                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATIONS

                                  IMPLEMENTATION TEAM

                          INDEX TO WORKING PAPERS - VOLUME 2


  23.   Conspiracy Theory paper

  24.   Letter to DCC from Doncaster Rovers FC Chairman in response to D C C 's
        letter dated 15.8.89 which enclosed copy of agreement

  25.   Spectator movement contingency plans - working paper

  26.   Evaluation of Green Guide/Popplewell/Harris decision

  27.   Communications - working paper (1)

  28.   Meeting with emergency services and Doncaster Rovers FC officials
        on 14.8.89

*29.    CCTV/turnstile arrangements - working paper (1)

  30.   Evaluation of ACPO stance towards South Yorkshire stance

  31.   Specimen Ground Safety Certificate

  32.   Criticisms re. Operational Order SWFC -v- Norwich 19.8.89

  33.   Laminated card - symptoms, signs and treatment re. signs of distress

  34.   Letter dated 18.8.89 from DCC to Mr Pensam (Admin & Legal Dept, Town
         Hall) in response to theirs dated 9.8.89 regarding the Interim Report of
         Lord Justice Taylor - implications arising etc. together with their
         reply dated 6.9.89

  35.   Letter dated 22.8.89 from DCC to Mr Hutchinson (Director of Planning at
        Barnsley MBC) re. Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 particularly in
        relation to Barnsley FC ground

  36.   Minutes of meeting chaired by Chief Supt Broomhead on 22.8.89 to
         discuss options/contingency together with resulting plans

  37.   Signed agreements with local football clubs - ORIGINALS

  38.   Letter dated 22.8.89 from Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer to CC
         requesting information concerning those recommendations in the Taylor
        Report affecting them (35, 36 and 41) together with our reply of 29.8.89

  39.   Fax dated 23.8.89 from ACPO No.2 (NE) Regional Secretary asking for
         information in relation to the implementation in South Yorkshire of the
        Taylor recommendations together with D C C 's reply dated same day

  40.   Minutes of meeting dated 24.8.89 with Chairmen and Secretaries of the
        five local football clubs (meeting held at SYP Sports & Social Club)
        together with supporting papers

  41.   Use of major incident room on football match days - working papers

  42.   Letter dated 25.8.89 from Mr Hayes to Mr Walker (Police Authority) re.
        charges for police services at football events
                                         -   2 -



   43.   Memo dated 4.9.89 re. use of Force Major Incident Room on football match
         days (discussed at Implementation Team meeting held on 22.9.89 minute
         number 22/89 refers)

   44.   Draft agreement for charges for police services at football matches
         prepared by Miss M V Oades (Joint Secretariat) together with D C C 's
         response dated 13.9.89 suggesting that certain amendments be made

   45.   Safety at Sports Grounds Act - briefing note prepared by Chief Supt
         Denton dated 13.9.89 re. sequence of events and delays by Sheffield City
         Council in revision of football ground safety certificates

   46.   Letter dated 11.9.89 from Derbyshire Constabulary Force Solicitor
         enclosing copy of their agreement with football clubs for our information

   47.   Letter dated 18.9.89 from Dr P A Young (Home Office SRDB, Sandridge) re.
         the use of CCTV for safety purposes at football grounds

^H48.    Minutes of meeting 18.9.89 with local authority representatives held
         at SYP Sports & Social Club

  49.    Report by A/Supt Waring dated 21.9.89 re. Communications including
         command channel, land lines, public address systems, hand signals

  50.    Letter dated 25.9.89 from Mr Hayes to Mr Johnston (Clerk & Financial
         Officer) re. cost of policing football matches - Clubs' contribution
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

     15TH APRIL 1989

Report, statements and documents
showing behaviour of Liverpool
fans before, during and after
the Disaster.
FRCM:   Detective Inspector King,                         21st June, 1989
          South Yorkshire Police


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER 15111 APRIL. 1989

I have to report that I have been investigating the behaviour pattern of
Liverpool Football Club Supporters at matches played away from home. I
have limited this enquiry to the 1987/88 and 1988/89 Football Seasons.

There have been a number of areas which I have looked at including the
behaviour of fans on the day of the disaster. I have categorised the
various enquiries and will outline the sailient points under each heading.

1.      POLICE REPORTS CONCERNING LIVERPOOL AWAY MATCHES WHERE PROBLEMS
         HAVE BEEN ENCOUNTERED WITH LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS __

1.1     Everton versus Liverpool, the F.A. Cup Final played at Wembley
         on 10 May 1986. There was a capacity crowd of 98,000. Over
         1,000 fans were ejected, many without tickets or in possession
         of forged tickets. 25 Police Officers were injured.

1.2     Tottenham Hotspur versus Liverpool on 28 November 1987. Enquiries
        with New Scotland Yard Public Order Branch and having seen the Police
        Report on this match, it was declared 'all ticket1 with a capacity
        crowd of 47,363. A total of 10,311 Liverpool Supporters visited
        White Hart Lane out of which 2,000 Liverpool Supporters were
        locked out of the ground. This group-caused policing problems
        in that shop-windows were broken in Tottenham High Road but they
        were eventually dispersed into an underground station. . •• •       .

1.3     Watford versus Liverpool on 13 February 1988. This match was
         declared 'all ticket!, with.-a total crowd attendance of 23,838
         which included.6,200 Liverpool fans. - 1,500 Liverpool- fans, some
         of whom had been drinking, arrived without tickets. Given that
         it would have presented severe policing difficulties and problems ■
         were the 1,500 fans allowed to disperse and run. the town of
         Watford and frequent local public houses, consultations between
         Club Officials and the Match Commander ended in a decision to
         allow the fans into the ground on payment.

1.4     Liverpool versus Wimbledon the F.A. Cup Final played at Wembley
        on 14 May 1988. Again there was a capacity crowd of 98,000, 92
        fans were arrested, 85 of them from Liverpool. Over 3,000 persons
        were ejected from the Stadium for possession of either forged
        tickets or no tickets at all. The Stadium authorities recovered
        478 forged tickets. Seven Police Officers vere injured. The
        majority of those rejected were Liverpool fans and the majority
        of forged tickets were presented by Liverpool supporters.

1.5     Southampton versus Liverpool on 24 September 1988. This match
        was declared 'all ticket'. 150 Liverpool fans arrived without
        tickets. Those fans were isolated outside the ground and again
        because manpower would have been soaked up by allowing the fans
        to roam Southanpton, they were allowed into the ground on payment,
        after discussions between the Match Commander and Club Officials.
                                        -2 -

        1.6    Arsenal versus Liverpool on 9 November 1988. The Match Commanders
               report that a capacity crowd attended the match with approximately
                6,000 fans being locked out of the Stadium. The kick-off was
I               delayed for 15 minutes to allow the fans ..to get into the ground.
               Many of the locked out fans attempted to climb or break into the
                Stadium. Reinforcements had to be called in. Not all of the
1               locked out fans were Liverpool supporters.

        1.7    Southampton versus Liverpool on 12 December 1988. This match
1               was also declared 'all ticket'. 750 Liverpool fans arrived at
                the ground without tickets. Many related a story of being unable
               to purchase a ticket from the Office at Liverpool because it had
I               not been opened to sell tickets for a sufficiently long enough
                period. The ticketless fans were isolated and although the situation
                was tense for a while the Southarrpton Football Club agreed to
WM             open a turnstile and after payment allow all the fans into the
                ground.

        1.8     Millwall versus Liverpool on 29 January 1989. The match was declared
(|             'all ticket', with a crowd of 23,615 of which 2,900 were Liverpool
                supporters. Several hundred Liverpool supporters attended without
    _          tickets and forged tickets were being sold outside the ground.
B              No other problems were encountered.

        1.9    Hull City versus Liverpool on 18 February 1989. This was an F.A.
                Cup Round and a particularly troublesome natch for the Section
M               Commander in charge of the Liverpool fans. Forged tickets were
                in evidence and a nurberof fans arrived without tickets. There
               was evidence that the majority of Liverpool fans had been drinking
                heavily. 100 ticketless fans outside the ground rushed a gate,
               when it was being opened by Stewards to allow someone to leave
    «          the ground, and at the ^ame time Liverpool fans inside the ground
■              also rushed the gate and attempted to pull it wide open. With
™              the assistance of Mounted Officers the situation was eased but
                ticketless fans outside, when the turnstiles were closed, shouted
                comments to the Police Officers that if the turnstiles were not
                opened they would rip the gates off and 'nobody closed doors on
                Liverpool supporters'.

^       1.10   Norwich City versus Liverpool on 1 April 1989. This match was
               declared 'all ticket' but information was received by the Club
               that 1,272 tickets allocated to Liverpool had not been sold and
               would be returned to Norwich on the team bus on the day of the
               match. A number of Liverpool supporters arrived without tickets
               and gave varying reasons for not knowing the natch was 'all ticket'
fl|            or that they had come from areas distant from Liverpool. It was
9              decided to sell the 1,272 unsold tickets returned by the
               Liverpool Club to get then into the ground. All the tickets were
               sold although it is believed some Norwich supporters also
I              benefit ted this way and got into the ground.



I

I

i
Wimbledon versus Liverpool on 13 May 1989. This match was declared
•all ticket' with a capacity crowd of 14,730 of which 6,473 were
Liverpool supporters. Enquiries with the Public Order Branch
at New Scotland Yard reveal that Liverpool F.C. was allocated
6,500 tickets which, were sent with a request for supporters to
be advised by means of local radio and the press that the fixture
was an 'all ticket' one. Soms 4,000 unsold tickets were returned
to Wimbledon F.C. On the day, nearly 6,500 Liverpool supporters
attended the game, excluding a number who entered the home supporters
parts of the Stadium. It was clear that a large number of
Liverpool supporters attended without tickets despite publicity
before the natch. Turnstiles were opened to facilitate those
supporters who had come without tickets.

Everton versus Liverpool on 20 May 1989. This was rthe .F.A. Cup
Final played at the Wembley Stadium, some 5 weeks after the
Hillsborough Disaster. The report from the Section commander
tends to show that Liverpool supporters had not learned from this
disaster. Ticketless fans caused considerable problems for the
Police and when they were clearing the area of those fans, bottles
and cans were thrown at them. Just before the end of the game
all gates to the Stadium were opened in preparation for the exodus.
An equalising goal was then scored by Everton which resulted in
an influx of fans who had been leaving and also those still around
the ground without tickets. All managed to get into bays around
the Stadium to watch extra time.

Detailed reports are attached under Appendix *A*.


WITNESS STATEMENTS WHICH SHOW HOW CERTAIN LIVERPOOL FANS INTENDED
TO GET INTO THE MATCH -

                   as a part-time barmaid who assists behind the
bar at her Aunt's licensed premises, The Matilda Public House,
Matilda Street, Sheffield. From mid-day on the day of the disaster,
she had a conversation with three to four male persons who described
themselves as Liverpool supporters. They told her they had come
from Liverpool on the train, had no tickets for the match but
it was their intention to go to Hillsborough and gain entry.
They further told her that it was easy because they had done it
previously and there were other Liverpool fans who had come down
with them without tickets who were going to get into the ground
as well. They left the public house by taxi to the ground between
2.30pm and 2.45pm.

Garry TAYLOR who is a retired Sales Director was drinking in The
Sicey Public House, Sicey Avenue, Sheffield, some 1*5 miles from
the Hillsborough Stadium on the day of the disaster. Whilst in
the premises he heard a conversation between three men sat nearby.
Tro of the men spoke with Liverpool accents and he assumed they
were supporters of that club. He heard them talk about Leppings
Lane and that they would meet up with others outside the Leppings
Lane entrance. They would organise as many other people as possible
to cause whatever trouble they could. If enough trouble was caused
the gates would have to be opened. Mr. TAYLOR concluded that
this had happened before and the person doing the talking appeared
confident that this action could be forced. More detailed evidence
can be read in his statement.
1•
I       2.3
                                        -4-

              Peter Kevan MARJORAM is a Conpany Director who visited The Pheasant
              Public House, Oughtibridge, some 2 \ miles from the Hillsborough
1             Stadium, on the day of the disaster. He arrived at 2.35pm to
              find numerous persons both inside and outside the public house.
              He would estimate that 25 of them were Liverpool supporters.
1             He got into conversation with two of then. They did not mention
              tickets, neither did Mr. MARJORAM see them in possession of one.
              At 2.45pm he mentioned to the two that they were leaving it late

1             to get to the ground and one of them replied 'Don't worry about
              that, we know either a gate will be open or opened'. Both men
              laughed at each other. The tvro left shortly afterwards.
        2.4                  ls a                  who was also in The Pheasant
              Public House on the date of the disaster and was joined by Mr.
              MARJORAM sometime, he says, after 2.00pm. He corroborates that
1   <
              one of the two Liverpool supporters he and Mr. MARJORAM were talking
              to said words to the effect that they were confident of getting
              into the ground because the gate would be open or opened. The

1             manner in which this remark was made did not suggest that they
              intended to force entry into the ground. He describes the two
              men as decent persons and they did not say that they had tickets
              for the match and he did not see them in possession of any.
        2.5   Statements from the four witnesses are attached to this report
              under Appendix 'B'.
I
        3.    SCHEDULE -SHCWING EVIDENCE THAT CAN BE GIVEN FRCM WITNESSES REGARDING

1       3.1
              LIVERPOOL FANS -ATTENDING THE: MATCH WITHOUT TICKETS   --

              There is ample evidence of fans arriving at this match without

I             tickets to get into the Hillsborough Ground. Attached is a schedule
              showing that 25 Police Officers have submitted reports showing
              numerous fans without tickets, fans asking for spare tickts, fans
              asking for the tickets of those arrested, evidence of fans coming
              to the match expecting to buy tickets from touts, evidence of
              fans having tickets snatched, evidence of seeing stubs from tickets
              being thrown back into the crowd and evidence of persons complaining

I       3.2
              of having their tickets stolen.

              The 25 reports submitted showing this evidence appears to be only
               'the tip of the iceberg'. Further reports are still being processed
              from other officers which will no doubt contain a lot of similar
              material.

s       3.3   Further evidence in relation to this matter can be given by civilian
              witnesses listed under Appendix ’B'.


I       3.4   A schedule showing the report number, the time, location, the
              officer involved and a brief summary of what he could say is
              attached to this report under Appendix 'C1.

I
I
I
4.        EVIDENCE OF THE BEHAVIOUR OF FANS AT THE SEMI FINAL MATCH BETWEEN
          NORWICH AND EVERTON PLAYED AT VILLA PARK ON 15IH APRIL 1989

4.1       A statement from Chief Superintendent Mellor, the Match Commander
           at the Semi Final match played the same day between Norwich City
           and Everton at Villa Park, showing the behaviour of the fans,
           especially those supporting Everton, together with tvro of his
          Mounted Officers is attached.

4.2       Whilst the evidence does not have any bearing on the match played
           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough, or the
           fans who attended the match, the Everton supporters behaviour
           at Villa Park shows a remarkable coincidence with the Liverpool
           supporters at Hillsborough which nay indicate seme Liverpool
           characteristic.

4.3 ...   Statements from the three Police Officers are attached and have
          been listed under Appendix 'D'.


5.        OBSERVATIONS AND COMMENTS

5.1       It does appear that there is a nucleus of Liverpool supporters
           (unidentified) who do travel to matches played away from Liverpool
           without tickets and cause severe policing problems. At the end
           of the day, rather than soak up Police manpower, it is felt better
           to allow them into the ground, if possible, rather than then cause
           havoc in the town, their team is playing. Whilst there is no
           direct evidence to support this, the fans do appear to know this.
           In the case at Watford where numerous ticketless fans arrived
           they did imply that if they were not granted admission to the
           ground they would go into Watford and cause havoc.

5.2       The evidence in the attached reports etc., has been gathered from
           material in possession of the South Yorkshire Police. Given the
           opportunity to read and study the many civilian statements' taken
           by the West Midlands Investigation Team, it nay be that the
           evidence to hand could be enhanced further.

5.3       Since the 1 January, 1989, the F.A. Cup natch played at Hull and
           the F.A. Cup Final played at Wembley both show a similarity in
           crowd behaviour to that displayed on the date this disaster occurred.




Detective Inspectoij.
■ •
                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15m APRIL. 1989
fl



I                           APPENDICES
I
I     Appendix 'A'     Police Reports concerning Liverpool away matches
                       where problems have been encountered with Liverpool
I                      supporters.

I

■#
I

I

fl

      Appendix 'D'    Evidence of the behaviour of fans at the Semi Final
I                     match between Norwich and Everton played at Villa
                      Park on 15th April, 1989.

*•
I

I
1

I
I
I
1
I    •

I                                                         APPENDIX 'A


I

I
£               HTTJ.SBC«aUGH DISASTER 15TH APRIL, 1989



l


     -   Police Reports concerning Liverpool away matches where
^        problems have been encountered with Liverpool supporters.


I




i

I*

I

1
3m
4


8

I

I




I
                                                                   METROPOLITAN POLICE
                                                                   T020 Public Order Branch
                                                                  tNew Scotland Yard
                                                                   Broadway
fl                                                                 London SW1H OBC

       The Chief Constable
fl
       (Attention of Chief Superintendent WAIN)
       South Yorkshire Police
       Police Headquarters
fl     Snig Hill
       Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                                   l6th June 1989

fl
       Dear Sir

fl                    RE - VISITS BY MERSEYSIDE FOOTBALL CLUBS TO WEMBLEY STAPIIM


       some
                      u™i^\ Po^hii ci^« 9 9-                     / with vl‘lts t0 L°ndon
                                                                 1 “ :
                                                                     ■ » "*<> » provide you with
       Stadium.               b a t i n g t0 Vlslts        Merseyside football clubs to Wembley

fl
      Wembley St^iuafon^O occs^ions^as shown belowf8^ 6 f°°tba11 clubs pla^ed «

I      1.        18th May 1985 F.A. Cup Final
                                                                  Everton -v- Manchester Utd
      2.        20th August 1985 F.A. Cup Final                   Everton -v- Manchester Utd
fl    3.        10th May 1986 F.A. Cup Final                      Everton -v- Liverpool
      k.        16th August 1986 F.A. Charity Shield
I                                                                 Everton -v- Liverpool
      5.        5th April 1987 Littlewoods Cup                    Liverpool -v- Arsenal
      6.    a   1st August 1987 F.A. Charity Shield
« •                                                               Everton -v- Coventry City
      7-        16th April 1988 Football League Centenary Festival
1     8.        14th May 1988 F.A. Cup Final
                                                                 Liverpool -v- Wimbledon
      9.        20th August 1988 F.A. Charity Shield             Liverpool -v~ Wimbledon
      10.       30th April 1989 Simod Cup Final
                                                                 Everton -v- Nottingham Forest

I     On only two occasions were there incidents of concern.

                (a)       On 10th May 1986 the F.A. Cup Final - Everton -v- Liverpool.
I                        A capacity crowd of 98,000 attended, there were 51 arrests the
                         majority of which were for crime related offences?    SStS’ the

I                        S e J t e d "6 * £ ! £ « : 6fhEvert0"     10 Liverpool supporters were
                         £ £ £ £ .    were arrested.               ?   EVert°n   ”*   21
I                        Over 1 000 fans were ejected,            many without tickets or in
                         injured^0” ^     ft’rSBd                           police officers were
1
       (b)     On l4th May 1988 the F.A. Cup Final - Liverpool -v- Wimbledon.

               A capacity crowd of 98,000 attended; 92 fans were arrested, 85
               from Liverpool and 7 from Wimbledon. Over 3,000 persons were
               ejected from the stadium for possession of either forged
               tickets or no ticket at all. The stadium authorities recovered
               4/8 forged tickets.   Seven police officers were injured.


I hope that the brief summaries of the above matches, in addition to that
already furnished in respect of the 1989 F.A. Cup Final held on the 20th May
1989. will be of assistance.

Please contact me if you think I can help further in this matter.

Yours faithfully




JB.
Chief Inspector
Public Order Branch
                                                  METROPOLITAN POLICE


                                                         FOOTBALL MftTCK


f l     1.    DATE: Sat 28th NovS/7 FIXTURE: Tottenham Hotspur                              -v- Liverpool


              VEHJEt -White Hart Lane, N.17.
m                                                                                    KICK OFF HJC; 3.00pm

              HATCH (League/Cup^)ther) (Specify):       B a r c la y s League D iv is io n 1.
k
i




*
        2‘                              .   TO" L 4 7 ,5 6 2      “       StfPORTBB 3 9 ,0 0 0 . AWAY SUWRIERS 8311



        3.    MDOE OT TRAVEL                           RAIL                                  BUS/COACH
                                             (No. on Special Trains)                  (No. and Transport Companies)
                                             flto. on Service Trains)
                                                                                           See Attached List

«
              OThER (Specify)
i            Transit Vans        N il
             Special Parties (P o litica l ox youth gangs)     N il

%
l
       A.    NUMBER OF ■                  INSIDE '
             SSKLbTS:                                                     . OOTSICE                  . E3ECTVENTS
l                                   i » € " . VISITORS            hoc             V isitors          HSC-       VISITORS
             Ptfclic Order
             Offences                                                 1             N il              36
«            Oarage
             Others

       See also Appendix *A*




       S*    l-EVS-5 CT POLICE COVER
             (a)      priority          (b) Above avaxage             (c) Average          (d) Low
                                                 XX

1     <0 5                              <§q,
              1 6 - 0 6 - 1 9 8 9 11-• 31                                                           01 230 2811        P. 04


                                   '   .                                  2 •*
                  •&.> f- '
                     -s-V .•            ’V
                                                                                                                          r
                                       '. 1.
         6.      INTELLIGENCE ■KECEIVED AM3 FROM V H > ,
                  ( In r o c n a t io n ano comm ents}


                 Bus Companies, Football Clubs, P olice, etc.
%                (Show nature of in telligence)

                  I n t e l l i g e n c e r e c e iv e d from Pc                  very good and accurate.
I

I

I

I    <

I

         7.       POLICING PROBLEMS AND CROWD BEHAVIOUR
I
                  (a )     In t r a n s it :   n il

I



                  (b) inside Ground:                  Nil
I

u
                   (c )    Immediate v i c i n i t y o f Groixid:   2,000 Liverpool Supporters 'locked   out’   caused damage   to
I                  sh o p      windows in Tottenham High 3Road, and stole two large butchers knives from a shop
                   supporters dispersed into underground s-atior*.


                   (d) Other Locations:
fl



fl



I

I
     fir
                 /                                                 -3-


         8.      COWENTS ON POUCtKS TACTICS


I                !>•»   E scorts. TurntTlIn Snnrefwtt, Dnntrot nf Ltr«n«tng L»*s, »te:

                 Usual escort of visiting supporters from station and West Road Coach Park and
fl
                  searches at Turnstiles for Licensing offences and offensive weapons.

                 Liverpool supporters- given the whole of South terrace and wedge and Spurs given
I                 upper wedge* On the day we had 10,311 Liverpool supporters travel to the match.

                 Liverpool supporters escorted back to Coach Park and Seven Sisters Station and
1
                  apart from the incidents of criminal damage in the High Soad game comparatively
                  quiet.
fl
     I
                  Serials from 2 Area arrived late ( which is becoming frequent) and we had problems
fl                with Channel J6 Radio’s.


fl
I
fl



1

fl*




1        FRCM:          CMef Superintendent                                          TO:   Chief Superintendent
                        * YT« Division                                                     Force Support Services


I
I
I                                                                        Chief Superintendent


I
I
                           HERTFORDSHIRE CONSTABULARY                              79



From. Superintendent _J _ H I G G S _'C ' Division        H.Q. Ref:

       Chief Constable, Headquarters                      Div. Ref: .'JH/SAK__

                                                          D a t e : 10 May .1989




 RE:    LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

 Attached hereto is the Football Match Summary relating to the match
 played between Warford and Liverpool at Vicarage Road, Watford on
 13 February 1988,  the total crowd attendance being 23,838 this
 included 6,200 Liverpool Fans.

 Together with Superintendent HOWLEY I was responsible for policing
 this particular game.  I was responsible for policing outside the
 Football Stadium.  Prior to kick-off it became apparent that approx­
 imately 1,500 Liverpool supporters had arrived without tickets.   The
 game, which had been declared 'All Ticket' at Police instigation, was
 well publicised prior to 13 February. The majority of all fans
 attending were in possession of tickets. Some of the 1,500 fans had
 been drinking and were somewhat noisy although I am bound to say the
 behaviour was generally good.  The prevailing weather, without doubt,
 assisted the policing of the crowd and after consultation with
 Superintendent HOWLEY I decided to’ hold the 1,500 supporters in the
 Cardiff Road area at the bottom of the walkway giving access to the
 Stadium.  Given that it would have presented severe policing
 difficulties and problems were the 1,500 fans allowed to disperse and
 run the town and frequent local public houses.   After further consul­
 tation with Superintendent HOWLEY and Club Officials it was decided
 prudent to let these fans into the arena upon payment.   I was aware
 that there would be sufficient room in the Stadium to accommodate
 these fans because of the shortfall on sales of tickets in Liverpool.
 I was also conscious of the fact that previously Liverpool fans had
 attempted to enter the ground by forcing open gates.   The match was
 relatively trouble free there being 2 arrests of Liverpool supporters
 and 14 ejections of Liverpool supporters.

  At the match briefing officers were told of the strong possibility of
  visitors arriving without tickets and seeking access to the Football
  Stadium.
   \
■                                                                                                                                                                                   29



                                                                                     FOOTBALL M A T C H S U M M A R Y



        1   .            DATE               13th February 1988                       FI X T U R E        VATFCRD                                — v—          LIVERPOOL

i                       VENUE:                 VICARAGE ROAD, 'vATFCRD.                                                  KICK O F F T I M E :     3 P.M .


                         M A T C H (L e a g ue                  Cup Ot her !         (Specify):
1

                         CROW D ATTENDANCE                                           TOTAL                     HOME SUPPORTERS                         AW AY SUPPORTERS
I                        Es t im a te if not kn o w n

                                                                                     23838                                                                       6200




I                        M O D E OF TRAVEL                                                            RAIL                                        B U S /C O A C H
    I                                                                                        (Mo. on S pe c ia l T rai ns)       (No. a n d T r a n s p o rt C o m pa nie s )

                                                                                                         NIL
s                                                                                            ( No on S e rvi c e T rains)
                                                                                                                                                  See attached list.

                                                                                                         200
                         O T H E R (Specify)
i
                         T r a ns it V a n s


I                        Spec ial Par ti es (Political or
                                             yout h gangs)




1

i   m
        4
         -----------:-----------------------------------------------
                         N U M B E R OF                                        IN S ID E
                                                                                                    --
                                                                                                                     O U TSID E                           E JE C T IO N S
                         ARRESTS                                       HOME          V IS IT O R S          HOME             V IS IT O R S            HOME         V IS IT O R S
■                        Public O rder                                                      1                  _                   _                      —

                         Offences

                                                                                                                                                                                -
                         Damage                                          -                  -                                      -


                         Others                                          -                  1                  -                   -
I
        S e e also A pp e n d ix 'A'



        5                LEVELS OF POLICE C O V ER


                        (a) Hig h priority.                            283
I
                        (b) N o r m a l.

I                       (c) Low.



i
                                                                                                           06.12.1989       11:33         NO.   1     P.   5


t> •

I                                                             'V =°AiVDFRO,v,WHOiVI
    8.   COM M
V        i.e. F
                                                .
                                                              Clubs. Police ere
                                                    * crriffij A?                                 naT t oi

I                            -:!»ated
                       -‘a tcn ALL-TiCKP'f         n
                                                         -
                                                       . .
                                                               Aerosate


                                                           — £ su p p o rter s va«
                                                                                       - -J
                                                                                    ° v*"
                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                    .! : ? •
                                                                                                    iVC's
                                                                                                   ..
                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                       F - rrTyrw   t 4 ;
                                                                                                           '•'-tt/t-*..




V                    -hout and wer» kent
                  m inutes b e f o r * ' k t l L
                  *«« ground rather t^ar
                                               o-r
                                                   h - J them
                                           '•r.cr. nave  J
                                                             P u b l i c i t y s o r e i cc o r-s ’' “a ^ ^ l''£ s ‘n-2cessar-' ‘• 1 n '
                                                 ~ \ t*hol^ S : W s o w^“?
                                                                Voided
                                                               in
                                                                              ~ e % ?cvj
                                                                     i-ua m-prud^t   ~
                                                                                        vu     L*v« rp ool .,S u-^ '»+,
                                                                                          t0t ^a T
                                                                                                 lloVw* f -?» £trs  •
                                                                                                                      o r+t-4
                                                                                                                    ?roujld
                                                                                                                o i =po
                                                                                                                            e rqs ^wurnf
                                                                                                                                    '.^ L
                                                                                                                                        ld ^
                                                                                                                           ^ “------ aa K

I                                                              J-n tn e Town C entre.                               '       en tran ce t o




1

I
I           POLICING PROBLEMS
                                                     A N O C R O W D BEH AVIO
           (o> In Transit;

i                                     N IL




I
         (b) Jnsic
                       G- o u n d :

            • •ico r d i f f i c u l t i e s a f s ^ i - f
I           ‘ ■•71.-.? t o g , t         la t        t                             -its
                                                             c ft^ound q u ic k ly .
                                                                                                  la r w       n v ,b = -
                                                                                                               U M , r ° o f none t i c
                                                                                                                                            holders




                      'U- V''C/OilyQfGr,„ nd
                  -                   ana sr.cvir.g ar;
                                                                     — -   the   tu rn stiles
                                                                                                               :uch or it
                                                                                                                            £oc>- natur--'1




                        i.cr;-




                      u-d be achittsd
    COM MENTS ON POLICING TACTICS

    i.e. Escorts, Turnstile Searches, Control of Licensing Laws etc.:


         Searching carried out at turnstiles. Escorts to Shuttle Trains from Stadium
         to Watford Junction* Large nunfcer of Liverpool Supporters travelled back into
         London on. the Local trains* No problems.

         The tactics of establishing a holding area for those non-ticket holders was a
         success and will be done at future all-ticket games where this is likely to
         prove a problem*




FROM:   Chief Superintendent                                 TO: Chief Superintendent
        ' C ' Division
                                                                  (Attention of Inspector POPE)
        Herts Constabulary                                         Merseyside Police
        Shady Lane                                                 *C’ Division H.O.
        Watford                                                    Lover Lane,
        WD1 1DD.                                                   LT/ESPCCL
                                                                   L9 6DG



                                                                                   °Y

                                                         r     Chief Superintende nt
                           HAMPSHIRE CONSTABULARY*


Station:.\       Shirley
                                                             Western
Department:      Actlng Superintendent
                                                              Oth June,
      Subject:



         C.C.'O'




                   I submit this report at the request of D.I. KING of
      Sfluth Yorkshire Police. Hillsborough Incident Room based at Police
      Headquarters, Sheffield, Fax. No. 0742 523243. Tho report has been
      requested to assist tho Barrister representing Police at the Hillsborough
      Epquiry in connection with the behaviour of Liverpool fans at other all
      ticket matches in recent years.

        I           * have to report that the First Division League match
       between Southampton and Liverpool on Saturday, 24th September, 1900
      wjis an all ticket match and had been advertisod as such. Pre match
      information was that only 1.700 tickets had been sold to Liverpool
             althou8h 1110 whole of lhe Archers Road end (capacity 4,000)
      h|d been given over to thoir fans. Cuncern was expressed that a
      large number of Liverpool fans might therefore turn up without tickots
      a| Liverpool Foulball Club had only sold tickets to callers at their
      gfound and not sent any tickots out by post as a postal strike was
                            time. Plans wore therefore made in advanco
      il ^    an^ *ans w^° arrived without tickets, to queue in Silverdalo
      ROad noar to the ground so Police could identify the scale of the
      "*oblem in terms of fans without tickets. Such fans wore told that
        ere was nn guarantee of them getting in. 150 of those who arrivod
         thout tickuts chose to queue Jn this fashion.

                  Near kick off time it was decidod by Superintendent
     THOMPSON that an approach would be made to tho club to open a
     Ci sh turnstile to allow these fans access.

                   The main reasons for this were that:
                   1.   Manpower on the day was limited to 0 P.S.U.s and
                        the crowd had exceeded the previous Liverpool
                        fixtures by 3,000 on ticket sal6 3 , so it was felt
                        that 150 fans wandoring in the town, frustrated
                        at not getting into the match, could have soaked
                        up manpower, which would have boon better
                        committed at the ground.
                  CONTINUATION     SHEET No. 2 ,                     G.




3         2.    A local couple had booked tho Church next
1               to the ground in Archers Road for a wedding at
]               15,30 hours in the mistaken belief that it was
3               not e match day. They had phoned the Police
!               3 days before requesting assistance lo avoid
2               disruption of the service. The presence of 150
*               frustrated fans in the area would not have been
                 a good siart to married life.

           3.    It was felt that the postal strike had frustrated
                 the ’all tickot' systom.

            The Club Secretary agreed to open a cash turnstile
Jhortly after 15.00 hours and the fans were let in.
!           The Liverpool fans behaved well throughout the match
find there was little evidence of drunkcness. Five Liverpool fans
were ejocted from the ground for breaches of tho ground
regulations. Two Liverpool fans were arrested for being drunk
and disorderly before the match. Two were arrested in the ground
 or drunkeness. This is        below the average for matches at the
 )ell during the 1988-09 season.
           I ask that this report bo Faxed to the Incident Room
bn the above number for the information of D.I. KING.




                                  A. McWHIRTER
                                  Acting Superintendent
             ib - t t o - lS u 5   li:J 2                                                                     01 230 2813            p . 06
                                                                                                                                         Form 301
                                                                                                       O
       y-        r
mm


fl                                                   METROPOLITAN POLICE

fl
                                                         FOOTBALL M A T C H S U M M A R Y


B |         1.     DATE:           e-fch November 1988         FIXTURE:                 ARSENAL               — y—      LIVERPOOL

H            .VENUE:               EIGH3UBY FOOTBALL STADIUM                                            KICK OFF TIME:
                                                                                                                               7.'*5p»

                  M A T C H (b©3gc*Ec/Cup/0thecJc{Specify): LITTLEWQODS CUP 3rd Bound Keplay

I^JH
g

        2.        C R O W D ATTENDANCE                         TOTAL             HOME SUPPORTERS                      AW AY SUPPORTERS

Ai                Estimate if. not known.
                                                          :: 5^075               ■:     ^5,075 ‘ • •                       9,000

        3.        M O D E OF TRAVEL :                            ,V   . 'RAIL                                      B U S /C O A C H
v                                                              (No. on Special Trains)                   . {No. and Transport Companies

                                                               (No. on Service Trains)                Amberline - B170EFS
                                                                                                                                              9? ^
a                                                                                                                       BT^SPS                Witt]
                                                                                                                        A32f1TJFE
                                                                                                                                                E5C
n                                                                                                      ’’               C792FSW
                                                                                                                        C39^tn=C
                                                                                                        >
                  O TH E R (Specify)                                                                  Selwyn's       - A51 W33
                     «*
                 .Transit Vans
                                                                                                      Sunsve-n    ' - E275HEY
                 Special Parties (Political or youth gangs)
                                                                                                     Basford's - TGY 698
1                                                                                             Selector Notts - B918 FFE
                                                                                              Evesway                   r SU   369
1       4        N U M B E R OF
                 ARRESTS:
                                                   IN S ID E                          O U TS ID E                    EJECTM ENTS

                                            HOME         V IS IT O R S     HOME               V IS IT O R S      HOME            V ISITO R S
1                Public Order                                               •%
                 Offences                     8                2                                                  1*8                    7
                 Damage
                 Others

                 See also
                                                                                          •
1                Appendix 'A'
                                                                                                                                               1

l      5.        LEVELS O F POLICE C O V E R
                 (a) High priority                  (b) Above average                               (c) Average                  (d) Low

I®          s n W                    ”
6.   IN T E L L IG E N C E R E C E IV ED A N D F R O M W H O M
     (information and comments)                _

     Bus Companies, Football Clubs, Police, etc. :
     {Show nature of intelligence)                information of numcer of coaches
      correct*. No spotters supplied by Liverpool#




7.   P O L IC IN G PR O B LEM S A N D C R O W D B E H A VIO U R
           r   *

     (a) In transit: •         low'number of coaches attending this match underlines the
                           residual support for Liverpool in London and the South East*
                         . Crowds started to build up outside the Stadium at 6pm and
                           increased to beyond capacity by 7»30pm* Start of game delayed
                           by 15 minutes to allow fans to enter*


     (b) Inside Ground: Capacity crowd with approximately 6.COO fans locked outside
                         the stadium. The South Bank is at present being built or
                        and a constant stream of locked out fans were ejected from
                        the building site area who were trying to gain entry without
                        payment. No serious disorder in the ground. Some ko fans
                       •                 were ejected from the building site area during the m
      *■ .              it was impractical to take all their names ar decide which
                          club they followed.
     (c) Immediate vicinityof Ground: „              , ,   » • *            .     .
                                      Constant attempts by locKea. out fans to scale
                       ■the-ground from all directions made it necessary to call
                        on Central London Reserve Serials for' assistance*




     (d) Other Locations:    None as yet reported.
           1 6 -0 6 -1 5 6 9   1 1 :3 3                                                   01 230 2813     P . 08

     •                                                    - 3   -
              (
    8..     C O M M E N T S O N POLICING TACTICS

          • i.e. Escorts, Turnstile Searches. Control of Licansing Laws, etc:



1

I                                               See attached.




I
1

1




1

i

i




i
    FROM:          Chief Superintendent                             TO:   Chief Superintendent
i                   NH ' Division                                         Force Support Services



i

I
i

l
                                                                                     D.A. HOPKINS

I                                                                                 EKXetf Superintendent
COMMENTS ON POLICING TACTICS:
                  **
Late arrival of fans estimated 30 to AO thousand arrived after 7pm.

Radio reception on Force radios intermittent.

Intelligence from TO 20 Arsenal FC and Liverpool FC indicated a crowd
of 45,000 to 50,000.
A crowd of 54,000 inside the' ground and approximately 6000 locked out
was beyond the police resources employed as per grade ’£' catches.

The presence in Gillespie Road of a considerable number of fans before
the turnstiles opened prevented police removal vehicles operating and
therefore parked cars added to the obstruction.

Turnstiles at Gillespie Road ran out of change causing delay and further
congestion in Gillespie Road.
Ians ignored Police instruction to fora queues not enough Police present
to enforce instructions.
Kick Off delayed by me until 8pa but many of the locked out fans attempted
to climb or break into the stadium.
The only police available to police outside the ground after kick off
were Mounted Section and Dog Section until reinforcements arrived from
West Earn FC match and Commissioner's reserve.

While Mounted Branch, Dog Section and local officers were splendid ’Aid
serials' generally seemed overwhelmed by the situation and were not as active
as one would hope.
Searching at turnstiles had to be abandoned because of crush.•

There were few problems inside the stadium during the match.

Due to late kick off and extra time match finished at 10.20pm in nil nil draw,
therefore fans only interested in getting home and the dispersal prsented
no problems.

Future Plans
 Due to Arsenal's successful season and Tottenham's failures crowds are larger
 than expected at Highbury therefore policing levels are to be reviewed.

 For evening matches Commissioner’s regulations will have to be 3 hours before
 kick off instead of 2 hours to enable vehicles to be removed before crowds
 arrive.
Turnstiles will be opened earlier and Arsenal are to supply a PA System into
.Gillespie Road to assist in directing fans to correct queues.

 More Barriers will be used in Gillespie Road to operate q u e u e s .
FROM HANTS   POLICE   U1   CONT                              3. 1389     15!31                    P.   2
                                            "f




                         HAMPSHIRE CONSTABULARY
     Tel. No.    Southampton 581111
                                                                       POBTSWOODPOLICE STATION,
     T.l.x No,. « | ^ /pH/JS/ro                                        ST. DENYS ROAD,
                                                                       PORTSWOOD,
     Our R«f.
                                                                       SOUTHAMPTON.
     Your Ref.                                                         S02 1GN.


                                                                   9th June 198=


          The Chief Constable,
          South Yorkshire Police,
          Police Headquarters,
          Snig Hill,
          Sheffield, S3 SLY.

          For the Attention of chief Superintendent T . o ,wain


          D e a r Sir,


                                      Re:    Letter dated ?t'n June 1969

                    On Saturday 12th December 19SS, I was on duty in uniform as the
          Superintendent in charge of the First Division i-'ootball League match between
          Southampton and Liverpool at the Dell, Southampton; kick off 1500 hours.

                     The match was an ’all ticket’ match in that entry to the ground for
          Liverpool fans would only bo allowed if they arrived with a ticket already
          purchased.


                    At 1345 hours it became.obvious that a large number of fans
          supporting Liverpool did not have tickets.

                    Our strict, and rigid policy at the Doll, has always been that fans
          who arrive without tickets will not be allowed entry and that the Club will
          not open a turnstile.

                    However, on this occasion there were about 750 Liverpool fans
          without tickets.  Many related a story of being unable to purchase a ticket
          from the office at Liverpool because it had net been opened to sell tickets
          for a sufficiently long enough period.

                   Therefore, I got all 750 into an orderly queue and Southampton
         Football Club opened a turnstile and charged them all £5 per heac entry
         instead of tr.e usual £3.50.

                     The situation was extremely tense for a while and we had to use much
         tact    and good humour to avoid a situation of serious disorder.

                   We were helped by the fact that we still had room inside for those
         750.  Had that not been so then controlling those locked out would have been a
         major problem.

                                        Y<pj^s faithfully,
             1^06-1989                11:34                                                                                                                         01 230 2813                  P. 10
              W r-                                                                                                                                                                              Form 3017
       j-
                                                                     S;.
                                                                              . *
                                                                              •.   n
                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                         *:0'T’ Xsi-                                  ^ ii C         *lr l -i -*-JTV»»             .5
      ■4                                                                                                                                                           rr.oc



 B    «
                                                                :M E TR b P O LlT iK l PO LICE' V " :                                                                       v_

 I                                            .. ..................................
                                                                       ,«L*. > »                                                                                   , w. I
                                                                                                            y     •*
                                               *-                          FO O TB A LL M A T C H S U M M A R Y ,.                                                  r.r;_
               ,-                                  ?£sry 4 .>*                s, .:v           «/■/*               *•*f*                       •*-
 I          • vv-'/*.V^«2f- v z t i r f l lW-%.- W                            V4- r-.5                                 -V ■'■•-                                      r'”°.        *7
 1.          DATErr.totoV^^                                                                                                                            - -,7 2 ? . S: ^ T T ^ V . ht

             VENUE:              K i l i w a l i F .C .                                                                                               KICK OFF TIME:
                 •...}•** ‘W?                 -■                                                                       ■            .
              . ...                           .
                                              ■ r *:-* ■■: ■ *:: \ ~                                                   *;•'*- ■* - ' > ”*                           J - ' -' ‘^ -:                 * ’■•■’■* '•*
              MATCH (L eag u e/C u p /O th er) (Specify):                                            ^                        ;      . ... «•
                •••:. u.u.K*.                           Cup.               ••■’*"* """ J                                  '         .... .
      •
                                                                                                                        HO M E SUPPORTERS " ’" “ ' AWAY SUPPORTERS
rft.          CROW D ATTENDANCE                                                            TOTAL '
              Estimate if not known                                                        25615     ’
                                                                                                                                  20715 ‘ ■                                      • 2900 -                     .•
                                                                            ...                    tV, *'                  to'itV   v<\                                                                2 ;.



£!3.:c-cMODE OF J R A V E U s x ii
            H o \ i f:j! X            ir.-:?a•v-yiri:- •
                                                                                           t r ' V j ^ R A l L 6li ^ > r J i
                                                                                           (No. on Special Trams)
                                                                                           ;. *.‘
                                                                                                iv
                                                                                                                                                           . j '^ fiP f^ v L n a n ie s
                                                                                                                                                         (No. and Transport Companies,
                                                                                                                 'i..; •:it* .v -r::^ _-;.c i.i 'iVenty ’Single ’•'Deckers •
                                              .                . ^ v : v.-..-                                                                         _.'j :   Five:Double Peckers.
                                                                                                    • ^                                                        As notified by F.L.O* •




  L            OTHEJ? {Specify}                                .v:n .-                      *^r.
               Transit Vans         «one Seen.
  |            Special Parties (Political or youth gangs)
            il «■*       »   .*.’*/   /                     ::ic 'Ac* :r                                    n*.:: x\".x. e
                                                                                                                                                                                 •« .a :::
      ».         V«*l«         I-
                                *4’ J "
                                                                                                                           O U T S ID E                               «.     E JE C T M E N TS
      4        N U M B E R OF                                        IN S ID E                                                                                      • _ S, '\j . .   .             v
             . ARRESTS:                                                                                                                                                                        V IS IT O R S
                                                       HOME                        V IS IT O R S                  HOME                    V IS IT O R S               HOME .
               Pubiic Order                                                                                      S eventeen                  One                   Tw enty”^ our                    Sdven.
                                                                                       One .
             ^•Offences *-c t - - -               *.•>J J X* C tC*     u *i                    Ic c             riuvx^     :u.z.\s •-j. c z                                                V

               ■Damage- L                 ;       ;* znrr             _*v:                    « -.'.re                                ■v      .7..-            •               •• !‘—
                Others                                                                                                                        *                             Five                   Two

               See also                                                                                                                   •
               Appendix A '




       5.       LEVELS O F PO LICE C O V E R
                                                                                                                                                  (c) Average                                   (d) Low
                (a) High priority                                      (b)/Above average
6.    IN TE LLIG E N C E R E C E IV E D A N D FR Q M W H p M
      (Information and comments)                           \ C'                                                     .    !
                                                     ’■         . . .      1

      Bus Companies. Football Clubs, Police, etc. ' : .-V\                     ■'
      (Show nature of intelligence)
       In fo rm a tio n from F .L .O . i n L iv e rp o o l t h a t about 3000 would a tte n d . This was c o r r e c t,




                        k                    *.           ♦ir*^ V »tv» > I'Ve•        i'.J'U*.


        • Ivczzovj.s'. ■ ■ - V—                  JL£#Wl,£lii                   'L'*   .-^9-'                . i '.-'.I




 . -P O L IC IN G PR O B LEM S A N D C R O W D B E H A VIO U R

      (a) in transit:
        A Millwall ‘supporter walking to the ground was slashed about the face with either
        a Baser Blade or a Stanley Knife. He was unable to identify his attackers* Liverpoo
     . .supporters .walking to the rear of the ground via a Walkway, threw stones into Cold
       -jslow Lane.but they fell amongst other Liverpool Supporters©
     ’ (b) Inside Ground:     '         .        a

        Only Minor problems inside the ground during the game. One Millwall supporter got
        over the fence on to the pitch but was detained^ After the final whistle, Millwall
        Supporters forced two gates and got out into rear car park.
            *


      (c) Immediate vicinity of Ground:
         As a result Of the"above incident, serious disorder took place in the car park. A
          total of Fourteen Officers were injured. Four Police Vehicles were damaged One
         seriously. Three Liverpool supporters were seriously assaulted and several Liverp
         Coaches dainaged. .

      (d) Other Locations:                  <•             1
        'one Double Decker Coach* containing Liverpool Supporters wasAttacked in Old Kent
          Road when a bottle of V.P. was thrown through a window. Two passengers injured.
     1£-05-1989    1 1 :3 5                                                       01 230 2813    P. 12

                                                    — 3

8.   C O M M E N T S O N P O L IC IN G TA C TIC S

     i.e. Escorts, Turnstiie Searches, Control of Licensing Laws, etc:

     All the Liverpool Coaches attended the meeting point at Sower Bridge as•arranged. They
     were escorted to the ground without any incidents. Several hundred Liverpool Supporters
     from the London Area attended without tickets. An unknown male obviously *Trom Liverpool
     was selling forged tickets in the car park for £15* Several persons obtained entry to
     the ground with these tickets but several were noticed at the.turnstiles and the holders '
     refused entry. The seller was not located. Apart from the supporters who attended by
     Coach, the rest arrived via service trains and by their own means. In the main, ‘they
     were well behaved. Because of the position of the Turnstiles i.e. only at each end of the ;
     ground, the main problems were getting all the Millwall supporters into the ground before ;
     the start. Kany arrived late the worse for drink. The game took place with only minor
     incidents., Considering Millwall were well beaten, not too much was thrown onto the pitch. I
     Some damage was caused inside the ground when Millwall supporters forced their way out
     into the car park. Lack of lighting in the Car Park was again the main problem together                 !
     with all the debris lying about. The Liverpool Supporters who had attended by train                     j
     were escorted to the railway station and seen off to London without any problems. To lookf
     back on the day, a total of            persons were injured. The Dog Section suffered the most,         t
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                             £
     with Seven Officers injured One with serious back injuries. Following many games without j
     any disorder, this one game showed that the Hooligan element is still present waiting to
     strike. The main targers being visiting supporters, their coaches and Police Officers.
     The Chief Superintendent from Liverpool attended the fixture                  as an observer together
     with Inspector CLOW the F.L.O. $nd a Sergeant. We were unable to offer them any decent                  ?
     hospitality but they seemed to understand. I think they also appreciated the problems in
     Policeing First Division fixtures with a Third Division ground surrounded by waste lando j
                                                                                              i




FROM:     Chief Superintendent                            TO:    Chief Superintendent
          ' ?*L9ivision                                          Force Support Services




                                                                          Chief Superintendent
                                                                         -,n
From:     Inspector JARVIS
          Humberside Police
          BK Sub Division


To:      Chief Superintendent J T WAIN
         South Yorkshire Police




HULL CITY V LIVERPOOL, SATURDAY 1 8 .2 .8 9
F A CUP 5 th ROUND MATCH - VENUE BQOTHFERRY
PARK, HULL, KICK OFF 1500 HOURS

Further to the general report sent on the 8 June 1909 with regard to
a summary of the day’s events, I submit my observations as to the
conduct of Liverpool supporters at the turnstiles at the North East
corner of Boothferry Park, Hull which are used by away supporters
wishing to enter the ground.

I was the Sector Commander responsible for the North East turnstiles
and the two designated areas allocated to Liverpool'supporters,
these being the North Stand and the enclosure on the north end of the
East Stand which are connected by a large gate close to the perimeter
wall of the playing area, allowing free access to arid from the two
areas.                                              i

Prior to the match I was engaged outside the turnstiles, all of which
were open, admitting Liverpool supporters upon production of a match
ticket (this being an all ticket match).

Forged T ic k e ts                                  j
                                                    t
It was discovered that many fans had several batched of tickets all
bearing the same serial number, there being severali different numbers
used.   Some of the tickets appeared to have been pointed and others
were poor quality photocopies, all being of a similar colour to the
genuine tickets (yellowish).   The fans stated they!had bought them
close to the ground and in Liverpool from touts.   farrests of the
sellers were made by officers other than my Sector it&ff.
                     ^                              i
Offers of Cash

I was approached, as were my staff, by Liverpool faits with £10 or
£20 notes held in their hands asking if we could possibly get them
into the ground.   They were informed this was not possible and
several made attempts to several different officersj

Behaviour of Fans

The general behaviour of the fans at the turnstiles'!was peaceful but
it was evident that the majority of the Liverpool fins had been
drinking intoxicants heavily.
The fans formed up at the turnstiles and were marshalled into orderly
lines with officers carrying out good hearted searches.

I was informed by Stewards from inside the ground t&at several
fans had jumped over or crawled under the turnstile!and entered
the North Stand.

There are 2 wire meshed gates between the turnstile^ and fans who
had entered the ground were passing their retained ijtalf of the
tickets to fans outside who tried to gain entry alleging they had
lost the other part of the ticket or had it snatched from then.

The crowd were physically pushed back from these gates at which
point the fans inside crumpled up their retained part of the ticket
and threw them out of the ground for fans outside t<S> pick up.

Then, shortly before the kick off time, I had my baik to the wire-gates
observing about 100 fans who were without tickets aid had gathered
close to the turnstiles.

From their conversation they were of the opinion th&t we would let
them in the ground shortly after kick off.   They were informed this
was not to be the course of action we would take and they would not
be admitted without tickets.   From the replies I farmed the opinion
that this was an expected course of action and had happened at other
grounds.                                            I

These fans then started to rush towards me at which]point I noticed the
gate had been opened by a Steward to allow someone to leave the ground.

Fans from inside rushed to the gate attempting to piill the gate wide
open and appeared to be trying to lift it off the hinges which they
could not do because of restraining pins through th^ hinges*

k short struggle ensued and with the help of Mounted Officers fans
were bodily thrown and pushed from the gate and we rfcsnaged to re-
secure the gate.   Prompt action -by ray staff and Club Stewards
prevented the gate from being fully opened and only a small number
of non-ticket holders entered the ground and ran into the crowd
knocking fans out of the way in their efforts to mirigle with the
standing crowd.   I instructed my officers not to pursue these
fans.

After this the Mounted Section pushed all fans without tickets onto
the car park.   I then lined officers from the Dog Section with their
dogs on leads across the front of the turnstiles and the Mounted
Section allocated me two officers, one to each wire!gate between
the turnstiles to preserve a sterile area.   After ill fans with
tickets had entered, the turnstiles started to closi, at this
point about 30 fans in the over 30 age group staggered, they had
obviously consumed a lot of drink and started to shout comments
to the effect that if the turnstiles were not opened they would
rip the gates off and nobody closed doors on Liverpool supporters.
9   JUN   *B:   16:34   FROM   HUMBERSI DE   P OL I C E _ HQ   TO   S.YORKS        PAGE.001



          '3-


          At this time I only had two officers outside the ground.   We calmed
          them down, checked their tickets and they entered bv a turnstile.

          During the-match I received a report that due tc attempts to reach
          in and steal stock from the refreshment hut it haci been closed and
          fans in the North Stand round the hut were starting to damage it.
                                                              i
                                                              i
          I reo.uested fans to back off from the hut so that jroy officers could
          supervise an orderly purchase of refreshments and (the hut would re­
          open.    Despite several requests there was no movement even though
          there were areas away from the hut.    I therefore |used uniform
          officers who in the end had to bodily fight their (way into the
          crowd to prevent fans banging and pulling at the Wooden end of the
          hut.    After a bitter struggle we managed to boaiily force them away
          and preserve a sterile area around the refreshment! hut.     At no
          time did any of the fans assist in clearing the arjea, they acting
          in a mindless way pushing towards the hut.

          For the rest of the match officers physically retained a small
          sterile area and supervised sales,                !

          Holdback after the Final Whistle

          It is the policy of the Humberside Force to allow home supporters to
          leave the ground and holdback the away supporters to prevent any
          confrontation on the car park or around the ground.

          This was the case of this date, announcements were, made over the
          public address system to this effect.

          The holdback is achieved by a oordc          rmed officers across the
          entrancewav from the two areas.   After a short time 1 could see the
          fans at the back pushing the fans in front of them forward and
          pressure started to build up at the front.   Verba 1 requests were
          made to fans at the back to ease back and stop pushing, this was
          totally ignored and they just pushed all the more jfrom the back

          It was obvious to me that fans at the frcnt were bjeing crushed and
          there was a danger of them being seriouslyinjured! alongwith police
          officers engaged on the holdback.                 1

          I instructed my officers to ease back and allow thje fans to leave in
          an orderly manner.   As we started to move back a large cheer went
          up from the away supporters and a big surge forward broke through the
          cordon.   The fans then rushed out in an uncontrolled manner, best
          described as a herd of wild horses knocking their bwn supporters out
          of the way.   My staff were unable to prevent this! because of weight
          of numbers against us.                             j

          At no time was any request by myself or my officers willingly followed
          and various degrees of force had to be employed toj achieve our
          reouests.
1 StoS-I dto- i   "d   l a . ’ Dj   N O K r <JL.K   <•' J N 5. | H b U L M r , Y    U b tii   b a :tiS b   Ud




          "I was the officcr in chargo cf the policing ul the Norwich City
      Football Club versus Liverpool Football Club football match at Carrow
      Road, Norwich oil Saturday, 1st April, 1909.

           It is usual procedure to categorisc football matches as of high,
      medium or low priority in our pre-season planning. This match had been
      categorised as high priority even before the result became of greater
      significance in the Division One Championship Competition. The Carrow
      Road ground capacity is 26,81.2 and for this reason it was also decided
      that the match would have to be all ticket, a fact which-would be well
      publicised in advance.

            Carrow Road offers limited options for the accommodation of
       visiting supporters and the total available space, taking into account
       the need for segregation and accommodating home club members, is 5,000.

            There is terracing behind both goals at the football ground. Hie
       River End terracing is part of a 51% membership scheme and, therefore,
       always occupied by home fans. The Barclay Stand terracing is divided
       into 4 enclosures to limit lateral and forward movement and segregate
       opposing factions. Hie pens are numbered 1 to 4, pens 1 and 2 are
       always occupied by home fans, pen 3 at medium and low priority matches
       remains empty and pen 4 is for visiting supporters. In addition there
       is another area of terracing, the Triangle, which faces obliquely across
       the pitch and is adjacent to pen 4 and seating in blocks F, G and H
       normally taken up by visiting supporters. Pens 3, 4, the Triangle and
       blocks F, G and H wore allocated to Liverpool supporters for this match.
       4,800 tickets were sent to Liverpool for sale in advance.

             Access to the visitors enclosures is through turnstiles at the
        rear of the Barclay Stand which are completely independent of the
        access points available for home supporters. The rear of the Barclay
        Stand borders the main A.47 Norwich to Great Yarmouth trunk road.

                                                                                   Cont'd          f
-06-12     15: 54             NORFOLK   CONSTABULARY        B 603   665086



                                -   2




     It was obvious, owing to Liverpool's recent success that there
would be a large, if not capacity, crowd for this match. Local interest
was also very high and policing arrangements included the highest level
of policing for any match during the season. This level was 313 officers
including Special Constables.

     On Thursday, 30th March, 1989, I saw the Norwich City Football
Club Chairman, Mr. Robert CHASE, at the football ground; He told me
that ticket sales for the match were not selling as well as expected in
Liverpool. He had been told that 1,272 tickets would be returned and
would be brought to Norwich on the club coach on Saturday. Mr. CHASE
suggested that pen 3 now be allocated to home fans as pen k , the Triangle
and the seating could accommodate the reduced away support, I told him
it would be imprudent to take that decision in the light of experience
which showed that Liverpool always attracted considerable national
support . The probability being that many people would attend who either
could not obtain tickets because they were only on sale at Liverpool or
unaware that the match was in fact designated as all ticket. 1
suggested that the decision be delayed until the morning of the match
and I would then consider the situation with regard to pen 3, although
because of access and egress to this enclosure for home fans it was
most likely that the space would still be allocated to Liverpool
supporters.

     On Saturday, 1st April, 1989, there was a significant crowd
assembling outside the Carrow Road Football Ground by midday. Almost
all were Liverpool supporters and the majority had tickets. By 1300
hours there was a considerable crowd gathered, a number of whom did not
have tickets. Many said they were not aware it was an all ticket match
and others that they could not obtain tickets because they came from
areas distant from Liverpool. I decided, therefore, to open 2
turnstiles and sell the returned tickets, after agreement with the Club
Chairman, to Liverpool supporters for access to pen 3. All the
tickets were sold in this fashion and there is no doubt that some home
supporters benefitted in this way. They were, however, met by officers
just inside the ground who directed them to accommodation reserved for
home supporters. The visiting fans were quite well behaved and formed
orderly and quiet queues outside the ground. They did not arrive late
and all supporters were in the ground by 1500 hours.

     The visiting fans were quite boisterous, generally good humoured
and totally partisan in their support for their team to the exclusion
of all else. I attach a copy of the match summary which was forwarded
to the Merseyside Police on the 3rd April, 1989, and indicates the
problems that we had faced. A video tape of this match is available
if required. I attach a copy of the Carrow Road ground plan."
     Use enclosed is an extract of a report submitted by Chief
Superintendent MAXWELL, Norwich Divisional Commander, who was Operational
Commander for the Norwich City versus Liverpool football match held at
Carrow Road, Norwich, on Saturday, 1st April, 1989. It covers the
overall policing of the event and is forwarded for the information of
Chief Superintendent WAYNE/Detective Inspector KING, Operational
Intelligence Unit, Police Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield.,

                                                 _____




                                        Superintendent

12.0.89.
RE/GT
          1S-06-1SSS     li:j6                                                                              01 233 2813         P. 15
                                                                                                                                Form 3017




           r:\

                                                 METROPOLITAN POLICE

I                                                   FOOTBALL M A TC H S U M M A R Y


I   1.     DATE: Sat    1 3 th   May 1989.               FIXTURE;            WIMELEDOI'                    — v—         LIVERPOOL



M          VENUE:      Plough Lane, Wimbledon, SW19*                                                KICK OFF TIME:      1500hrs.


           MATCH (League/C up/O ther) (Specify): League D iv is io n One,
I


                                                                              HOME SUPPORTERS                     AWAY SUPPORTERS
    2 . CROW D ATTENDANCE                                TOTAL
           Estimate if not known                         1^,730                    M57                                  6,^73
1
                                                                      R A IL ...                                 B U S /C O A C H
           M ODE OF TRAVEL
N                                                            (No. on Special Trains)                     (No. and Transport Companies)
                                                                       Nil             >                     Private Coaches.
                                                             (No. on Service Trains)
                                                                                                         2 Selwyns coaches
                                                                                                         2 Starline coaches
                                                                                                         1.Go Whittle coach
                                                                                                         1 Eavesway coach .
I                                                                                                        1 Landliner coach
                                                                                                         1 Jones of Flint coach
                                                                                                         1. Amberline coach
                            Private
            O TH £R (Specify)                       motorcars.                                           1 Sun Span Travel coach
            TransitVans Nil.
                                                                                                         All coaches parked in the
            Special Parties (Political or youth gangs) N i l .                                           Wimbledon Greyhound Stadium
                                                                                                         car park.
I

                                                 IN S ID E                         O U T S ID E                    E JEC TM E N TS
            N U M B E R OF
            A R R E STS :
                                                                                                                            V IS IT O R S
i           Public Order
            Offences
                                    HOME
                                        one (l)
                                                       V IS IT O R S
                                                             Nil
                                                                             HOME
                                                                             Nil
                                                                                           V IS IT O R S
                                                                                                  Nil'
                                                                                                               HOME
                                                                                                                  one(1)         one(1)

            Damage                      Ml                   one(1)          Nil                  Nil             Nil            Nil
1           Others                      one(l)               Nil             Nil             .Nil                 Nil            Nil

            See also
«           Appendix 'A '



M    5.     LEVELS OF POLICE C O VE R
            (a) High priority      «t   a   11
1
     1 6-06-1989       1 1 : 37

/ •
    * 6.       IN T E L L IG E N C E R E C E IV E D A N D F R O M W H O M
           ^-'information and comments)

             Bus Companies, Football Clubs, Police, etc.
             (Show nature of intelligence)

             Information received froa|                      correct. Most of Liverpocls
             support came from the London area M ^,500 F-us whatever was m -~e home en-*




•                                                              :------------
      7.      POLICING P R O B L E M S A N D C R O W D BEHAVIOUR

              (a) In transit: Most of the Liverpool supporters came early and queued in an orderly
                 fashion until the turnstiles opened at 151;5hrs. Not much drunkness was m
                 evidence. The local public houses were quits eopty*




              (b) Inside Ground: Both sets of Fans were very well behaves. One arrest for criminal w
                 of the toilet window by the C.C.T.W but on the rerun cl "he viaso afver whe
                 match it was not clear that the arrested person ( though clearly involved in tne
                 damage with another person ) committed the offence* He was released without
                 charge. Two other arrests in the home end one for threatening behaviour and
                 one for drunk and disorderly a Chelsea supporter.
                 9L .                                                              *




               (c) Immediate vicinity of Ground:       Very quiet no problems.




               <d) Other Locations: Very quiet no problems
           i,o " u o " i~ c r       i» i • j f                                                            y i   c .u u u o x j         r . .l t




is*                   .         .                                             — 3—

      8.    CEM ENTS                      O N P O LIC IN G T A C T IC S   -
1           i.e. Escorts, Turnstile Searches, Control of Licensing Laws, e tc :, ^

            Turnstile serial vere using metal detectors on all supporters for the match* Nothing
1           untoward was found. Although this game was billed as all ticket, due to the very low
            before match, sales it was agreed by-police“-and. the club to open four turnstiles at
            each end of the.ground .for .ticket sales only. The match went very quiet without any
I           serious p r o b l e m s . During’the game there were three arrests-and two ejections. •-•See -
            appendex "A” for details. The game ended’without incident and "both "sets o f ‘    •fans" went
            to there respective hoaes without incident.
                                    •A-           •                                          -•                              . . . .              ...
1           The Commissioner of Police, Sir Peter Imbert was present at the ground for 'this"gsune.

I                  This game was made all-ticket at the .request of Wimbledon P.olicey;..L.iverpoo.1 .
                   F.C. was allocated 6,500 tickets which were sent with a request for supporters
                   to be advised by means of local radio and press that the fixture was an all­
1                  ticket one. Some 4,000 unsold tickets were returned to Wimbledon F.C: despite
                   this,- policing arrangements were based on intelligence reports that 4,500
                   or more;Liverpool supporters could be expected. On -the .day nearly .6,50.0
                   Liverpool supporters attended the jgame, .excluding a, number who .entered the
( •                home supporters parts of the stadium. It was clear that a’ large number of
                   Liverpool supporters attended without tickets;, despite publicity, that the       ..
                   game was an all-ticket one and adequate tickets were^ available -for sale in.
I                  Liverpool.


I

I




|      FROM:          Chief Superintendent                                           TO:   Chief Superintendent
                      ' VW ' Division                                                      Force Support Services           TO 20.




I

I

I

f                                                     F .L .O .                                     Chief Sunerintfinriftnt & EARWOQD.
Report for the
information of:-

r                                                                      METROPOLITAN                POLICE
    The Chief Constable,                                                  'QV. Division Wembley,       siaticn
    South Yorkshire Folice, *
    Police Headquarters,                                                  603 Harrow Rosa, .Wembley, Middlesex.
    Snig Hill,                                                            HAO 21IH
    Sheffield S3 8LY,
    South Yorkshire.                                                      5 June
                                                                              No
    Through Deputy Assistant Cctnrdssioner                            Your    Ref.
    «P«* «-i   IT-.      V^li /      \         ,
                                               -Li--- -
    R B w e l l s QJM MA (OXCN)
                                                                      Doted




                      Subject     F .A .   CUP FINA L     -   2 0 MAY, 1 9 8 9




I an a Chief Inspector in the Metropolitan Folice, attached to Wembley Division.
 My duties include the policing of events at Wembley Stadium and T have been doing
this in rny present rank since January, 1987.

The Hillsborough tragedy, after the initial shock, gave me hope for the future.
This hope was that the behaviour of fans in Leppings Lane, which I recognise as
a not unknown tactic at Wembley, would now :cease - the danger being acknowledged
by those who indulge in such acts.

Cn the 20 May I was in charge of the concourse at Wembley Stadium frcro the Royal
Tunnel round Westwards to Turnstile ’K’. This area has two groups of turnstiles,
1F' and 'G', which are approached by flights of steps and are relatively safe frcni
crushing.   It also has three groups of turnstiles, 'H', 'J' and 'K', approached
by level ground and which are liable tocrushing problems.     The stadium offices
are close to 'H', *J' and *K' and likewise on level ground.

I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my way into Wenbiey at Stanmore Broadway,
seme six miles frcm the stadium, where a nunber_were sitting on the pavement drinking
cans of beer or lacer, at 'about 9.30 a.m.

The closer to Wembley, the mere fans I saw who were drinking in the street, often
carrying more cans with them.
I arrived at Wenisley Stadium at about 10.30 a.m. and saw that alarge number of
fans were already on the ccrplex, perhapsas many as 10,CCO. Again, many of them
had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with than. I was dismayed to find that many
of those present did not have tickets for the game. My advice to then to leave
the area went for the most part, unheeded.
On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile 'H' a small section of
fencing, secured by scaffold clips, had been slackened so that a signifi­
cant breach of the fence could be rede, giving access to the circulating
corridor.   From the enquiries I mece it appeared that this hod been done
by fans during the night, no doubt intending to apply pressure at the
right moment to cain .entry to the Stadium.

Information was passed to officers under my corrmand by an unidentified
Liverpool police officer, that he had heard fans planning to rush the
'H', *’J ’ end 'K' turnstiles. This confirmed my own view that these were
the irest vulnerable areas and therefore the most likely to be attacked.

As time progressed, I noticed that there were more people in that area
suffering the ill effects of alcohol and tension was beginning to increase.
This culminated -in a number of fights at the ‘pinch point', the narrowest
point of the concourse, outside the Stadium Offices.       The fights were
caused apparently by tlxi sale of tickets by 'touts'. Although well known
touts were not evident,''there -seemed to be a number of people selling
one or two-ticketsr- -The fans -were keen to attack such people and yet
also to buy the tickets::at inflated prices.

By 12.30pm, the crowd was building up generally, but especially so outside
turnstiles rH', ‘J ‘ and 'K1. Because this area is confined, i had to
put in a cordon of police horses ond foot police between the T.V. ccfT^pound
and turnstile 'H' to prevent the danger of crushing.

Outside of the cordon, there were more outbreaks of disorder among fans
who had been drinking and I personally received a blow to the head whilst
assisting one of my officers in making an arrest.

The turnstiles--were-- late in opening, because a lorry was stil.l-carrying
out some work in the circulating- corridor. - This lorry could only make
an exit -through a-gate .at the side-of turnstile '-K'. it did this just
before 1.15pm but caused quite severe problems with crowds waiting for
the turnstiles to cpen.     The gate stuck when it was only half open and
a lot of effort was required to prevent a large nuirber of illegal entries
to the Stadiun.
Once the turnstiles opened, I expected the crowd to ease considerably
and to reduce the complaints of crushing I was getting frcm people in
the crowd.   That people were obviously pressing forward and causing a
crush in these circumstances, in the wake of Hillsborough, amazed me.
I was more amazed, however, to finri_that the crush was not diminishing
as I expected-it to at turnstile 'H'.    This was because of ticketless
fans forcing their way through the turnstiles with ticket-holders a**
having to be removed through exit gates, slowing down the whole of the
operation.
Whilst a lot of illegal entrants were removed, I believe an appreciable
number were not. The nest intense crush was at turnstile ’H', which had
had a fence weakened during the night, and in my mind must have been pre­
planned by a large number of fans hoping to breach the security of the
fence, if they were unable to get in through the. turnstiles.

By 2.30pm, the number of people going in through turnstiles 'H « ^ ®n<3
'K' had reduced greatly.   This had been achieved by having tickets for
turnstile 'H' accepted at 'J' and ’K ‘ turnstiles and filtering people
               at the cordon and allowing only those with tickets through. Many people
i      •       were reluctant to produce tickets, fearing that they might be snatched
               from them.    Itey took the trouble to secrete them in shoes, socks and
               other places, which made it difficult when production was demanded. The
               niroer .of street robberies for this event are much higher than fcr similar
               events.

      16.      There were new seme 300 people on the outside of the cordon who did not
               have tickets but were still anxious to find a wev into the .Stadium. Father
               •than .leaving the ccrfcn as a fixed target, I decided to ccrrmence a sweep
               of the concourse,.pushing t>j*se fans towards the Royal Tunnel and awey
               from the vulnerable area.

      17.      When the sweep frcm the other side, turnstiles ’’A' to 'E‘, reached the
■              Royal Tunnel, the crcwd which numbered about" 500 began throwing bottles
               and cans at police. A 'nurfcer or arrests were made during the ccnpletion
               of the sweep.

■     18.       Despite the sveep, snail pockets of ticketless fans returned to the concourse
               during the progress of the game. At about half time, there was a determined
               • atterrpt by about 200 to gain entry through cates and windews at the Stadiun
N               Offices and turnstile 'H'. This was successfully repelled.

                Just before the end of the care, all gates to the Stadiun were opened
i *             in preparation for the exodus. At this stage, Liverpool were in the lead
                and fans were starting to leave.     However, the equalising goal was then
                scored by Everton. This resulted in an influx of fans who had been leaving
C               and also those still around the ground without tickets. All managed to
                get into bays around the Stadium to watch extra time.

|     20   .    The nuocber of Arrests, 76 on the outside of the Stadiun, does not fully
                reflect the magnitude of misbehaviour by drunken fans. Rather a balance
                is struck in deciding whether arrests can be irede without seriously reducing
                the nuitoer of police left to control the crowd.

      21   .   Cn this occasion, there was a rapport between the Liverpool and Evertcn
               supporters.   Had this not been the case, I believe much greater disorder
I              would have emanated frcm the section of fans determined to gain entrance
               to the Stadiun, regardless of the cost in any terms, to others.

      22 .     Having described a lot of bad behaviour on the part of sane fans, I should
               say that the majority were well behaved and concerned for the safety of
               themselves and others.
I

X                                            v     J. MILLER

I                                          Chief Inspector (Operations)



I


               »A-'~•

                                                                        TOTAL P.04
                                               APPENDIX




    HTT.T.^BOROUGH DISASTER 15IH APRIL, 1989




Evidence of the behaviour of fans at the Semi Final
match between Norwich and Everton played at Villa
Park on 15th April, 1989.
                                                                                                                                                                        Wl- *14

                                                          West Midlands Police                                                                                 <Am*"a'913>1
                                                S T A T E M E N T OF W ITNESS
                                     (C.J. A c t 19«7. • #; M.C. A ct 1380, t 102; M.C. Autes 1981, r.7Cl

Name .... ........................... Roy_ John SELLER
A9« •                                     (yrs!       Date o? B irth                   9 V?P. ? -)..................................

Occupat:on ........................................................................... P   M e.f ,^P?r^\^e.
                                                                                                          nAert of Police
Home or business address                               ...................................West M id la n d s P o lic e                     Headouarte-'-s
anc telephone number                                                                                                                       •*•■*■*• -n • ••• ^ . < v. . . .
                                                       ............ ^?PPA.aAnAs.A .DiscJ pi ine. Dcp^r^ipnt.
                                                       ............. ?4?y.d.House, Cylmore Circus, .Cueensy.'pV
                                                       ................................................................ . . T e l ? : . 0 2 ; . ^ 3 6 i Q C O . e n . * 3 7 9
Tni. statemen;, consisting of                pagels! each V aigned by me. is true tc the w * t of my knowados and
      • nd 1 ma*e 11 knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence. I jhall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfuliv
stated in n anything wh.ch I know to be false or dc not believe to be true.


                                                                   June                                          19         89

                                                            • -•.              Signature witnessed b y ................ .. ................................

                                                                                O ffic e r'# Name          .............................


                                                                                Rank ...................................          Nc.



 • 1 «.?. currently the officer ir. charge of tne Co-nplaJnts t r . i discipline

 I p r e s e n t Of the West Kiciar.ds f-olice, stationed at Force Headquarters ir

       BiRs-nghia.                 However, for the period from 31 March 1566 tv 21 May 1 ^ 5 , j

      was the Divisional C o l d e r of -D’ Division of the West Kidlands Police,

      fir. art?, which enconpssses the Villa Park Football Stadium, the home of

      As ten Villa Football Club, and bne of ny responsibilities was tc ma>:e the

      nccessary policing arrangements in connection with the Foctbsll Staciua.



      In?             iiu.- is equipped with a dedicated Police Control Box, and

      facilities include comprehensive closed circuit television equipment to

     enable nor,1 taring both inside and the Immediate outside cf the grounj.

     A recent addition is a visual display unit fro- the Club's computerised

     elec^r.it                turnstile counting facility from which it is p e t i o l e to




Signed ......                                                                  Signature wttr\etse*1 by
 0**rv #,
                                         W**t Midlands Pofle*                                                                                       VOOI
                                                                                                                                            —>•***»« 1.(7)
                               S T A T E M E N T OF W I T N E S S
                    fC .J. A ct, 1 M 7 , ».B M.C. A ct 19fiO; .. 102; M.C. RuIm. 1881. ,.70)

  Continuation of «t«t«m#nt of               .......................F:0Y_ JOHN MF.LLErt




            rr.onitcr the total nunber of persons e ^ s r i n r the                                         j   -
                                                 6...ering the stadium, and the numbers
            in any particular section of the ground.



                         F$rk was cN^sr” ««                              <•
                                                          t,,c %enuc fcr Lne seni-final or the r.A.? Cup
           between Everton and Norwich cn Saturday 15 April 198$.                                                   Such games have**„-

           a regular future at Villa Park for n*ny years, aHd 1 personally had been                                                                  -

           rcs^nsitle for                 the      policing of two previous seni-final-gan,e« and in
           a c t i o n . n.uifiter ef cc^arable .atche*.                                 * te thorefore                        ^
          With football Sur.ry%.-■*■£,■ r                               ..--it
                                                                 HtiJ> w d i        aware of toLcnfi-i
                                                                                             K «i/CI] L is j                         , •

          * * * * * *     *w,‘wrdlR*Ay*            •' d5t2ii^                        operation invc3vinG semc’fiBO                          police
          c rria v z              also :raffle Warden,, Spcc<al Constable, and civilian staff                                                        '
          was     prepare:!, to d * a i with a l l facets of-th* event. " ”



         Tr.e S m j : .va c a p s c it ; .       c u r r e n t l y s ta n d s a t 4 5 , 5 0 0 .       A c a p a c it y
                                                                                                                      /    rowd V a 5
         expects* ar.;j it way declared an all-ticket g£-nc                                          A3i Mr---
                                                                                         c-   *<--   a ji    l3 c K r iw e r e        s o le
         w e ll   t^ ro rt-    th e e v e n t .      I n a c c o rd a n c e w i t h a w c U                                -
                                                                                    * wz.x            e o ^ a b iis n c d p ia n i t        was
         p o s s ib le    to s e g r e g a t e    th e    two s e t s o f * u r - ' o r r « r -t
                                                                             I "      -e . ^ _n th e manr.er shown on th ;
         p3c«n    01'    t h e gro u n d nr-,:>:rd"& J           m 1 ».
                                                •                 ‘ •   ihfe            e f f e c t o f th is       v:-s t ’- a 4

     E v e rtc r         s u p p o rte rs a r r iv in g     f r o a th e N o r t^       u y * k ..o r .
                                                                                    -            ’serc s i t u a t e s    in       th e K c r th

             °f th8 r W ‘#                    the Wlt£0" ^     turwtllM m d Norwich
     su p p o rte rs . m v i n , r , o , t h . East took ta . SouEK - a r t e f ^                                                       ^
     the T r i n i t y *0,4 t u r « U l « .                   Tsis arrangenent,                 comM^ w it- the „ « or
     S '^a rz .~         rs jlv a y   s ta tio n s ,      coach and c a r na^ks a^-d
                                                                          Pa.*to a ..d ir.oworway e x i t s ,                        e n a b le d
     e « p ; t t* Mtr'cttloa of „pp,«in£ 9 W pCrter5 on the a .pro... l0 itia


    <*M r i “ r * f r “           U:i'                     l 3 « * arra.'j£ri.snts a , t J U w w M „                        m « ,



Signad                                                        S tpnatvrv wftn*S9*</ by
                                                 W**t Midlands Police                                                                                        *o*i»
                                                                                                                                                     ,-i>*r>d«Sl.l?l
                                      STATEMENT OF W IT N E S S
                        (C-J.   Act. 1987, i»,          M.C    Act 1980; ». 102;    M.C-   flgtM. 1$81,   f .7oi

   Contt»vj*tion ©f *t*t«meni cf                               .......... ^P.*.        MEL!»£.'R                   -3 -



               P lans marked -K .J .K . 2- (E v e rto n ! " R .J . m . 3» (N orw ich).                                           Ihe f i n a l c f f i c l a ’

               attendance figure was *6,553, comprising                                              ,515 Everton supporters and
               22,02k .Norwich supporters.




             ; Cn th e day ° f *?* * “ ?» s u p p o rte rs frcm both E vcrton and Norwich began

             a r r iv in g        Ir, the v i c i n i t y o f V i 13a Park from a p pro xim ately n a = .                                    fro *    12


              r.oon onwards, I took up p e w it!o r. m                                the P o lic e c o n tro l Bex w it h in the

              S ta d ium .          The t u r n s t i l e werc opened a t 1 2 .3 0 p m and freer, th a t tJ .,e onwards

              the:*c war. a reasonably steady flo w o f s p e c ta to rs in t o the f.ta d lu n .

              Gererally                .speaking the KcrwJch Supporters were well bchav-c                                           and i n good

             hux^r, *rriv«d In                              th* locality early and quoued In an orderly fashion.                                           By

         :<r-3^pr:, the vast majority of Kcrwich supporters were in the Stadlua and

             s— .•.xftc .               hc-..’evcr,it vi*s niost noticeable at          +<rrn tv,,. *.•
                                                                         K * ' t **a - tiffic th a t tc e re was a
         .c e r.p a r& tiv * la c k o f ever ton s u p p o rte rs in the Stadiu-r.                                          sucn was the

    . • d is p a r ity             tha« I in s tr u c te d P o lic e Constable 5299 G BHAKK70.1K, one o f the

             s t a f f in                P o lic e c o n tro l Sox, to check w it h the P o lice Motorway C o n tro l

         C e :„re ,          P e rry B u rr, „                 to w hether there was « problem c s u s i, * any delay on

             the r * torwciV yys ze~r.                        me r e p ly was th a t although t r a f f i c                            heavy, there

         was nc £-
                 ::c':lfic rc£*on’ ~uch ^                                             works     or   an a c c i d e n t .         At    th a t   time -

        2     .35p~ - ell the coaches which were expected from Liverpool had arrived,

        all s p e c i a l t r a i n s had unloaded, and a large number of cars were in the

        appointed car parking                               a re a .    My conclusion was that a substantial                                num ber     of

        F iv e r t o r .    s o r t e r s            w e re    Ir.     the vicinity of the stilus,                         but   w e re n o t    in   or

        r *£r        - -j“ s ta d iu m .             1 way info rm e d th a t niuny c-f the io
                                                                                                                     Zcl    p u b lic houses were
        crowded, t u t 1 h.'id no d e ta ile d in fo rm a tio n a_s to who was in -J.cz., o th e r

        thar. t '(&t *,any w*re C;.%V:1r£. \ tA i r way to the f o o t b a ll natch.


S ig n e d     ................................ r» vw - •                 S tffr> *tu f* w rtn+ss+d by
                                                                                                                                                                                           .k :

            r * i
                                                           W**t Midlands Pollca                                                                                                            VrV« 1i
                                                                                                                                                                                               5. a 7i

                                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                   «C J . Act. 1 9 6 7 .           M.C. A ct 1 9 8 0 ; *. 1 0 2 ; M.C. I U m . 1 * 8 1 . f.70i


        I           Continuation of ttattmtnt of                   ...................ROY . JCKN M^LLE;’                                     ^



        i                   T * * ,,, - ic *                   O ff „        t f,       ,C ^ „ i«                   t i » , c f 3pffi.           At l h i t ^

                            tu rn s ti:e t, n i t o r i „                t h . * U c s C o n tro l So, w „ r e a u t ™ * . to ta ; o f
    i
                                       - p e c t s to r s in the S’-*--’ *                                     t          -
                                                                                                              1 i0*tr“ct«                  p=ii« c«.uki. u m iS iX
    i                       to r.,k« . w riLt.cn re c c re e f tW » f ig u r e , which h» d i -
                              •                                                                 •                                                        *-- m e . ..me, tne
                                      s e c tio n s o f the StacjJurs were f u l l to c ^ - c i - v     t> :
                                                                           . ..           c^ « CJ- y , whereas the Everto*
    i                    to c tio R s           n e t . v'ne '•iened r ^ ’ - i n t *n*                      -
                                                             a " ° ec              rv canseras shewed 5^v>si-Antic.
                                                                                                          v - b s ^ n M . i ' crowc*
                         m W itto n Lan,. p . r - . i c u , . , , * . i n t o . v i c i n i t y o f                                              . L . t - , ck                            '
0
                         o f a , . r to,. s u p p o r t s .                  They « r e                 n o t queuinS in ,                       o r a e r l} .              J         ,
■
mm
                                              U'5 :                                     ^          f« *                              -     th a t v i c n . i t y ehoul(i M

                                            by * S,ir-t W “ *                 f M : 0 f n c c r s < « • T r i n i t y S;s3 , the ,.o r J l f ,
■
                                               «-.cr» t f c m K6J no q ^ j l n g o r crowds.                                                  Tv*            ...........
                                                               - -                                                                            1**- c r c * w i r ; Aitcc-n Lane
                        V?,i b° i s U ':' t;U5 £r’d                            ^ r:c o -o p e ra tiv 5 and th e re va5 ev —                                       -V -   '
                                                                                                                                                 “                  w* cany ci-
                                  .-vi.jr? ur.Jer tne in f iu e n c s o f drir>*<                                             c       Tt. ...
                                                                                                                              .-w .^ufcl4 wr.er-e were no major
                       D mh* *    -*•— »   A. w ^ rv w            . •>, *»
                                                               _ Cr*                ~       a r-. r * . ^ 4   »>•    »*
                                                                                    fc. a . . 6at &                  tve rco n s u p p o rte r* re fo re they
                       a r r iv e d i;, the                              f o r drink* r e n t e d o ffe n c e s .



                       A. t h -.v.agc- y f the proceedings a s e rie s o f p ro b le m             d     -h -
                                                                                      ^ - ‘ —r ^ f c .   .there were a
                      number o f i n c J d e n * s ' r v^ r — n        -
                                                         - ....      - jum ping the t u r n s t i l e s , in c^der

                       L° f 5 i n e^           n" '            ? r“ “ ” Wy                             e                  ^      ~       tic k e ts .      to h O T m i            .

                      ” “ * ' r ef                         * '* * * ■ ''* ’ •* sained entrance in                                    t h is manner t,y                   o f the
                      T r i n i t y Sua<! t u n . s t i ] e r . i n t o t h , Norwich .e ctJor, o f t h , c.-o,d.                                                              n

                      « *    b rought -to p o l i t e a. t e n t i o „                        t h a t a number o f i v Srto.n                                            Ke, t

                     **> » l « .« «              tc t u r : . . 't i : e a tte n d a n ts in o r d t r to Sc in en ; : -,ncc v i t h o . t
                      "~ C ^ f i r 40 '*»OZ.i                                r Inr       r   ~+*\* *•          -if              «
                                                           -     . o. . e r m g                          ^ a lt e r n a t iv e to t J - k * - - ' * ^ Cr.-
                                                                                                                                                     % ** ■* •           V V»(13
                     ftls n £:;                       r c - - j rir;e pc>lice atf.enLion in t h *                •
                                                                                              n- ^.eC ’ i j i -iCKC't o f f 1: e i.n
                     ir m ity                          »w p-r.v.or.<; ir. possession o f t ? f , fcrt                                                    .r . .,
                                               ---------------                           v-.wK.t. io .                                                    r.e L iv trp c r-i

                                                                                        S ig n ttu rv vrttnmssvd by
                                          W**t Midlands Pcftcs                                                                                            WJ41S
                                                                                                                                                 - i i a n M $ |7 i

                                   STA TEM ENT OF WITNESS
                        fC.J.   A ct 1M 7. «.»: M.C. A « 19M; ». 102: M.C. Ruin. 1881, r.70l

   C o n tin u ttio n c f »t*:em*nx of          .........................^ 9 ^                                  -b -




               v Kottingha:.- F o r e s t s e - . n n a ] at K iU sb o rcu ch caused I r d w b l. wnen t n , i r

              r*,U *’ t f ° r thC U c * * U                    10 be                           » * rc r e f u n d .       Thcr. „ „ w            arre.,,
              or «        Fverto:: s u p p o rte r f ,- r the- robbery o f t i c k e t , fro n a Horwich


              " WSrt<!r- Th' !'S *“ " D ' vldcnce «<■ * « * •« t i c k t u in c ir c u la t io n , wMch
              - d te c , f e a tu r e o f ! « • . « , 51nU a r * » , , a.,d £sis „ „ , t t r l t u ^ tc £
             new process of cocputsrised prirfne of" tvte*. ^                t               -•
                                                 01 t ^ c k e - . s on n e a t $ ? : : s u i v e p a p e r ,
             wni...1. nokes forgery Exicb more difficult.



             At 3.<5p- aU suppcrtcrs ver- in chg Stadjur.
                                                                                                          it. w as a t     this       point   that
             the o. fici=i iJnsiJ fittendar.ee *’5ure of *i£ tc<
                                                                                 ° ^ rc 0i    ^c »         fcas r e g i s t e r e d   on t h e

            • " rr“ k<iS                          i n i s meant th a t 4030 persons - a U o f tnem Everton

            s-^ po.     te.- - enters t;;e $tad.< us after the ga,-ne had kicked-off.



            m rou^u*.             th- «***,         t Uc E v c r t o . n s u p p o r t e r s b e h a v i o u r w a s p o o r a nd t h « y

            r . q j_.                         p o lice       a tten tio n .            By c o m p a r i s o n   the    Korvr c h      sectio n    cf

            tne   crow d was r e a d a b l y                w ell        Shaved.             I t w as n e c e s s a r y   t,   eject     16

        persons            fr-*"    the * * = ,      for       b r e a c h e s o f ground r u l e s ,            com p risin g «         Everton

        «.id A f * o r . . c : . s u p p o r t e r s .           A fter          t h e £arae was o v e r ,       th ere were « —

        o u t f it s            o f d .T o rd cr,     a ] 2 as the Ever t on w p p o rta r s r a d e t t o t r way b a c k to

        t r . o l r ccacn and c a r p a rk s . a:,d the r a ilw a y s t a t io n , n e c w a l u t l n * S5

       a r r e s t!, f o r p u b lic o r d e r and d r in k r e la te d o ffe n c e s .                            There were no sunt.

       a rrK t* ^                         ‘                                 "<l» t o t a l nu=.ber o f , r r „ , s . „ cor,nec. . cn

       “ ith t!*           * « • « * » » « « « fc • '* *                         ' “ k -n down, a s r c l:o w 5 ; -




S rp o td                                                               S iy n itu r* v rk n *s x *d by
                                  WMt Midlands Pollc*                                                                           Wl«tl

                           STA TEM ENT OF WITNESS
               f C J . A ct. l » - 7 . *.#: M .C . AM 1 8 8 0 ; *. 1 02; M.C. Hub*. 1 8 8 1 . r.70)

Continuation of *x«tem*m of                               SOY JOHN y g l l j L Z



     INSIDE GROUND                                       NORWICH                              EVERTON



     Publi; Ore*:'                                            3                                 11

     Drink Feiste-d                                           2



     O U T S ID E GROUND                   before                 after             before              AFTER



     Pub] i c      C rc ie r-                10                                                          is>
     D rin k     fc c - lite i                 &                                        25              10

     Ih & rt. e tc                                                                        1



     TOTALS s                                                                                  £2



    Tnc t o t a l r-o iic e opc-r:.tior. w *n l o f f w ithout, any a a jo r pro&ieas.                          Ko       ic e

    c: fic.c-Ts wor e as.sauj.ted, th e re were no i n j u r i e s of' any perse:} re po rted , and

    d2" 0* - tc                         was s in ir c & l.         The v i c i n i t y o f V i l l a park S tadias was

    c l e a r ar.cJ re tu rn e d to r:or:r.al by 7pm.




Srgmd                                                 . . .   S rp n ttu rt wftnmS9*d by
                                                                                                                                                                                                          WG 414
                                                                                                    W E S T M I D L A N D S P O L IC E                                                                    CS.O. C22)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          I m w M Ul)

        I
                                                                                                    S T A T E M E N T O F W ITNESS

        L   ............ ..................................               (C.J. Act, !967. s.9; M.C. Act 1900. t102: M..C. Rules 1881, r.?05
        E cout d a t e s
        jWfSS NOT A V A l LASLE
                                                                          DESKCKL K2ISY TURNER
         t                                                    Name
         I T n 2 z 29            1    <15            22 29
         I t 16 23 30            2    9 16           23 30           Over 21
        §0 17 2 *3 1             3   10 17           24 31    Aoe    ......................(Yrj.)     Date of Birth
        11 1*26                  4   11 18           25
        12 19 26                 5   12 IS           26
        |3 20 27                 6   13 20           27       Occjpa lion       . . F.Q.iic e ,.Chie;f.. I n s p e c i g r                  ...... ....................................................
        j l 21 28                7   14 21           28                                                        !- e s t M idlands F o lic e .
        h                                                     Home or business address and                   ................................ .........................................................
      8 IS 22 29 1 8 15 22 29                                 telephone number                                 Mounted Branch, 199 Fark Lane, Aston
     .9 16 23 30 2 9 16 23 30
     1C 17 2* 31 3 10 17 2 4 31
     11 18 25    4 11 18 25                                                                                    B ir n in g h a is .          B63^D                   021 3 5 9 0611 E x t n                 20^
     12 IS 26    5 12 IS 26
     13 20 27    6 13 20 27
     14 21 28    7 14 21 28
                                                              This statement, consisting of          pages each *sicned by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and
    f                                                         belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have
     I 8 15 22 29 1 8 15                             22 29    wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not beiieve to be true.
     £ « 16 23 30 2 9 16                             23 30
    )10 17 24 31 3 10 17                             24 31
    111 18 25     4 1118                             25       Dated the                             day of                               , 19
    ■ 12 IS 26    5 12 19                            26
    113 20 27     6 13 20                            27
    | i 4 : i 28  7 14 21                            28
                                                                                                                                          Signed
    » T E B / IF NO OATES


¥
         i AVOIDED
                                                                                                                                          Signature witnessed t



                                                              I an Chief Inspector Turner Officer in Charge of the V.est Midlands Folice
I
                                                              Mounted Branch. Cn Saturday 15th April 19S9j I was on duty at Villa Park

i                                                             Football Ground, Birminghan as the Officer in Charge of a contingent of

                                                               20 Counted Officers sent to assist police the football Seni Final between

                                                               Everton and Norwich. The Mounted Officers were posted around the ground

                                                               as follows, six Cfficers to "K" Block turnstiles, Trinity Hoad, six

                                                              Officers to "L" Block turnstiles, Litton Lane and six Officers to

                                                              Block, Uitton Lane. Norwich Supporters used the 16 turnstiles at "K"

                                                              Block and Evert on Supporters used the 10 turnstiles at "L" Block and all

                                                               the turnstiles at RL-S Block situated in Litton Lane. While the queues

                                                               at the various turnstiles were light the Mounted Officers were instructed

                                                               to patrol in the near vicinity to their respective turnstiles and also

                                                               escort       suTD-Dorters from Witton Station, Aston Station ana the coach parks.

                                                               Two Mounted Officers were also posted to patrol the perimeter of the

                                                               ground to assess and report any large crowds or problems.

                                                               All Officers on Mounted duty were on post at 1330 hours for a 1500 hours

                                                               Kick Off. Fror. 1330 hours a steady flow of I.'orvich Supporters were

                                                               adnitted to the ground through "K" Block, with no problems and at no

                                                               tice did a queue exceed JO yards froc the turnstile entrance._______
                                                              Signed                                                                 Signature witnessed by ,
                                                                                                                          WG 415
m                                                WEST M ID LAN DS POLICE                                                  CS.O. C221
                                                                                                                          (•mandad9.811
                                                S T A T E M E N T OF W IT N E S S
                             (C .J. Act, 1 9 6 7 . S .9 : M.C. A c t 1 9 8 0 , £ .1 0 2 ; M.C.    1 9 8 1 . r.?0 )

                                            dzs ;;ci:d kucky tusker
    Continuation cf statement of



At 1^+50 hours I was present in Trinity Road when all the Norwich Supporters had

    entered the ground ar.d Trinity Road was clear of pedestrians. The mood of the f.orvich

Supporters uas jolly and co - operative. I then ordered two of the six Officers

    posted to "K" Block to patrol Aston Park and with the other k Officers I coved from

"K" Slock to "L".Block, Where a request had been na.de for!nore Mounted Officers to

assist:with the queue due to a large anount of Lverton Supporters who had just arrived

at the turnstiles at "L" Block. Upon arrival at "L" Block I found that ail 10

turnstiles were being used and there was a queue some 60 yards in both directions

iron the turnstiles along i.'itton Lane. At 1500 hours when the Kick Off connenced

    the crowd outside "L" Block surged towards the turnstiles and I ordered a wedge of

    horses to be put into the crowd to relieve the pressure on the turnstiles and avoid

    any Injury to any person in the queue. Many of the supporters at "L" Block had been

    drinking and the snell of alcohol in the air fror, the crowd was strong. The Everton

    Surocr4‘£"'c nt MLn B"1oek                       uncc             o i . b u -                thsv sl3.1          sccsss *to *hc

    ground by 1515 hours. I then rr.ade ny way along '.-itton Lane to Rc.-S Block turnstiles

    and saw that the last of the Lverton Supporters were just gaining access to the

    ground by HL-S turnstiles, at this time it was about 1520 hours. Upon ny arrival ?;t

    "RL-S" Block I was informed by the Mounted Officer in Charge at the turnstile, Folice

    Sergent Dunn that the. i-verzon supporters uno gaz_neo. access                                                        nst^_e r.aci

    arrived in the 20 minutes before 1500 hours.
                                                                                                                                                            WG 414
                                                                               WEST MIDLANDS POLICE                                                         (S.O. C22I
                                                                                                                                                            (am«no*d U 1 I

                                                                               S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                                                      (CJ. Act, 1967. s.9;M.C. Act 1980. j. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
         }CK OUT DATES
         WESS NOT A V A IL A B L E
                    1
         a tS 22 29 1 8 1: 22 29        Name
         • 16 23 30 2 9 16 73 30
        JO 17 2 * 31 3 1C 17 24 21                                                                                                  over 21 years,
        11 1* 28     4 11 18 25
                                        Age    .........             (Yrs.i         Date of Birtn
        IS 19 26     5 12 19 26         n                                    Police Sergeant.                          Mounted Eranch.
        13 20 27     6 13 20 27         vjccupation        .......................................... 5?.................................................
        14 21 28     7 14 21 28
                                        L
                                        .       u                  j
                                        Home or business address and
                                                                                                    Mounted Branch,
                                                                                         ..............................................
          8 15   22 29 1 » 15 22 29     telephone number
          9 16   23 30 2 S 16 23 30
        110 17   24 31 3 10 1 7 24 31
        111 18   25    4 11 18 2S
        *12 1$   26    5 12 IS 26
         13 20   27    6 13 20 27
         14 21   28    7 14 21 28
                                        This statement, consisting of 0Iie pages each ’ signed by me. is true to the best of my knowledge and
        18 1-5 22 29
        I             1 8 15 22 23
                                        belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence. I shall be liable to prosecution if I have
           8 18 23 30 2 8 16 23 30      wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true. '■
        110 17 24 31 3 10 17 24 31
        111 18 25     4 11 18 25        Dated the                             day of
        112 18 26     5 12 19 26                                                                 JO
        113 20 27     6 13 20 27
        | i4    28    7 14 21 28
                                                                                                                     Signed.............
           n V IF NO DATES
            AVOIDED
                                                                                                                     Signature witnessed b y .
    t
                                         I an Police Sergeant                                           a mounted officer with the West Midlands
    I                                    Police. On Saturday 15th. April 1989 I vs-s with other Mounted
                                          officers posted to Villa Park Football ground, Birmingham, to assist

    I                                     police the semi-final football match between Norwich and Everton.
                                         I was posted as the officer incharge of the mounted contingent
                                          required to control the supporters entering the ground via R and S
                                         block turnstiles and escortins' the supporters from Witton Railway
                                          Station to nie football ground, only Evert on supporters were allowed
    1                                     access to the ground by R and S block. All Mounted officers were on
                                          post at R and S block by 1330 hours. Between 1330 hours and 14^0 hours

Hi                                        the supporters using R and S block arrived in small groups and there
                                          v;ere no problems gaining access through the turnstiles. At about
t                                         iMfO hours-the crowd began to increase at R and S block and in order
                                          to prevent crushing on the steps, myself and two other Mounted officers
                                          blocked off the bettor, of the steps and directed all supporters up
                                          an adjacent ramp which facilitated better queuing. By about 1515 hours

fS                                        all the Everton supporters at R and S block had gained access to the
                                          football ground.I did not encounter any form of dissorder at R and S
                                          Block turnstiles while I was present.
I

1

I

I                                       Signed                                                                ,£ignaturc witnessed by
Doncaster Rovers
Football Club Ltd.
      Company Registration No. 1701792                                                                BELLEVUE
      V.A.T. Reg. No. 181 5475 52                                                                       DONCASTER
                                                                                                           DN45HT
                                                                                                      Telephone:
                                                                                                      (0302)539441/2/3
P . H a y e s Q P M L L B MA,
Deputy Chief Constable,
South Yo r ks hi r e Police,
Police Headquarters,
S n i g H ill,                                                                                                     ?
S h e f f i e l d S3 8 LY                                                                                      16 /9V.8 9




Dear             Mr    Hayes,

    INTERIM            REPORT           OF   LORD   JUSTICE   TAYLOR

T h a n k y o u for y o u r l e t t e r of 15 A u g u s t c o n c e r n i n g                 the a b o v e . I c an
c o n f i r m t h at our C o m p a n y s e c r e t a r y ha s s i g n e d the                 agreement between
o u r s e l v e s and the S o u t h Y o r k i s h i r e P o l i c e .

We are                f u l l y a p p r e c i a t i v e of t h e i m p o r t a n c e o f g e t t i n g t h i s m a t t e r
right,                a n d w e s h a l l d o a l l w e c a n to h e l p t h e p o l i c e b y c o o p e r a t i n g
fully.

As y o u are o b v i o u s l y a w a r e , w e h a v e n o t b e e n v e r y s u c c e s s f u l in r e c e n t
y e a r s , and o ur c r o w d s are v e r y low. T h i s m e a n s t hat s o m e of the
p r o c e d u r e s we s h a l l h a v e to a d o p t are r a t h e r i n e f f i c i e n t and c o s t l y ,
and, in s ome c a s e s , i n a p p r o p r i a t e . O u r a w a y s u p p o r t e r ' s t e r r a c e is an


•
e x a m p l e : a h e a v y r e s o u r c e w i l l be n e e d e d to m o n i t o r and c o n t r o l this
!area, y e t it v e r y o f t e n o n l y has a b o u t 50 p e o p l e in it.

N a t u r a l l y this is n o t the m o m e n t to t a i l o r p r o c e d u r e s to s uit
i n d i v i d u a l c i r c u m s t a n c e s , but in the f u l l n e s s of time I h o p e we m i g h t
be a b l e to sit d o w n and l o o k at i n d i v i d u a l c a s e s to a s s e s s w h e t h e r it
is r e a s o n a b l e to a l t e r a r r a n g e m e n t s for the b e n e f i t of all.

In the m e a n t i m e I w o u l d l i k e to c o m m e n d the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e for
d e a l i n g w i t h this m a t t e r in a m o s t r e a s o n a b l e an d b u s i n e s s l i k e way. I
r e a l i s e t h at f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s m u s t be a r e a l n u i s a n c e for you.

V r l i i T .g    c i n n o r f l l g




Michael Collett
C hai r m a n .
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




                      CONFIDENTIAL




              THE OPTIONS TO COPE WITH THE

              FORESEEABLE PATTERNS OF ARRIVAL

              OF SPECTATORS AND THEIR DEPARTURE




CIRCULATION RESTRICTED -
PREFACE




1.        THESE ARE SIMPLY A SERIES OF OPTIONS THOUGHT MOST LIKELY TO BE
          RELEVANT.  THE LIST OF OPTIONS IS NOT EXHAUSTIVE, NOR ARE THOSfr-©Ff£ONS
          IN ANY PARTICULAR ORDER.    THEY ARE FRAMED IN A WAY WHICH WHOULD NOT
          INHIBIT INDIVIDUAL INITIATIVES IN A DEVELOPING SITUATION.




2.        IN CONSIDERING   ANY   OF   THESE   OPTIONS,   THE   SAFETY   OF   THE   PUBLIC   IS
           PARAMOUNT.




3.        CONTAINED IN THE AGREEMENTS WITH THE CLUBS IS THE STATEMENT THAT THE
          POLICE WILL ACT IF NECESSARY.   IT THEREFORE FOLLOWS THAT INDEPENDENT
          POLICE ACTION WILL BE INITIATED IN THE ABSENCE OF ANY ACTION BY THE
          CLUB.




4.        THESE OPTIONS ARE TO CATER FOR THOSE UNFORESEEN EVENTS WHICH INEVITABLY
          OCCUR DESPITE OUR BEST PLANNING.   ADDITIONALLY THEY SHOULD BE USED BY
          GROUND COMMANDERS AS A FRAMEWORK FOR THEIR LOCAL ARRANGEMENTS.
I T MUST BE STRESSED THAT THE OPTIONS STATED ARE NOT IN ANY ORDER OF PRIORITY




ALL TICKET OR PART TICKET MATCH




1.      OPTION - OPERATE FILTERS CLOSE TO THE GROUND.




2.      THE CHECKING OF QUEUES INTO THE TURNSTILE - LAST FILTER.




3.      THE PROBLEM CAUSED BY THE TICKETLESS FAN

        i.      VITAL - INTELLIGENCE FROM ORIGINATING FORCE AS TO NUMBERS WHICH
                CAN BE EXPECTED.




        ii.     FANS WHO ARE STOPPED AT THE OUTER CHECK POINTS - EITHER ALLOW TO
                PROCEED, TURN BACK, OR HOLD.




        iii.    THE INNER CHECK POINTS - EITHER ALLOW TO PROCEED, TURN BACK, OR
                HOLD.




        iv      ARRIVAL AT THE GROUND - EITHER ALLOW TO PROCEED, TURN BACK OR
                HOLD.    '




        v.      THE OPTIONS AT THE GROUND

                a)     ALLOW THEM    INTO   A   PRE-DETERMINED   AREA   ON   PAYMENT,
                       OTHERWISE;




                b)     DETAIN OR CONTAIN.




                       CONTROLLED DISPERSAL.




                       ESCORT BACK TO TRANSPORT.
EARLY ARRIVALS




1.      PRE-MATCH ]NIELLIGENCE.




2.     OBSERVE AND MONITOR.




3.     S WEEP, CONTAIN OR CONTROLLED DISPERSAL.




4.     ARRANGE EARLY ADMISSION TO THE GROUND WHERE POSSIBLE.




5.     CONSIDER SPECTATORS COMFORT TO THOSE ADMITTED INTO THE GROUND.




6.     CONSIDER INTELLIGENCE FROM THESE EARLY ARRIVALS WHICH MAY AFFECT POST
       MATCH PLANNING




LATE ARRIVALS



1.     PRE-MATCH INTELLIGENCE.




2.     MAKE AVAILABLE SUFFICIENT TURNSTILES TO ACCOMMODATE THE LATE COMERS.




3.     DEPLOY SUFFICIENT POLICE RESOURCES/RESERVES TO MANAGE THE LATE ARRIVALS.
CON i ROLLED ARhi YrtL - CONSIDER DELAYj NO THE!R ARR2 VAL .




CONSIDER DELAY]NO 1 HE KICK-OFF.




SENSIBLE MANAGEMENT OF THE FANS AND KEEP THEM INFORMED.
UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL LARGE NUMBER OF FANS




1.     WHAT IS THE INTELLIGENCE?




2.     CAN THEY BE ACCOMMODATED AT THE GROUND OR SPECIFIC AREA?




3.     IDENTIFY RESOURCES OR OBTAIN ADDITIONAL RESOURCES, I.E.    OPERATION
        SUPPORT.




A.     DEPLOY RESOURCES AND GAIN EFFECTIVE CONTROL.




5.     ALLOW THEM TO PROCEED OR TURN BACK OR HOLD OR DISPERSE.




6-     WHERE THE DECISION IS TO PROCEED


        i.     INFORM OFFICERS POLICING THAT PART OF THE GROUND _ INTO WHICH
               THEY ARE TO BE RECEIVED AND ARRANGE THEIR RECEPTION.




               CONTROLLED ARRIVAL - CONSIDER DELAYING THEIR ARRIVAL.




               CONSIDER DELAYING THE KICK-OFF.




               SENSIBLE MANAGEMENT OF THE FANS AND KEEP THEM INFORMED.
EARLY DEPARTURE




THE FIRST CONSIDERATION IS    SAFETY   OF' ALL   FANS, BOTH THOSE ATTEMPTING TO
LEAVE AND THOSE REMAINING.




1.     ATTEMPT TO DETERMINE THE REASON.




2.    WHERE PRACTICABLE,    DETAIN IN THE GROUND.




3.     USE P.A. FACILITY.




4.     IDENTIFY THE EXIT ROUTE BUT SPONTANEITY AND VOLUME MAY DICTATE THE
       EXIT ROUTE - THEN - OPEN THE APPROPRIATE GATE(S) - ADVISE POLICE
       OFFICERS AND STEWARDS.




5.     DEPLOY RESOURCES TO CONTROL DEPARTURE.




6.    ATTEMPT TO MAINTAIN SEGREGATION.




7.    ARRANGE EARLIER TRANSPORT.




8.    ADVISE THE SUB-DIVISION.
S W H E R E AN AREA WITHIN TH E GROUND APPROACHES C APACITY



 ASSESS   REMAINING  CAPACITY      IN    THE      GROUND  (WHICH   INCLUDES  THE
 CONTINUATION 01  SEGREATION, I . E . V IS IT IN G FANS INTO HOME FANS' AREAS.’’




 WHERE CAPACITY IS    AVAILABLE  - DEPLOY POLICE RESOURCES TO THOSE
 TURNSTILES TO BE CLOSED AND TO THOSE WHICH WILL RECEIVE THE FANS.




 INFORM POLICE OFFICERS AND STEWARDS WITHIN THE GROUND AND THE CLUB ALSO
 WHAT IS INTENDED.




 OPTION - CONSIDER DELAYING KICK OFF - KEEP REFEREE INFORMED.




 CLOSE THE TURNSTILES.




 INFORM THE FANS.




 CONTROLLED MOVEMENT TO THE PRE-DETERMINED TURNSTILES.




 NEGOTIATE WITH THE CLUB - WHERE POSSIBLE - FOR ADMISSION TO THE PRE­
 DETERMINED AREA FOR THE SAME ADMISSION FEE.




 IF NO SPACE AVAILABLE, DECIDE - CONTAIN OR DISPERSE - DEPLOY RESOURCES
 TO EFFECT THE DECISION MADE - AND THEN INFORM THE FANS.




 REINFORCE SECURITY PATROLS AND PUBLIC ORDER PATROLS.




 ADVISE NEIGHBOURING DIVISIONS/FORCES WHERE EARLY DISPERSAL IS EFFECTED.
GROUND APPROACH!NG CAPACITY



                                                       Cl. ON WHICH 1C1 B/-.•' ?   •: FLANS.
1.     HLIHF KE HELY HEAVILY OK PHE-NATCH FKTFL




                                                    :S CLEARLY A NI F F "          0   CLOSE   ALL
2.     IF GROUND CAPACITY IS APPROACHED T Hi-H;
                                                    ANS    WITHIN THE GROUND.  WHEN THERE
       TURNSTILES TO ENSURE THE SAFETY OF 7 HOB!
                                                                              GROUND, THE
                                                 ’ AI K ] KG ENTRY INTO THE
       REMAINS FANS OUTSIDE, S T IL L 3NTEN"] ON >
       OPTIONS ARE AS FOLLOWS.




       CONSIDER ADDITIONAL RESOURCES, I . E .   OPERATION SUPPORT.




                                                                        - DEPLOY   RESOURCES    TO
        IF NO SPACE AVAILABLE, DECIDE - CONTAIN OR DISPERSE
        EFFECT THE DECISION MADE - AND THEN INFORM THE FANS.




 5.     REINFORCE SECURITY PATROLS AND PUBLIC ORDER PATROLS.



                                  /V *




        ADVISE NEIGHBOURING DIVISIONS/FORCES WHERE EARLY DISPERSAL IS EFFECTED.
                    Q £   I' o f S i r ' 1'-'-   ^ ^ ,

THE EMERGENCY OPENING. 95 EXISTING GATES TO ALLOW ACCESS.




THE SCENARIO ENVISAGED IS WHERE THE GROUND IS NEAR TO, OR AT CAPACITY AND
THE SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GATE IS ONE WHERE BECAUSE OF THE PRESSURE CREATED
BY THE CROWD, THERE IS A SERIOUS RISK TO L I T E . ALL OTHER CONTINGENCIES HAVE
BEEN TRIED/CONSIDERED AND HAVE F A ILE D . AS THE LAST RESORT:




1.     ID EN T IF Y THE GATE.




2.    ID E N TIF Y THE AREA WHERE THE SUPPORTERS CAN SAFELY ENTER INTO.   THIS
       MAY MEAN -




3.     EVACUATING THE TERRACE VIA GATES TO THE PITCH OR THROUGH EXIT GATES.




4.    STOP THE GAME AND BRIEF THE REFEREE.




5.    CONSIDER USE OF CUTTING EQUIPMENT.




6.    DEPLOY RESOURCES TO:

       i        CONTROL ENTRY INTO THE GROUND




       ii.      FACILITATE EVACUATION OF THE TERRACE




       iii.     TO MAINTAIN SEGREGATION.




7.    USE OF P.A.




8.    ALERT EMERGENCY SERVICES.




9.    IMPLEMENT EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLANS.




10.   MOVE TO MAJOR INCIDENT PROCEDURES IF NECESSARY.
        TAYLOR RECOMMENDATION IMPLEMENTATION TEAM

RESPONSIBILITIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS VIS A VIZ THE POLICE




The responsibility of football clubs vis a viz the police is
discussed by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor in his Interim
Report on the Hillsborough Disaster.  In considering the
question he refers to the Green Guide, the Popplewell Reports
(Interim and Final) and Harris V Sheffield United Football
Club.

The Taylor Interim Report (hereafter referred to as The Report)
states the principle as being:

       "162..a football club which invites the public to
             a match on its premises for reward is
             responsible for securing safety at that event."

The provisions of the Green Guide (1986) are used to support
this principle viz:

       "23   The safety of the'public inside the ground is
             the responsibility of those who stage the event
             and administer the ground in which it is held ie
             'the management'.  This responsibility applies in
             both normal and emergency situations.1'

       "195... there are five basic duties which stewards
             are called upon to carry out. These are:

             (a)   controlling or directing members of the
                   public who are entering or leaving the ground
                   to help achieve an even flow of people to
                   the viewing areas and safe disposal of
                    spectators on the terraces or viewing
                    slopes.

             (b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any
                   emergencies eg raising alarms or
                   extinguishing fires.

             (c)   manning entrance, exits and other strategic
                   points, especially exit doors and gates which
                   are continuously open whilst the ground is
                   in us^s

             (d)   assisting police as appropriate or as
                   requested with crowd control and:

             (e)   undertaking specific duties in an emergency."
The above quote from paragraph 23 of the Green Guide (1986) in
The Report is incomplete.  That paragraph goes on to state:

             "Local authority safety officers, fire and police
             officers will help management to discharge this
             responsibility and in certain circumstances may
             require measures to be taken in order to achieve
             reasonable safety standards, but the management is
             not thereby absolved of its responsibility for the
             safety of its customers" (my emphasis).

This reinforces all that has already been said.

Consideration is then given in The Report to the deliberations
of MrJustice Popplewell on the self same question.   Paragraphs
3.6 to 3.8 of the Interim Popplewell Report makes the following
division of responsibility.

1.    Physical safety of buildings and the maintenance and
       good housekeeping of the ground - the club.

2.    Organising the crowd with all that entails during the
       game - the police.

However, Mr Justice Popplewell altered his position in his
Final Report stating:

       "4.13..because, as a matter of practice, police
              officers have regularly attended in large numbers
              at football grounds, it has somehow been assumed
              by the clubs that the responsibility for control
              of what goes on inside the ground has passed from
              them to the police. A police presence is there
              to assist in the enforcement of law and order.
              Those responsible for organising a private
              function, however, have the primary and
              continuing obligation and responsibility to
              ensure reasonable safety for those who are
              invited into their premises."

       "4.14..This responsibility, which is a legal
              responsibility, continues throughout the time
              that those whom they have invited onto their
              ground remain there.  It does not, for instance,
              cease when an emergency arises."

       "4.15..The police's responsibility is to preserve law
              and order. When an emergency arises they are
              likely to be the only body there capable of
              dealing with it. They have the facilities.    They
              have the training.  They have the authority."
       "4.19...It cannot be too strongly emphasised that it
               is upon the club, or the occupier of the ground
               who is putting on the function, that the primary
               and continuing obligation rests."

The Final Popplewell Report contains at Appendix 'E', the
recommendation of the Working Group on the Green Guide.
Recommendation 63 states:

       "On the question of the relative responsibilities of the
       police and stewards, the Group feel that the Guide
       ought to make it plain that it was the club's
       responsibility to control and manage spectators in
       normal circumstances and that the police presence (if
       there was one) was to deal with the law and order
       problems and provide support and leadership in
       emergencies".

TheGreen Guide (1986) was published following the  Final
Popplewell Report and Recommendation 63 is clearly reflected in
paragraphs 23 and 195(a) to (e) of the Guide as set out
earlier.

The events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 have prompted the
Rt >Hon Lord Justice Taylor to state in The Report:

       "165...Whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests
              upon the club, they may need, and by agreement be
              entitled, to employ the police to act as their
              agents in certain circumstances.  This very
              difficult and grey area as to club and police
              responsibility will need to be reviewed in
              greater depth at stage two of this Inquiry."

Having said that, Recommendation 4 of The Report requires that
before the 1989/90 season starts:

       "There should be a written agreement between the club
       and police setting out their respective responsibilities
       for crowd safety and control and in particular for the
       filling of each self-contained pen or other terraced
       area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen
       or area to avoid overcrowding".

This has provided the police with the where-withall to iron out
the grey areas of responsibility referred to, despite the fact
The Report has left the question of responsibility open pending
completion of stage two of the Inquiry.
Again whilst The Report states:

        "166...What is clear, however, is that de facto the
              Police at Hillsborough had accepted responsibility
              for control of pens at the Leppings Lane end."

and whilst it goes on to examine the following statement of the
Learned Judge in Harris V Sheffield United Football Club:

        "     the police were expected and did take part in
        crowd management ensuring the safety of spectators, the
        enforcement of the Club's regulations and to be on hand
        to assist in the event of some emergencies such as fire
        or accident injury."

Nevertheless, The Report commences its Interim recommendations
with:

        "315   The recommendations which follow are the minimum
               necessary to ensure that existing football grounds
               can for the present be safely used, based upon
               the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and
               other information I have received.  They
               complement the recommendations which Mr Justice
               Popplewell set out after his enquiry at Bradford."
               (my emphasis).

As The Report does not amend or set aside paragraphs 23 and 195
of The Green Guide (1986) which reflect the recommendations in
the Interim and Final Popplewell Reports, then they must still
apply.

As a general policy statement, I conclude that the
responsibilities of football clubs vis a viz the police remains
as follows:

CLUBS   -      the control and management of spectators in
                normal circumstances.

POLICE -       to deal with law and order problems and provide
                support and leadership in emergencies.

In terms of safety, the recommendations contained in The Report
identify individual and joint areas of responsibility and these
are set out in the following schedule, together with
requirements for the future:
         CORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE INTERIM TAYLOR REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS.
            THE POPPLEWELL REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS AND THE GREEN GUIDE


                                                   NOTES


RECOMMENDATIONS 1 AND 2
Specification of maximum numbers in pens or        Responsibility of Local Authority
self contained areas.                              when drawing up safety certificate
Assessment of capacities per Green Guide less
15% safety margin.

(to be read in conjunction with Recommendations
12 and 19)

   Pan Guide
Paragraphs 44 to 47 - deal with admission of       Paragraph 46 requires Club to have
spectators at a rate comparable with dispersal     contingency plans to stop unduly
arrangements inside ground. The maximum            large crowds fran gathering
notional rate per turnstile is 750 persons         outside. Police advice to be
per hour.                                          sought. Needs pursuing

Paragraph 217    228 - criteria for assessing
capacities.

Popplewell Report (Final)
Appendix 'E', Recommendation 18 - notional
rate.

RECOMMENDATION 3
Limit numbers entering and close off access        Responsibility of Club. Police
when maximum capacity about to be reached.         require contingency plans to assist
                                                   once notified.
    be read in conjunction with Reccrrmendations
21 and 30)

Green Guide
Paragraph 46 and 194 (ii) - interccsnrmunication
systems and metering system at turnstiles and
centralized computer monitoring system

RECQfrMEMDATIQN 4
Written agreement                                  Joint responsibility of Club and
                                                   Police
Green Guide
Paragraph 197 - duties and responsibilities of
stewards should be agreed with the Police.
RECOMMEMDATICN 5
Steward or police officer on perimeter track to           As agreement is will be a steward
check crowd conditions etc                                - Club responsibility

To have ready access to police officer authorised         Police responsibility
under Reccnmendation 9 and by radio to the Control
Rocm

(to be read in conjunction with Recommendation 9)

RECXM4ENDATI0N 6
Training of stewards re crowd densities etc               Club responsibility - police may
                                                          assist

Training of police re crowd densities etc                 Police responsibility

^ften Guide
Paragraphs 26, 177, 195 - 199 and Annex
Bl and 2 cover various aspects of stewards duties and
therefore need to be included in any training
programme

Popplewell Report (Interim)
Recommendations 7, 10 and 12 contain specific
provisions in relation to stewards

RECX3MMEM)ATION 7
Gates in radial or perimeter fences to be painted         Club responsibility
different colour and marked 'Emergency Exit1

Green Guide
Paragraphs 32, 33 and 186 refer to emergency gates
criteria

^ragraphs 209, 214 to 216 refer to track gates
^P±eria

Popplewsll Report (Interim)
Recaimendation 11 - exit gates manned at all times

Recannendation 24 - consideration to be given to design
of a standard, efficient perimeter fence with proper
exits

RECCM^ENDATICNS 8 AND 9
Perimeter fence gates to be kept open                     Police responsibility

Manned by police officer authorised to allow access
onto track. He must be able to make radio contact
with Control Room
RE0QM4ENDATICN 10
Cutting equipment provided by the Club                 Responsibility of Club

For lose by police, fire brigade or stewards - agree   Agreed used by stewards so Club
who uses and that person to be trained                 responsibility

Decision as to use - nominated senior officer at       Police responsibility
ground

RECOMMENDATION 11
Visual inspection of crush barriers                    Club responsibility

Green Guide
Paragraph 39 - visual inspection after each event

RmattffiNDAJTION 12
^Pediate review of layout of barriers                  Club responsibility

(to be read in conjunction with Recctimendations 1,
2 and 19)

Green Guide
Paragraphs 110 to 1.19 - specifications re layout
of barriers.

RECOMMENDATION 13
Immediate review of safety certificate by Local        Responsibility of Local Authority.
Authority taking into account findings of this         Consultation with police, club,
report                                                 fire and ambulance

Review to include inspection of stadium

RECm^ENDATION 14
Situation where designated stadiums without            Local Authority responsibility
^prtificates to be remedied forthwith

RECOMMENDATION 15
Annual review of safety certificates                   Local Authority responsibility

Popplewell Report (Final)
Recaimendation 9 - annual review as above

RECOtMENDATION 16
Review of issuing, monitoring, enforcing etc           Local Authority responsibility
of safety certificates

Accountable supervisory administrative structure       Local Authority responsibility
required

Popplewell Report (Interim)
Recommendation 9 - co-ordinate and cormunicate
inspections and reports
RECCMflENDflTION 17
Advisory group to assist re certification to comprise   Local Authority responsibility
local authority member, police, fire, ambulance,        but incorporates Club and Police
building authority and club

Popplewell Report (Interim)
Recomnendation 2 - certification team to include
police

RBCCjMMENDATICN 18
Inspect turnstile and measure flow rate                 Club responsibility
Regular inspections thereafter                          Club responsibility
Green Guide
Paragraph 44 to 47 - deal with admission of .
^^ctators and flow rate

Popplewall Report (Interim)
Recomnendation 23 - clubs should review arrangements
for entry and the organisation of their turnstiles

RECOMMENDATION 19
Correlation between viewing areas and turnstiles        Club responsibility
(to be read in conjunction with Recommendations 1, 2
and 12)

Popplewall Report (Interim)
Recommendation 23 - clubs should review arrangements
for entry and the organisation of their turnstiles

RECXMMENDATIQN 20
Quick and effective communication with turnstile        Clubs responsibility
^prators so can close                                   Police require contingency plans so
                                                        can assist
(to be read in conjunction with Recommendation 3)

Green Guide
Paragraphs 29(vi) and 194(i) - intercommunication

RECXM4ENDATICN 21
CCTV to monitor crowd densities outside, in             Club responsibility with Police
concourse areas and inside grounds                      input
Green Guide
Paragraph 194(vi) - installation of CCTV

Popplewell Report (Interim)
Recorrcnendation 21 - introduction of CCTV
RECQMMEM3ATI0N 22
Signposting for spectators both inside and outside     Club responsibility with Police
the ground                                             input

(to be read in conjunction with Recommendation 23)

PopplevEll Report (Interim)
reccnmendation 23 - clubs should review arrangements
for entry ....

RECXMMENDMTON 23
Information on tickets unambiguous, simple and clear   Club responsibility with police
and correlate to information inside and outside         input
ground

(to be read in conjunction with Recommendation 22)

               24
Information on ticket requesting entry by              Joint Club and Police
particular time to be reviewed by clubs in             responsibility
conjunction with police to ensure corresponds
to planning arrangements

RECOMMENDATION 25
Club to consult supporter’s clubs re pre-match         Clubs responsibility
entertainment

RECOMMENDATION 26
Chief Constable to appoint Chief Officer to liaise     Police responsibility
with club and local authority

RECOMMENDATION 27
Operational Order and pre-match briefing to alert      Police responsibility
officers to prevention and detection of overcrowding
and to take steps to remedy same

            ON 28
Operational Order to enable police to cope with        Police responsibility
forseeable patterns on arrival and departure of
spectators

Should provide for sufficient reserves

Green Guide
Paragraph 197 - stewards to be made aware              Requires implementation
contingency plans

Popplewall Report (Interim)
Recarmendation 1 - emergency evacuation procedures
    »•




RECXM®NDATION 29
Delay kick off at discretion of Ground Commander.          Police responsibility
Crcwd safety on paramount consideration

RECOMMENDATION 30
Results of CCTV and turnstile counting should be           Club's responsibility to install
available in police Control Room

(to be read in conjunction with Recaimendations 21
and 30)

Officers in Control Room should be skilled in              Police responsibility to train
interpretation of data

RECCMYGENDATION 31
Sufficient operators in police Control Roam                Police responsibility

Radio system with priority and over-ride facility          Police responsibilty

Additional channels should be used to prevent              Police responsibility
overcrowding of airwaves

Sound proofing                                             Club's responsibility

Green Guide                                                             ■- ,V
Paragraphs 192 - to 3 deal with canmunications system
and setting up of a police Control Room.
Paragraphs 194(v) - poilce radio facility to augment and
not supersede ground canmunications system

Popplewell Report (Interim)
Reconmendation 3 - production of a more suitable
personal radio for police

ggCOfrMENDATION 32
^P>arate system of landline telephone links                Club's responsibility
Green Guide
Paragraph 29(vi) - management to devise a clear system
of conmunication within the ground

RECCffllENDATION 33
Public address system in Control Room to carmunicate       Club responsibility with police
inside', outside, sections or whole of ground               input
Announcements preceded by loud signal                      Club responsibility

Arrangement advertised every programme                     Club responsibility
Green Guide
Paragraph 29(vi) - management to devise a clear
system of carmunication within the ground

Paragraph 194(iii) - criteria for public address
system
RECX*ME»0*IICIN 34
Illuminated advertising boards to address crowd               Club responsibility with police
                                                              input

System of hand signals                                        Police responsibility, need to
                                                              inform club employees

RBCCMffiNDATiatJ 35
Police, fire and ambulance senior nominated liaison           Joint Police, fire and ambulance
officer                                                       responsibility
RECOMMENDATION 36
Police to ensure fire and ambulance given full                Police responsibility
details of event.

Such details to be readily available in emergency             Emergency services responsibility
^■vices Control Room

RECOMMENDATION 37
Contingency plans for arrival of emergency                    Joint Police, fire and ambulance
services to be reviewed                                       responsibility with input from
                                                              club

Green Guide
                                                         •!
Paragraph 29(v) - management responsibility to draw up
contingency plans with emergency services

Paragraph 176 - contingency plans

Paragraph 189 to 191 - access for emergency vehicles

Popplewall Report (Interim)
Recommendation 4 - reads clear for a | radius

ggCn^MENDATION 38
^^Llce officers posted to entrances to ground to be           Police responsibility
briefed as to emergency services contingency plans

RBCXM4ENDATI0N 39
One First Aider per 1000 spectators                           Club's responsibility
RIXX2“MENDATION 40
One or more First Aid roans                                   Local Authority and Club
                                                              responsibility

Local Authority to specify number of roans and
equipment and include in safety certificate

Green Guide
Paragraph 29(x) - management responsibility to
provide First Aid facilities and First Aid staff

Fopplewell Report (Interim)
Recommendation 8 - a term of safety certificate that
adequate First Aid room provided
RECOMMENDATION 41
Club to employ medical practitioner trained in              Club1s responsibility
advanced First Aid

Whereabouts to be known to those in Police Control          Club1s responsibility to arrange
Roan and he should be iirmediately contactable              and inform police

RECOMMENDATION 42
One ambulance where expected crowd of 5000 or more          Club and Ambulance responsibility

RECCiyMENDATION 43
Number of ambulances required specified by Local            Local Authority andAmbulance
Authority and included in safety certificate                responsibility


There are no other reconmendations contained in the Popplewell Report which require
   lamentation in South Yorkshire.

As indicated above, there are two areas in the Green Guide (1986) which South Yorkshire
Police need to pursue viz:

          Paragraph 46        - Club's contingency plans (eg what provision have they made
                                 for spare capacity turnstiles and what manpower have they
                                 arranged to operate them?).
                                           .   »*■

          Paragraph 197   -    Stewards to be made aware of Police contingency plans.




      Inspector
    ingust 1989
COMMUNICATIONS - A DISCUSSION PAPER

I was tasked with looking at recommendations 31 to 34 under the title of
'Corrmunications'. These included radio, telephone, semaphore and any related
matters thereto. I was supplied with a paper that had been prepared by Chief
Inspector Creaser of the Corrmunications Department and instructed to establish
a close liaison with his staff.

History has shown over the years that at any major event, whether it be a
disaster or not, communications have always presented problems. I am sure that
systems have been reviewed many times in the past and various recommendations
will have been made. In relation to Hillsborough, the problems that were
encountered are well documented within the Taylor Report and it would serve no
useful purpose for me to go through these problems at this point. Suffice for
me to identify the paragraphs in the report that refer to communications and
identify the fault.

Paragraph 65 - identifies the fact that radio communications at Hillsborough
went down at 2.44 pm.

Paragraph 244 - identifies the fact that Channel 25 was subject to excessive
air traffic.

Paragraph 303 - identifies the fact that messages from officers on the perimeter
track were not received by the Control Room.

What I intend to do is work my way through Recorrmendations 31 to 34 as general
as possible. You must appreciate that local peculiarities may prevail and
require certain adjustments. You should also take into account that match
categories will to some degree have an influence on certain of my
recommendations.

As a thought, before conmencing the critique it is perhaps worthy of note that
I am informed that our entire radio equipment throughout the force leaves a lot
to be desired.

Recommendation 31

There should be sufficient operators in the Police Control Room to enable all
radio transmissions to be received, evaluated and answered. The radio system
should be such as to give operators in the Control Room priority over, and the
capacity to override, others using the sane channel. Additional channels should
be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration
should be given to sound-proofing the Control Rocxn against excessive crowd noise.

This recommendation deals with four separate matters and I will deal with each
on an individual basis.

a)   This deals with the staff in the Control Roan at football grounds. It is
     suggested that there should be a minimum of two trained officers in every
     Control Room at football grounds together with a conmander. The Force
     Communications School at Ecclesfield have intimated that they will be able
     to put a course together for officers carrying out these duties and that
     there may be merit in the commanding officers attending these courses. It
     is suggested that all officers working in football control rooms should
     attend such a course as soon as possible. The Communications School state
     that radio discipline is vital at football grounds and that everyone
     connected with communications could benefit fron this course.
b ) This refers to the quality of equipment presently in football control rooms.
    It is fair to say that only Barnsley's at the moment is up to any reasonable
    standard. At Doncaster they operate the football control room by use of
    a hand held radio. On Wednesday, 16 August 1988, I attended a demonstration
    of new equipment that has been installed at Hillsborough Football Ground.
    This consists of the installation of a two-bay radio set capable of use with
    head sets and booster microphones. In the event of radio failure, all that
    is necessary is the flick of a switch and command is restored. In the event
    of electricity failure, it takes approximately ten seconds to switch to the
    battery back-up. This equipment is capable of being linked into tape
    recording facilities and this will be done in the near future. It is
    recommended that all grounds in South Yorkshire be brought up to this
    standard as soon as possible.

c)    This deals with the number of channels in use at football grounds. I have
      received strong representations from one ground commander virtually demanding
      a second channel to be used as a command channel. He explained that Channel
      25 could be used by officers in and around the ground and Channel 29 could
      be used by himself, his two Chief Inspectors and his two Inspectors as a
      command channel and that his radio would use the scan facility to pick up
      the traffic from Channel 25. None of the other ground commanders are in
      agreement with the need for this facility, at the same time accepting that
      additional facilities may be required from time to time dependent on the
      category of the match. It was pointed out that Channel 7 is a back to back
      channel and could be used by commanders for private conversation and also
      in the case of an emergency. It has been confirmed with the Corrmunications
      Department that should any football ground at any time, for any particular
      occasion, require a secondary channel, then they will be able to install
      it for that particular incident. It is therefore considered that the
      provision of one football channel and the use of Channel 7 is adequate.
      As an aside, in respect of the two Sheffield grounds, provided they make
      previous arrangements with the Communications Department, they can have use
      of Channel 29 as a secondary channel, at any time they wish.

d)    This deals with acoustics in Control Rooms at football grounds. Being
      realistic, there is not perhaps the need to have the control rooms at
      Doncaster and Bramall Lane sound-proofed, and Barnsley have intimated that
      it is not essential at Oakwell. Having regard to all the circumstances it
      is recommended that Control Rooms at the football grounds in South Yorkshire,
      in the fullness of time, be sound-proofed.

Whilst discussing radios it is perhaps pertinent to mention that at seme grounds
all officers on duty are in possession of a personal radio whereas at others
it is restricted. The Communications Department inform me that to achieve a
satisfactory level of comnand no more than 100 officers should be in possession
of a radio.

Recommendation 32

To compliment radio communications, there should be a completely separate system
of land lines with telephone links between the Control Room and key points at
the ground. This identifies two issues which are:-

a)    Key points - obviously these will vary from ground to ground but during
     my discussions with representatives of the five grounds the following
     have been identified as possible key points:-

     1 The Referee's Roan

     2 The Perimeter Track - four suggested

     3 The Tunnel

     4 The Casualty Clearance Centre

     5 The First Aid Post

     6 All Police Roans

     7 Various locations outside the ground


b)   Type of Equipment

     I am reliably informed that the main expense in establishing a telephone
     system at such a location as a football ground, is the provision of the 'ring
     circuit'. Thereafter it is quite cheap to take as many telephones as
     necessary fron this one ring. It is suggested that for outside locations
     a weather proof jack-plug should be installed and that the telephone be
     connected to it on match days only. This should consist of a vandal proof,
     weather proof telephone with a flashing light to attract attention.

     It is recorrmended that each ground is given a full survey by the
     Corrmunications Department in liaison with the ground commanders and that
     the necessary work is commenced as soon as possible.

Recarmendation 33

With the Control Roan there should be a public address system to communicate
with individual areas outside and inside the ground with groups of areas or with
the whole ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal
to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground.
This arrangement should be proninently advertised on every programme sold for
every match.

The only ground within South Yorkshire which cones anywhere near this
recorrmendation is the equipment installed at Hillsborough. Only recently has
this been issued with a signal preceding the message. Quite simply, it is
recorrmended that all grounds comply with this recommendation. It is an essential
form of cotmunication and will enable ground catmanders to pass messagers to
fans queueing outside as to the fact, for example the 'kick-off' has been delayed
or that they should move to other turnstiles to gain admission or indeed for
any emergency. This work should be done as soon as possible.

Recommendation 34

Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address
the crowd. Consideration should also be given to the use, by police officers,
of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to the Control Roan the existence
of certain emergencies or requirements.
In relation to the illuminated advertising boards, only two grounds in South
Yorkshire have them, these being the two Sheffield clubs, and in both cases the
boards are not visible- to everyone in the crowd. It is agreed that the Police
should have access to put messages onto these boards. This could be done perhaps
by telephone but the commanders must always be aware that their message will
not necessarily be going to everyone in the ground. The final part of this
recommendation deals with hand signals. Many officers were surprised by the
inclusion of this recorrmendation in the Taylor Report. Hand signals were common
place in the late 70s and early 80s by PSUs but were discontinued due to them
continuously being misunderstood, misread or not being visible to the officers.
It must be remembered that in a crowd situation the only hand signals visible
are those above the head, this immediately puts a limit on the use of hand
signals.

I have taken this matter up with the Forward Planning Unit at New Scotland Yard
and they share my views that if hand signals are to be taken into use they should
be done on a national basis and kept to a minimum number. Superintendent Revill-
Johnson of the Forward Planning Unit is pursuing this matter on my behalf and
I expect to hear from him in the near future. Quite simply, this matter should
be referred to ACPO for them to evaluate.

It will be seen that a lot of the recorrmendations involve a lot of expense and
perhaps discussions with the club should take place as to where the money is
coming from. If we are to comply fully with the Taylor Report as we must, then
the money has got to be found from somewhere.




Superintendent
COMMUNICATIONS - A DISCUSSION PAPER

I was tasked with looking at recommendations 31 to 34 under the title of
1Communications1. These included radio, telephone, semaphore and any related
matters thereto. I was supplied with a paper that had been prepared by Chief
Inspector Creaser of the Communications Department and instructed to establish
a close liaison with his staff.

History has shown over the years that at any major event, whether it be a
disaster or not, communications have always presented problems. I am sure that
systems have been reviewed many times in the past and various recommendations
will have been made. In relation to Hillsborough, the problems that were
encountered are well documented within the Taylor Report and it would serve no
useful purpose for me to go through these problems at this point. Suffice for
me to identify the paragraphs in the report that refer to communications and
identify the fault.

Paragraph 65 - identifies the fact that radio corrmunications at Hillsborough
went down at 2.44 pm.

Paragraph 244 - identifies the fact that Channel 25 was subject to excessive
air traffic.

Paragraph 303 - identifies the fact that messages from officers on the perimeter
track were not received by the Control Roan.

What I intend to do is work my way through Recommendations 31 to 34 as general
as possible. You must appreciate that local peculiarities may prevail and
require certain adjustments. You should also take into account that match
categories will to sane degree have an influence on certain of my
recanmendations.

As a thought, before conmencing the critique it is perhaps worthy of note that
I am informed that our entire radio equipment throughout the force leaves a lot
to be desired.

Reconmendation 31

There should be sufficient operators in the Police Control Roan to enable al1
radio transmissions to be received, evaluated and answered. The radio system
should be such as to give operators in the Control Roan priority over, and the
capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should
be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration
should be given to sound-proofing the Control Roan against excessive crowd noise.

This recanmendation deals with four separate matters and I will deal with each
on an individual basis.

a)   This deals with the staff in the Control Roan at football grounds. It is
     suggested that there should be a ndnimum of two trained officers in every
     Control Roan at football grounds togetKer”wTHFT~a commander. The Force
     Corrmunications School at Ecclesfield have intimated that they will be able
     to put a courseJto^ther_for officers carrying out these duties and that
     there may be merit iri the commanding officers attending these courses. It
     is suggested that all officers working in football control roans should
     attend such a course as soon as possible. The Communications School state
     that radio discipline is vital at football grounds and that everyone
     connected with compriunications could benefit from this course.
- 2 -


b)   This refers to the quality of equipment presently in football control roans. )
     It is fair to say that only Barnsley/s at the moment is up to any reasonable 3
     standard. At Doncaster they'operate the football control room by use of
     a hand held radio. On Wednesday, 16 August 1988, I attended a demonstration
     of new equipment that has been installed at Hillsborough Football Ground.
     This consists of the installation of a two-bay radio set capable of use with
     head sets and booster microphones. In the event of radio failure, all that
     is necessary is the flick of a switch and command is restored. In the event
     of electricity failure, it takes approximately ten seconds to switch to the
     battery back-up. This equipment is capable of being linked into tape
     recording facilities and this will be done in the near future. It is
     reconmended that all grounds in South Yorkshire be brought up to this^,
     standard as soon as possible.                                        s f-J

c)   This deals with the number of channels in use at football grounds. I have
     received strong representations from one ground commander virtually demanding
     a second channel to be used as a command channel. He explained that Channel
     25 could be used by officers in and around the ground and Channel 29 could
     be used by himself, his two Chief Inspectors and his two Inspectors as a
     command channel and that his radio would use the scan facility to pick up
     the traffic from Channel 25. None of the other ground commanders are in
     agreement with the need for this facility, at the same time accepting that
     additional facilities may be required from time to time dependent on the       .
     category of the match. It was pointed out that Channel 7 is a back to back ^
     channel and could be used by commanders for private conversation and also
     in the case of an emergency. It has been confirmed with the Connunications
     Department that should any football ground at any tine, for any particular
     occasion, require a secondary channel, then they will be able to install ___ 2__
     it for that particular incident. It is therefore considered'tTH'tr'Tfte-"'
     provision of one football channel and the use of Channel 7 is adequate.
     As an aside, in respect of the two Sheffield grounds, provided they make
     previous arrangements with the Communications Department, they can have use
     of Channel 29 as a secondary channel, at any time they wish.

d)   This deals with acoustics in Control Rooms at football grounds. Being
     realistic, there is .not perhaps the need to have the control roans at           y
     Doncaster and Bramall Lane sound-proofed, and Barnsley have intimated that
     it is not essential at Oakwell. Having regard to all the circumstances it
     is recanmended that Control Roans at the football grounds in South Yorkshire,
     in the fullness of time, be sound-proofed.

Whilst discussing radios it is perhaps pertinent to mention that at sane grounds
all officers on duty are in possession of a personal radio whereas at others
it is restricted. The Cormiunications Department inform me that to achieve a
satisfactory level of command no more than 100 officers should be in possession
of a radio.                                 f ,.

Recommendation 32

To compliment radio carrnunications, there should be a completely separate system
of land lines with telephone links between the Control Roan and key points at
the ground. This identifies two issues which are: -

a)    Key points - obviously these will vary from ground to ground but during
     my discussions with representatives of the five grounds the following
     have been identified as possible key points

     1 The Referee's Room

     2 The Perimeter Track - four suggested

     3 The Tunnel

     4 The Casualty Clearance Centre

     5 The First Aid Post

     6 All Police Rooms

     7 Various locations outside the ground


b)   Type of Equipment

     I am reliably informed that the main expense in establishing a telephone
     system at such a location as a football ground, is the provision of the 'ring
     circuit'. Thereafter it is quite cheap to take as many telephones as
     necessary from this one ring. It is suggested that for outside locations
     a weather proof jack-plug should be installed and that the telephone be
     connected to it on match days only. This should consist of a vand al proof,
     weather proof telephone with a flashing light to attract attention.

     It is recorrmended that each ground is given a full survey by the
     Communications Department in liaison with the ground commanders and that----
     the necessary work is corrmenced as soon as possible.

Recorrmendation 33

With the Control Roan there should be a public address system to comrunicate
with individual areas outside and inside the ground with groups of areas or with
the whole ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal
to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground.
This arrangement should be praninently advertised on every programme sold for
every match.

The only ground within South Yorkshire which cones anywhere near this
recommendation is the equipment installed at Hillsborough. Only recently has
this been issued with a signal preceding the message. Quite simply, it is
recommended that all grounds comply with this recommendation. It is an essential
form of comnunication and will enable ground canmanders to pass nessagers to
fans queueing outside as to the fact, for example the 'kick-off' has been delayed
or that they should move to other turnstiles to gain admission or indeed for
any emergency. This work should be done as soon as possible.

Recoxmendation 34

Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address
the crowd. Consideration should also be given to the use, by police officers,
of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to the Control Room the existence
of certain emergencies or requirements.
- 4 -


In relation to the illuminated advertising boards, only two grounds in South
Yorkshire have them, these being the two Sheffield clubs, and in both cases the
boards are not visible to everyone in the crowd. It is agreed that the Police
should have access to put messages onto these boards. This could be done perhaps
by telephone but the commanders must always be aware that their message will
not necessarily be going to everyone in the ground. The final part of this
recommendation deals with hand signals. Many officers were surprised by the
inclusion of this recommendation in the Taylor Report. Hand signals were common
place in the late 70s and early 80s by PSUs but were discontinued due to them
continuously being misunderstood, misread or not being visible to the officers.
It must be remembered that in a crowd situation the only hand signals visible
are those above the head, this immediately puts a limit on the use of hand
signals.

I have taken this matter up with the Forward Planning Unit at New Scotland Yard
and they share my views that if hand signals are to be taken into use they should
be done on a national basis and kept to a minimum number. Superintendent Revill-
Johnson of the Forward Planning Unit is pursuing this matter on my behalf and
I expect to hear from him in the near future. Quite simply, this matter should
be referred to ACPO for them to evaluate.

It will be seen that a lot of the recommendations involve a lot of expense and
perhaps discussions with the club should take place as to where the money is
craning fron. If we are to comply fully with the Taylor Report as we must, then
the money has got to be found fron somewhere.

                                                                                    j
                                                                                    |
                                                                                    \



Superintendent
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:
                                                                                A DHQ
From:     Chief Superintendent Thompson                      Station/Dept:
                                                             Date:              15.8.89
           Deputy Chief Constable


        SUBJECT:
                               MEETING BETWEEN EMERGENCY SERVICES &
                               DONCASTER ROVERS OFFICIALS - 11.00 AM   1 4 .8 .8 9



           The attached report from Acting Chief Inspector Townend is forwarded
           herewith for your information, please.

           A separate copy has been forwarded to Superintendent Oughton, Cl Sub-
           Division.  The meeting is a continuing process following the work now
           being undertaken in this Force on the recommendations of Lord Justice
           Taylor.




           Chief bupermtenue




           Copy:   S u p e r i n t e n d e n t O ughton
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                   Ref:    j s t /PC

        From:   Acting Chief Inspector Townend                     Station/Dept:       A1

    To:         Chief Superintendent Thompson                      Date:                    August I989



                SUBJECT:     MEETING BETWEEN THE EMERGENCY SERVICES AND THE
                             DONCASTER ROVERS OFFICIALS - 11AM, 14.8.89



                  On Monday 14 August 1989, a joint meeting of the Police, Fire and
                  Ambulance Services and officials of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club
                  met at Belle Vue to discuss the implications of the Taylor recommen­
                  dations.  The Services were represented by the following people:-

                  South Yorkshire Police

                  Acting Chief Inspector Townend

                  South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

                  Mr. Roger Morley (Assistant Chief Officer, Staff Services)

                  Mr. Noel Wade (Chief Training Officer

                  South Yorkshire Fire Service

                  Mr. Gordon Gravil (Divisional Fire Officer)

                  Mr. S. Pritchard (Assistant Divisional Fire Officer)

                  Doncaster Rovers Football Club

                  Mrs. J. Oldale (Secretary)


                  The matters discussed were as follows:

                  CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES

                  Recommendation 35

                  I informed the meeting that the Deputy Chief Constable Mr. Peter Hayes
                  would be the senior nominated officer on behalf of the South Yorkshire
                  Police;  Mr. Roger Morley would be the senior nominated officer on behalf
                  of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service; and the South
                  Yorkshire Fire Service had still to decide their nomination.

                  Recommendation 36

                  It was agreed at this meeting that the Police would supply all relevant
                  information as to numbers of spectators expected, likely routes of entry
                  and exit and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning crowd
                  movement.  The Fire and Ambulance Services indicated that they would
                  prefer up to date telephone information as soon as possible, rather than
                  copies of Operational Orders weeks before the event.  I informed them
                  that subject to Force policy and in either event this would be available.


Gen/2
Recommendation 37

The persons present at this meeting had earlier visited all round the
stadium, and had seen the arrival points, routes of access, rendezvous
points and areas of accessibility within the ground. Apart from removing
a small section of the perimeter wall in the North West corner of the
ground, and the re-siting of three portable toilets, all other points
were found to be suitable.  The work needed on the wall and toilet
removals was to be carried out immediately by the club.

Recommendation 38

I informed the meeting that all police officers were in radio contact and
that the pre-match brief would be informed of the importance of being in
a position to direct emergency services to any portion of the ground
where required.

FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES

Mr. Roger Morley then outlined the requirements on the above subject.

Recommendation 39

He informed the meeting that in the previous discussions which he had had
with the club he had been assured that there would always be at least one
trained first aider per thousand spectators.  Mrs. Oldale, the Club
Secretary, explained she personally contacted St. John's Ambulance
Service before each match, to ensure they supplied the number of staff
required.

R e c o m m en d atio n 41

Mrs. Oldale explained that Dr. Head attended every match. He received an
honorarium from the club and was present at each game.   In addition to
this, Doctor Erskine also attended every match, and they could be
contacted at any time in the Directors' box.  Mr. Richard Morley, SYMAS,
explained that it was essential that doctors realised their role was not
purely to deal with players, but also spectators.   Certain concern was
expressed that doctors were not always fully conversant with modern first
aid requirements, and Mrs. Oldale was asked to check with the doctors to
verify their capabilities on this subject, and to liaise with the Ambu­
lance Service where in doubt.  It was also pointed out that this
recommendation required them to be available for at least an hour before
kick-off and remain in that status until half an hour after the conclu­
sion of the match. Also that their whereabouts should be known by
officers in the Police Control at all times. Mrs. Oldale would discuss
this matter with both doctors to ensure compliance.

R eco m m en d atio n 42

Mr. Roger Morley explained that liaison was essential in order that an
ambulance should be in attendance at all matches where an expected crowd
of 5 thousand attended. He further explained that this requirement must
be made in writing by the club before the event, and that a Special
Services charge (£200) would be levied against the club for this atten­
dance. Mrs. Oldale agreed that this would be met on behalf of the club.
The officers of the Emergency services took this opportunity to discuss
the other recommendations, and also the details of the Doncaster Rovers
Football Club Safety Certificate, and were all satisfied with the prop­
osals made towards safety at the ground.

I ask that a copy of this report be submitted to the Deputy Chief
Constable and also to Superintendent Oughton, Cl Sub-Division.
   A_________________,




Acting Chief Inspector
                  CCTV GENERAL COMMENTS


    CCTV was funded by the Football Trust in 1981 for the
    installation of the first purpose built Closed Circuit Television
    System at Aston Villa Football Club, Birmingham.

    Since that time the development of CCTV has been away from its
    use as a Command and Control facility towards its use as an
    intelligence and evidence gathering system.

    Both the ACPO Public Order Guide and ACPO Working Party Report on
    CCTV highlight this move.  It is interesting to note that nowhere
    in either of these weighty volumes is the monitoring of crowd
    safety by CCTV even considered.


                CCTV FOOTBALL TRUST GRANT


    SWFC             -   £30,000 (largest in 1st Division by £5,000)

    Barnsley         -   £24,85 3

    SUFC             -   £24,977

    RUFC             -   £14,520

    Doncaster        -   £12,500

    The limited time scale given to achieving this review of both CCTV
    and turnstile counting equipment throughout South Yorkshire
    has necessitated those involved in undertaking brief surveys
    at the grounds in question and making 'estimates’ in respect
    of installation costs of such equipment.

    The attached information therefore, can only be used as a guidance
    for futher discussions with clubs.

    My thanks to the staff of AVA and in particular Sergeant Foster
    and Mr Hall for their assistance in completing the surveys in
    the short time allowed.




c
    Superintendent
                                                    SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB


EQUIPMENT                            AREA COVERED                             EFFECTIVENESS                             MAINTENANCE
                                                                                                                        CONTRACT

Camera 'A' *
1 x colour mounted on the        View of terrace under stand, John Street    Limited low light capability. A            In existance
Brarr,...all Lane terrace on     Stand, The Kop .                            concrete pillar immediately in front
the underside of the seated                                                  of the camera when viewing towards
stand.                                                                       the pitch blocks off a good portion of
                                                                             the rest of the ground.
Camera'B'
1 x colour mounted on a metal    View around the ground into all stands.     Generally good but could benefit
roof stanchion on the Kop.       Limited view of Bramall Lane terrace        from a lens with greater zoom ratio.
                                 because of height of camera. Overhead       Limited low light capability.
                                 view of Kop area immediately below camera
Camera 'C'
1 x b/w with infra-red           Shoreham Street in both directions South    Good view of fans on approach to ground
enhancement on the outside       Stand car park area. Gangway from car       infra-red enhancement marginally assists
of the ground in Shoreham        park to stand. Area between Shoreham        in low light.
Street near to Cherry Street     Street and stand - leased by Gt Cars.
Camera 'D '
1 x b/w pole mounted at the      Bram..all Lane in both directions, John
junction of John Street/         Street in both directions.   Limited view
Bram. all Lane. Infra-red        of turnstiles from the outside.
enhanced.
Recorders
2 x JVC CR6060E U-matic
Low band

SUMMARY
Bram..all Lane is reasonably well served by CCTV. Camera 'A' might be improved by re-siting away from the concrete pillar referred to.
Experimental sighting with assistance of Fire Brigade is an option worthy of consideration.    Approximate cost -.£800.  Camera 'B' would
benefit from having a lens with a greater zoom ratio to enable better monitoring on crowd conditions at the opposite end of the ground
(Bram all Lane terrace - front).   Approximate cost - £3,000. Installation of cameras in the concourse areas at the rear of the Bram all
Lane Stand and Cherry Street Stand would be necessary for these areas to be fully monitored.    Approximate total cost - £6,000. (no
telemetry required). Picture quality inside the ground would be much improved by the installation of enhanced lighting particularly in
covered areas.   The power supply to Bram..all Lane is such that when a heavy electrical load is in use (floodlighting), there is a
considerable adverse effect on CCTV equipment.    A consultants/contractors opinion would need to be sought on this issue.




                                S’
SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

Turnstile Arrangements


        Turnstiles are of the rotating barrier type, waist height.
        Turnstiles Number 1-6 give access to the new south stand only.
        Turnstiles Number 7-10 give access to the Bramall Lane
        terracing, but are currently used.
        Turnstiles Number 11,12,14 & 15 give access to the
        Bramall Lane stand only.
        Turnstiles Number 17-25 inclusive give access to the
        Bramall Lane terracing.
        Turnstile Number 26 utilised as an exit gate only.
        Turnstiles Number 27-29 inclusive not in use.
        Turnstiles Number 30-32 inclusive give access to the John
        Street terrace (west side) only.
        Turnstiles Number 33,34,36,37 & 38 give access to the
        John Street stand (centre only)
        Turnstiles Number 39-41 inclusive give access to the John
        Street Terrace (east side) only.
        Turnstiles Number 42 & 43 give access to the John Street
        stand (east wing).
        Turnstiles Numbers 44 & 45 give access to the John Street
        Terrace (east side) only.
        Turnstile Number 46 gives access to the juvenile/disabled
        persons stand only.
        Turnstiles Number 50-75 inclusive give access to the
        Spion Kop (with the exception of Turnstile Number 52,
       which is used as an exit only).
        Turnstiles Number 74-79 inclusive give access to the new
        south stand only.
        It should be pointed out that the turnstiles numbers are
       no longer consecutive in sequence - a number of
       turnstiles have been taken out of use over the years and
        converted to additional emergency exits.
       The counting mechanism is computer controlled from each
       turnstile with link to a visual display unit in the
       club's main office, which is in the Police room at the
       ground.   (NOTE: This is not the Police Control Room).--------
       The system gives a 'bleep' alarm type warning when a
       particular area reaches 90% of authorised capacity.
       The cost of moving the second VDU from the Police room to
       the Control room would be approximately £150.
                         South Stand               Ground
                            I -   6                                                Visitin g S u p p o rte r s
                                                   7-10               14     5




                                  B R A M A L i-
                                                                                                             Visiting Supporters
                                                                                                                 Only 2 1 - 2 6
                                                                      Lane
                                                            Brama»»
                                                                                                                 West Wing
                                                                                                                 27 2fl 29

                                                                                                                  T e r r a c e West
Lane Social Club]—                                                                                                  3 0 31 32
                                                                                                                 { C e n t r e Stand 33 3 4 1

                                      Car Park
[Executive Suite]— - t
[pluyers Entrance
                                                                                                                   -{Centre S~tond~36 37 3Q
[Pools Office
[Directors Suite]                                                                                                   Tfer7East~39~40~4T1

 icket Office                                                                                                         East Wing 4 2         43^
                                                                                                                        er. E a s t    44   45
Recoptionf--
                                                                                                                      {Juvenile Pen 4 6           47

                                                                           Spion Kop                                    5 0 51 52
 ouvenirs I

                                                              mSfi



                                                                                                                           60-64


SHEFFIELD UNITED F.C.
     Bramall Lane
                                               RCGHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

EQUIPMENT                     AREA COVERED                              EFFECTIVENESS                           MAINTENANCE
                                                                                                                CONTRACT

Camera 'A'*
B/W mounted third way alone    A. Main Stand end seating towards        Soft on focus, poor low light            In existance
Main Stand on pan and tilt        Tiroli end.                           capability, overall performance medi­
with remote zoom and focus     B. Tiroli Kop.                           ocre.
                               C. Enclosure to railway end.
                               D. Main Stand at railway end.

Camera 'B'
B/W mounted on advertising     A. Front car parks.                      Soft on focus, poor low light
hoarding at front car park     B. Front of ground.                      capability, overall performance
on pan and tilt with remote    C., Masborough Street both ways and      mediocre. Infra-red enhancement
zoom and focus, and infra­         covers sane turnstiles.              gives small improvement on low
red enhancement.                                                        light capability.

Camera'C'
Colour mounted third way       Duplicates camera 1, but further
along Main Stand opposite      along Main Stand.
end from camera 'A' nearest
Police Control on pan and
tilt with remote zoom and
focus.

Recorder
Mitsubishi VHS time lapse                                               Poor definition in recording
model H5480E                                                            usually associated with time lapse
                                                                        recorders.

Monitors
4 monitors, 1 for each                                                  Poor power line regulation, giving
camera plus main monitor                                                ripples and hum bars on pictures.
for all via switcher.

Video Hardcopy Printer
Mitsubishi
SUMMARY
Perhaps the poorest picture quality of the South Yorkshire Clubs. Turnstiles for away supporters Millmoor Lane are not covered by any
camera. This is a potentially dangerous area in public order/public safety terms. Approximate cost - £5,000. There is no camera
covering the concourse behind the Tivoli Stanc^ Again an area where public safety could be seriously effected. Approximate cost - £3,(XX
(no telemetry required). There is no camera ^^ering the concourse beneath the Mai^fctand vfoich serves the members 'facilities' (bars
etc). This is an area quite heavily used and is a potential fire risk. Approximate cost - £3,000. (no telemetry required). Picture
quality inside the ground could be improved by installation of enhanced lighting particularly in the covered areas.
ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL GROUND


Turnstile Arrangements


1.     All turnstiles are of a rotating barrier type waist
        height.
        37 turnstiles giving access as follows:
        1-9       Main stand and Terrace.
        10-27     Tivoli Kop and Family Enclosure (Seated).
        28        Family Enclosure (seated).
        29-32     Visitors (seated).
        33-37     Visitors - Railway terrace


2.      (a)       Computerised system - terminating in
                   Secretary's Office.
        (b)       A Police Link is possible.


3.     When the crowd is at 90% capacity in any section, an
       audible alarm is sounded, whereupon the relevant
       turnstiles will be closed.


4.     The cost of installing a link to the Police Room would
       approximately £70 0.
                                                                                                   C o ^ - P/Kari

                                                              **




                                         M
                                         ^/i.bMOOA
                                           LA^C
                                         ^fAT^ -''
                        P C R .it* e~rc.fl




                                                |qu » r
                                             .^JsmT   I
      ♦JOWMfclU, '.'•                        .-/ / /w
                                             'S '
                                                     ,-   , xm i,v»9
                                                OfrtCtfOwW^ NVM •


                                               x          / ssy

Ott                                                  flWWONW*          awi   /w   w   v   - 9-j:
                                                        BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB
EQUIPMENT                      AREA COVERED                               EFFECTIVENESS                             MAINTENANCE
                                                                                                                    CONTRACT

Camera 'A'
1 x colour mounted on the      Sweeping view around ground showing        Generally good - limited low light
main stand.                                                                                                        In existance.
                               terraces and brewsry stand.                capability.
Camera 'B'
1 x B/W mounted at the back    View behind main stand, Grove Street       Low light capability poor.
of the main stand.             Belgrave Road.
Proposed Camera 'C'
1 x colour mounted at exit     Kop turnstile, exit gates 1, 2, 3
Gate 2 near Control box.       Queens Ground car park, Grove Street at
                               the Queens Ground end.

Proposed Camera 'D'                                                             NOT KNOWN
1 x B/W mounted on a flood­    Grove Street car park, Grove Street to
light tower at the Paddock/    Pontefract road corner terracing beneath
Pontefract Road stand corner   floodlight tower.
Rfecorder
1 x Sony 5630 U-matic, low
band

Monitors
3 x colour, 2 x B/W


SUMMARY
Perhaps the best quality pictures of all the South Yorkshire clubs.

There is no camera facility to monitor the front of the crowd whooccupy the PaddockTerraces.      Installation of a camera on the Brewery
Stand would overcome this inability. Approximate cost £5,000

There is no camera facility to monitor the turnstiles at the rearof   the PontefractRoad Stand.   Approximatecost £5,000

Camera 'B' would be enhanced by the addition of infra-red lighting for night work.   Approximate cost - £500

Overall picture quality would be enhanced by up-grading of lighting throughout the ground particularly in covered areas.
BARNSLEY FOOTBALL GROUND


Turnstile Arrangements


1.     All turnstiles are of the rotating barrier type, waist
        height.    There are 47 numbered turnstile entrances.
       Turnstiles number 1 - 1 0     are situated along the perimeter
       wall which faces into Grove Street Car Park and give
       admission to the brewery stand (Number 10 is for season
       ticket holders only).
       Turnstiles Number 11 - 12 are situated along the
       perimeter wall which face into Grove Street Car Park and
       give admission into the Pontefract Road end stand (they
       are not normally used).
       Turnstiles Number 13 - 26 are situated along the
       perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access to the
       Pontefract Road end stand (Number 21 is for season ticket
       holders).
       Turnstiles Number      24 - 26 are   'Lace Entry' turnstiles.
       Turnstiles Number      27 - 34 are   situated along the
       Perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access to the
       south terracing of the main stand and to Blocks 'C' and
       'E' of the main stand.       (Number 33 is for season ticket
       holders).
       Turnstiles Number      27 - 28 are   'Late Entry' turnstiles.
       Turnstiles Number      35 - 40 are   situated along the
       perimeter wall in Grove Street and give access to the
       North Terracing of the main stand and to Blocks 'A' and
       'B' of the main stand.      (Number 40 is the Director's
       entrance).
       Turnstiles Number     38 - 39 are    'Late Entry' turnstiles.
       Turnstiles Number      41 - 47 are   situated in the perimeter
       wall at the rear of the Spion Kop and the ground control
       complex.     They give access to the Spion Kop terracing.
2.     Counting Mechanisms are of the 'mechanical turnstile
       counter' type.     There is no notification to Police
       Control or monitoring at present.
3.     The system does not identify capacities unless an
       individual were to constantly gather totals.
4.     An approximate cost for fitting a computerised system
       would be in the region of £10,000 for the necessary hard
       and software with an added £100 per turnstile.
BARNSLEY F.C                                     OAKWELL


                                                                     i— i
                                                                 Cents Toilet
                                                                                                                                                    Gate 73

                                                                                                                                                    Gate 12
                                                              Brewery Stand
                                                                                                        Refreshments




                                                                                                                                                    Gate 11




 G a te 1                                                                                                                                            *^=— j
                              Refreshments
                                                                                                                               --------------------- QorejU\
 Police Room                                                                                                                   --------------------- Gate 9

 D is a b le d S ta n d                            Terraces               P lovers Tunnel                         R e fre
                                                                                                                                                    ^ as p ^ &y j 2 . ^ or'a(
                                                                                                      L a d ie s ! bents \ /
                                                                                                            To ile t
 Ground C ontrol
                                                               The Paddock
 Cash O ffic e                                     Lj 6ents_Toilet                   e nrs lo n e r
                                                                                               \
                                                        Shop

 P olice B r ie f in g Room


 F i r s t A id


 Gate 2



                                                                                                                                                                5 o u fjlJ t'? r!r$ h irp P r . l i 'n 1
                                    O ffic e s       Gah 4               Gate 5                                                                                 pLans        bl'pf. ~                      '
                                                                                                                                                                                                £:j
                                                           DONCASTER FOOTBALL CLUB
EQUIPMENT                          AREA COVERED                                  EFFECTIVENESS                              MAINTENANCE
                                                                                                                            CONTRACT
Camera 'A' *
1 x B/W mounted on corner         Car park - limited view of the
of stand at Rossington                                                          Fault on the zoom facility when            None at present but
                                  Rossington end of the ground.                 viewed. No view of turnstiles
end. Infra red enhanced.                                                                                                   arrangements in hand
                                                                                but does show some crowd build-up.         by Club Secretary for
Camera 'B'                                                                                                                 one to be obtained.
1 x colour mounted on a roof      Sweeping view of the whole of the             Generally effective with sane
support pillar of the stand       pitch, terracing and stand. Limited           softness of focus. Low light
                                  view of stand immediately to rear of          capabilities very limited.
                                  camera due to metal pillar on which it
                                  is mounted.
Monitors
3 in control box (one for
each camera plus one of the
picture being recorded).

Recorder
Panasonic NVG25HQ
VHS with long/standard play
facility.

Hardcopy Printer
Mitsubishi


SUMMARY
A small football ground with limited facilities.


improve the view at the L i l c H ^ o f S ^ t e ^ t ’tuSltiles?2 S r e o x S Z e ” ^ 6- £800^00^ ^   Rossln9ton end of ^   ground' but WDUld


                                                          ^nnn             ZOOm faClUty TOUld 313,316 “ - c r y i n g —                          to be


                                                                       M e s s r s s s r s & r 11 " uth                         c l u b 's   -
DONCASTER FOOTBALL GROUND


Turnstile Arrangements


1.     All turnstiles are of a rotating barrier type waist
        height.
        Turnstiles 1-2-3-4 Feed visitors pen at Rossington
        (south) end of ground.
        Turnstiles 5-6-7-8 feed open terracing on main stand
        terracing (south end).
        Turnstiles 10-11-12 (now unused) also feed onto main
        stand terracing.    These can be brought into operation
        should demand require situation.
       Turnstiles 13-14-15-16 feed both main stand terracing and
        north end terracing (capacity 600).
       Turnstiles 26-27-28-29-30 cover entry to popular stand
        terrace (west side).
2.     There is no counting mechanism on the turnstiles.
        Counting will be achieved by a ticket base situation.
       Nominated steward to act as logistics officer liaising
       with turnstile staff at each location.     Steward on
       personal radio in contact with Police Observation Point.
3.     No previous system used other than 'All Ticket' - no
       warnings etc.
4.     An approximate cost for fitting a computerised system
       would be in the region of £10,000 for the necessary hard
       and software with an added £100 per turnstile.
                                    OiA-cM
                             «M r
                             »X1«




  Belk Vw Grcmd
(Dom m sier IU n *r* F C )
                                                      S H E F F I E L D WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

 EQUIPMENT                         AREA COVERED                                  EFFECTIVENESS                                MAINTENANCE
                                                                                                                              CONTRACT
Camera *A*
1 x B/W mounted on the back      Leppings Lane in both directions.             Good range of view around the Leppings          In existance.
of the West Stand.  Infra­       Leppings Lane gates.   Leppings Lane          Lane entrance and the concourse
red enhanced.                    turnstiles.  Gate 'C'.                        between turnstiles and ground.  Blind
                                                                               spot immediately in front of turnstiles
Camera 'B*
1 x B/W mounted on the Kop       Herries Road to 5 Arches.  Penistone          Good range of vision, slightly soft
end outside the ground.          Road both directions.  Land and Minor         focus.
Infra-red enhanced.              roads between Penistone Road and
                                 Wordsworth Avenue.
Camera *C *
1 x colour mounted on            Circular view inside the ground               Good range of vision, limited low
South Stand-halfway line.        including walkway which runs full             light capability.  Soft focus, would
                                 length of South Stand.                        benefit from high ratio zoom lens.
Camera 'D'
1 x B/W mounted on the South     View of the Kop and North Stand.              Limited low light capability.
Stand at the Penistone Road
end.
Camera 'E'
1 x B/W mounted on the           From Leppings Lane to South Stand.            Limited low light capability.
corner of West end near to       Along South Stand. Along West Stand.          Limited view of crowd distress
the Police Control.              Pens at the base of the West Stand.           (side on view)
Recorders
2 x Panasonic time lapse,
VHS mode AG6010
Monitors     (7)
1 for each camera
1 for each recorder

SUMMARY
Hillsborough is reasonably well served by CCTV.  Camera 'A' could be improved by re-sighting on a pole above turnstiles Leonines Lane
— pproximate cost - £2,000. A re-sighting exercise with Fire Brigade was carried out earlier this year, but until the future plans for thi
area are announced by the club, it is unlikely that re-sighting will take place.  Camera ’C ’ would be more e f f e c t i v e in a s s e s s S c^owd
f a r i i p W6^e ih            hl?^eriratl° zoom lens * AfiBroximate cost - £3.000. Two concourse areas in the North Stand and. concourse
facilities in the South Stand would also require monitoring.   Approximate'cost - £9 .0 0 0 . (no 1-pI phipi-™ 1     is   hhtm     ^      ^
to-the club monitor turnstiles and areas behind turnstiles t h ^ f e t the ground. V s ;          £
                                                                                                  “ n i t ^ e d in t II Con” o “    tL0" c ^
size ofn theEpoliSe”control R° m    T   Gr0U"d (;or' tr o 1 UOIJJd '* Approximately t<l,0 0 0 , but is physically impossible'at present o»ing to the
particularly in covered areas?                    H     q     *             Er°“n<i “°Uld beg f alne<i •>»     installation of enhanced lighting
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND


1.     The Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground has a total of 93
       Turnstiles of the rotating barrier type and are
       formulated as follows:

       1-8, 9-16 and A-G.

       For the forthcoming season, bearing in mind the west
       stand will only be used, turnstiles A-G will be in use.
       However, should there be an overspill in more spectators,
       than these can cope with, then turnstiles 9-16 will be
       used.

       On the south stand area, turnstiles 19-22 will be used
       for the seated, uncovered area up to the halfway line and
       turnstiles 22-28, 29-32, will be used for the south stand
       centre and wing sections.

       Turnstiles 33-36 will be used for the uncovered seated
       area between the Kop and the halfway line of the south
       stand. Turnstiles 37-42, 43-48, 49-54, 55-72, 73 and 76,
       covering the whole of the Kop area. Any persons entering
       into those turnstiles can go in any part of the Kop, he
       or she desires.

       Turnstiles 77-78 will be used exclusively for the north
       stand.      ' ri'

2.     In relation to the counting mechanism, the turnstiles at
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground are operated by a
        counting computer mechanism, which is relayed to the
        Security Room under the south stand. At this stage in
        time, there is no Police link available from the Security
        Room to Ground Control.

3.     Identification of capacity is via a light warning in the
        Security Room, when figures get within 10% of capacity.
       However, it must be noted that this is total capacity of
        section, eg Kop and south stand.

       No other form of counting takes place at the Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Ground.

4.     The cost of extending the Computer VDU to the Police
       Control Room, would be £700 but the system currently does
       not have the capacity to achieve this and the Control
       Room has very little space available for such a facility.
 Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                              Police
                                                                                      v\
                                                                        Room>
     Hillsborough Ground                              First-Aid Room



                                                        Gymnasium




                                                   NORTH STAND




                                                                                                     49-54
                                                                                                    '43-48




                         *FC"



                                                   Player's                      12
                                                   Tunnel •>
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures



        Police Control          19-22            SOUTH STAND

                                                                                            37-42
                                                                       29-32 33-36         Park
                                                                        Car       ____


      KEY

      TURNSTILES                        Directors Entrance
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                Ref:           ACC(MS)/HMW
    From:     Assistant Chief Constable, Management   Services Station/Dept:   Headquarters

    To:       The Deputy Chief Constable                       Date.           \-j August 1989



            SUBJECT:     LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS RECOMMENDATIONS - DRAFT AGREEMENT




            Paragraph 165 of the Taylor Report says:-

                 'There remains, however, the question whether there are some
                 grounds or parts of grounds where the club may need to rely
                 upon the police (whom they pay to attend) to control filling
                 of pens and monitoring them for overcrowding.  In other
                 words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests upon
                 the club, they may need, and by agreement be entitled, to
                 employ the police to act as their agents in certain
                 circumstances.  This very difficult and grey area as to club
                 and police responsibility will need to be reviewed in
                 greater depth at stage two of this Inquiry'.

            The ACPO submission at paragraph 19 of their report indicates that crowd
            control is always going to be inextricably linked to criminal
            hooliganism and the police will never accept direction from Stewards
            and suggests, in these circumstances, the Police must accept a leading
            role and despite the requirements and civil liabilities of football
            clubs themselves take on supervision of the overall conduct of events
            wherever crowd safety is an issue.

            Our draft written agreement with clubs indicates that the stewards will
            be responsible for monitoring crowds and drawing to the attention of the
            police any problems (we will be responsible for policing open gates on
            the perimeter and assist the stewards where necessary).

            The ACPO submission says that dual responsibility for safety is a recipe
            for confusion.

            These are matters which need to be examined and discussed in relation to
            police responsibility and civil liability.




            Assistant u m e i constable
            Management Services




Gen/2
                                           0   9   'i

                                      South Yorkshire County Council




iifir       £>


                       SAFETY O F SPOBTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                           GE N E B A L SAFETY CERTIFICATE ~

Address of premises for which                                 The Hillsborough, Staaium,
ibis Certificate is issued                                    Penistone Eoad, Sheffield.

Occupier of the premises                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football
         and                                                  Club Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate

Use ofthe premises in respect                                 Football matches.
of which this Certificate is issued                           Beligious Conventions.

1.       This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect of
         the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by Order
         under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act , 1975 as a stadium    A
         requiring a Safety Certificate.                                         .
                                                                • I                  \
2,       The terms and conditions set out in the .Schedules attached hereto are hereb^
         Imposed.

3.       The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
         County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at
         the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
         Certificate is issued.

         The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto have         ^.
         the meaning assigned to them by_Schedule 1 to this Certificate and                ^
         Section 17 of the Act.

5.       The Schedules and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.
                                                                                 l!
                                                                                M:
 6   .   This Certificate commences on the twenty first day of December, One-1- t
         thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.


                   21st December, 1979                  Signed ..
         Dat e
                                                                Chief Executive on behalf
                                                               of and duly authorised by
                                                               the South Y o r k s h i r e County
                                                                Council.                   *’'*•



                                                                                                    /
                             SCHEDULE

                             In te r p r e ta tio n
                                                      1
                                                                                              \
    The .Act                            means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.
    Authorised Person                  means a person authorised in accordance with
                                       Section 11 of the Act.
    The Building Authority              means the Sheffield City Council.
    The Chief Constable                means the Chief Constable for the time being
                                       of the South Yorkshire Police or, as the case
                                       may require, the Police Officer having charge
                                       of the Stadium on the occasion of a Specified
                                       Activity.
    The Chief Fire Officer             means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being
                                       of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service or
                                       his designated representative.
    The Certificate '                  means the written General Safety Certificate of
                                       which the Schedules and Plans form part.
    The County Council                 means the South Yorkshire County Council.       *
                                                                                     v;
    The Guide                          means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
                                       as from time to time amended, issued by the |-
                                       Home Office, or such other code of practice as
                                       may be e o issued.
    The Holder                         means the applicant for and person to whom the
                                       General Safety Certificate has been issued and who
                                       is a 'qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.
    Invalid Carriage                   means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled


•
                                 •     or not, constructed or adapted for use for the .
                                       carriage of one person, being a parson suffering
                                       from some physical defect or disability.       \
    The Plans                          means the document or documents attached to and
                                       forming part of the General Safety Certificate and
                                       signed by the person signing the Certificate an4/
                                       or any other document cr documents which mayj
                                       be added to or substituted for such document or
                                       documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                       Council.
    Specified Activity                 means a football match or a Religious Convention.
                                                          ’*         *


    Spectator                         means any person occupying accommodation
                                      provided for spectators at the stadium.  .

    The Stadium                        means the Hillsborough Stadium, Penistone Road,
                                       Sheffield.      '
    Structural Parts                   includes structures, components, installations,
                                       fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

    Vehicles                           includes invalid carriages.
                                                                                        \

                           SCHEDULE 2 '

                  General Terms and Conditions

(1)    The Holder's nominee for the time being approved in writing by the
        County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a
       Specified Activity and he shall on behalf of the Holder ensure that
       the terms and conditions of the Certificate are complied with at
       the Specified Activity.

(2)    The appointment by the Holder of a nominee to attend each Specified
       Activity shall not absolve the Holder and any responsible person (as
       defined In section 12(2) of the A.ct) from their obligation to take all
       reasonable precautions and exercise all due diligence to avoid the
       contravention of any term or condition of the Certificate.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
Specified Activity is taking place.               ** .

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the several areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified in Parti of Schedule 3.                                          \ T'
                                                                                 V
Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relatirSj
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified Activity for one or
more of the following:-

(a)   the playing of music or singing; -

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming-activities, programmes, new-sheets
       and souvenirs;                                                        \

(d)   the sale and consumption'of refreshments;

(e)   any other. uSe ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
       in writing of the County Council.                                 -   j'

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is required under
      the terms and conditions hereof, anapplication forthatapproval shall
       be made by the Holder to the County Council atleast 21 days before the
      occurrence in respect of which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
       Stadium or any of its installations in a manner mentioned in Section 8
       of the Act the Holder shall at least 21 days before the carrying out o*f*the.
       proposal is begun give notice in writing of the proposal to the County
       Council.
(1)     The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
        (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
        prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
        employed in connection with the Specified Activity and (in relation
        to a Football iUatch) the methods to be used for the segregation of ■
        home and visiting supporters.
(2)    The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators from,
       the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or during a
       Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to do from the
        Chief Constable.                                         •

The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure the
orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed between the
Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such shorter time to
which the Chief Constable may consent) before a Specified Activity takes
place.
(1)     Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the County Council,
         the Holder shall provide and maintain sitbsStadium to the satisfaction
        of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room. The first
        aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit A
        by the emergency power supply referred to in paragraph 12 of this       \'
    ,v: Schedule.                                                               %.
                                                                                    \
(2)    The Holder shall ensure that during every Specified Activity a
        physician employed or retained by the •Holder is available to attend
        at the First Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known
        to those in the Police Central Control Room at the Stadium.

(3)    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
        of such numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the County Council
        shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall   \
        ensure that at every specified activity there is at least one First Aid \
       assistant for every 2 ,000 spectators.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of such \
number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule 3, ana , \ |
shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry‘out i >.'*
their duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress (d)
provided with written instructions as to their general duties in order to carry
out the following:-

(1)    Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the
       Stadium                                                                  V

(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
       raising an alarm and extinguishing any small fire.
Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the
Stadium at least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an egress route'between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the inside
and shall be manned at all times by at least the number of stewards required
by Part 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors or gates shall be opened by the
stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a time before
the—end of
         .III.a Snecifiea
                 ■    I■' Activitv
                               .■ ■ agreed
                            I |M    ^      between the Holder and the Chief
Constable and at any other time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the
sounding of the alarm. .

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
       Fire Officer exit signs comprising white letters on a green background
       over all exits from the Stadium ana all exits from spectator
       accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
       illuminated by both the main and emergency lighting systems. Such
       supplementary illuminated signs in such locations as the Chief Fire
       Officer may require shall also be provided by the Holder.

(2)    The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and staircases
       indicated on the Plans may be illuminated when required during a
       Specified Activity by both the main and emergency lighting systems.

(3)    The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
       illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a
       Specified Activity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

(4)    All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to and from
        any Spectator Accommodation- therein shall be maintained free from
       obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particular
       stair coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not
       constitute asource of danger.
                                                                                i
(1)   Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief F|re
        the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief ' '
       Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for providing
       electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting throughout the
       Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication systems
       within the Stadium, such emergency power supply to be operable
       independently of the main power supply and to come into automatic
       operation within ten seconds of the failure of the latter and to be
       capable of maintaining the necessary power output for a minimum of
       three hours from the failure of the main power supply.                  ’
                                                                               *•

(2)   At least once in each period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
       the Chief Fire Officer a report as to the condition of the emergency
       Power   Su»
                 o *d I -v   certified bv
                                        * an indeoenaent
                                                 «       Electrical Engineer.
                                                                       o

(3)    Cn the day of a Specified Activity and not less than 3 hours prior to
        its commencement the emergency power supply shall be tested for
        a period of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
        rectified before the commencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)    A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder shall be
       present during a Specified Activity.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
       of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

(2)    The fire warning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
        of the Chief Fire Officer.
 Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
'the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable

(1)    A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
       ancillary eauiDment as the Chief Constable mav require.                      ^
                                                                             \r;
(2 )   Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room ^
        and for administrative purposes.                                      f

(3)    A public address system audible in all parts of the Stadium. The Police
       shall have the right to use the public address system for police purposes
        in priority to its use for any other purpose.

(1)    The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts of the stadium
        in sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide
       and in all cases to the. satisfaction of the Council.                     ^

(2)    The Holder shall carry outis-uch works of maintenance, repair and                 5
        renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to time by the
        County Council.
                                                                                .   \f
The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the Stadiurri j ‘
(including the electrical and communications installations) and all emergency
equipment in good and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County
Council and shall undertake such maintenance repair or renewal as may from
time to time be necessary to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The Holder shall place within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specified
by the Chief Fire Officer, emergency procedure notices which shall be
maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
       restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise
       approved for emergency purposes bv a Police Officer in uniform.
(2)      The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
         satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for emergency -■
         vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T. V. and radio services
having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable
as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)      Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium only in
         containers constructed from soft plastic or other soft material, or as
         allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)      No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials which
         in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as missiles
         shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium to which
         spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods shall
be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.                                 \
                                                                                  V
No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the
Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
 Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
County Council within.. 7 months of the date of the Certificate and at least once in each
period of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
each inspection supply to the County Council a Certificate by the said              ».
 Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good \
engineering and building practices-and with the relevant British Standard            '
Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate provisions and
 recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
crush barriers and handrails.                                                      ,
                                                                             r .P|
 (1)    The Holder shall arrange for all crash barriers ana handrails within'the
        Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
        Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
        in the presence of a representative of the County Council within 2 months
        of the date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be notified
       in writing to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter,

(2)(i)   The Holder shall ensure that not more than 7 months after the date of this
         Certificate and thereafter not less than once in each period of 12 monttis
         a representative sample of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not
         less than 20^> of the total number of such barriers and rails is tested in
       accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer*
       (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the County
       Council ana the results thereof notified in writing to the County Council
       as soon as possible thereafter.
(ii)   a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails tested in
       accordance with sub-paragraph (2 )(1 ) alone and a barrier so tested shall
       not be tested again within a period of 4? years thereafter.

The Holder shall within. 7 months of the date of this certificate and thereafter
not less than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chiief Fire Officer
the certificate of an independent Electrical Engineer as to the current
compliance or non-compliance of the electrical installation within the Stadium
with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations or other sections or Regulations for
the time being in force relating to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

(i)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
        equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by the
       Chief Fire Officer.

(ii)   The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
        other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
        appropriate
         « • *      at least once in each period
                                           *      of 12 months by
                                                                w a competent
                                                                        *•    tr
                                                                              t .
        person to the satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.
                                                                  * 1*         *
                                                                               t
The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised Persons:

(1 )   A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during
        a Specified Activity and to each area of Spectator A 3Commodation
        therein mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3.

(2)     A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium is in i
       use for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such        \
       record to include the name^-address, and age of the spectator                '
       injured, the nature of the"injury and how it was caused, as far as can
       be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
       The Holder 'shall provide a written report to the County Council within ^
       48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.                        -i.
                                                                               } >.■%
                                                                               | , >


(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises held in
       accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this Schedule such
       record to include the date and time and duration of the instruction or
       exercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
       instruction or exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and renewals
       carried out at the Stadium.
The Stadium shall be maintained with the facilities and structures including.
all crush barriers, entrances, exits and means of access to the entrances
and exits in the number, size, position and strength existing at the date
of the Certificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
thereto unless prior notice in writing is given to the County Council in
accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use the Stadium in conditions of extreme
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular or in combination and in
particular:-
*            »


(1)    No soeciafcors shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
       speeds in excess of 100 Km.p.h. at 10m above ground level
       ana this prohibition shall be effective when more than one gust of
       this speed of at least 3 seconds duration is recorded in the area of
       the stadium in the 30 minutes immediately prior to the time of the
       enauirv mentioned in (2 ) to the local meteorological ofn.ce.

(2)    The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
       to the local meteorological office by telephone not more than 30
       m i n u t e s before the admission of spectators to the stadium and
       the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a book kept       ,r
        for the purpose.                                                   \’
                       *                                                    '5T
 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall
 have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange
 for the conduct of any inspection or test which the County Council may consider
 to be necessary in the interests of securing reasonable safety at tne
■Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                             PAST 1
                          Crowd Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the stadium snail not exceed the following
                                                                           8
figures;-

Soion Kop                              16,850
South Stand Upper                      5»567
South Stand Lower                      3,310
West Stand                             4,465
West Terrace                           7,200
North West Terrace                     2, 800
North Stand                            9, SS2

      Total Crowd Capacity             50,174


                            PART 2
                                                                                   1   •

                          Safety Stewards                                         ^
                                                                                  >
The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall             t
be as follows:-

(1)     Manning of exists                                       26   Stewards (2 per main
(2)     Control and direction of spectators                                       exit)
          entering or leaving the Stadium                       38   Stewards (1 per vomitory
(3)     Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
          with any emergency including raising
          an alarm and extinguishing any small fire             2    Stewards (under South
                                                                                StatJd)
The Stewards shall be distributed 'a's follows:-

Section of Stadium                      Number required for each function



Each Main Exit (13)                         28
South Stand                                            12

West Stand                                                  8

North Stand                                             IS
Under South Stand
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                             •F* DIVISION




              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY v NORWICH CITY


DATE     SATURDAY 19 AUGUST 1989                              K I C K £££ 3.00PM


1.            INFORMATION

1 .1          Anticipated attendance -No.       18,000

1.2           Away supporters

J.2.1         No.                                       400
                                                              1
l.v.j         Colouru                             YELLOW AND GREEN

1,2. }        Accommodation in ground       t   West stand only
               using turnstiles A - G


1.2.4         Information regarding away   Norwich fans
                                                fans:
               did not cause problens last season and none is
               anticipated for this game.
Travel    - The       away       team          supporters

to    travel    in    the      following             manner:

(A)      Coaches       - Number                and   details     will

         be    provided          at       briefing.

         Before       match          - unload          at    Leppings

         Lane    t he n     park          in    Coal    Road.

         After       match       - load          outside

         Leppings         Lane        turnsti1 e s .

(B)      Special trains                   to W a d s l e y    Station
         - none .

(C)      Service       trains             to   Midland        Station

         - details          to       be    given       at    briefing.

(D)      Other    means          -

         A small      number              of   supporters        are

         expected         to     travel         by     private

         transport.
DnamcH
It is the intention of ths police to allow this match to take plsce with the minimum disnpticn to those not
attending, to maintain public order and safety both inside and cutside the ground. This will be attained
end displayed with a hi#i standard of smartness aid professionalism.

It is also essential that any over-crowding is prevented and that, vfere detected, appropriate step6 are
taken to remecty same. All Officers must be alert to this important factor and note’
that earliest notification to Ground Central is paranount.

HEMP

All personnel, together with their duties end parade times are shcwi fa Appendix 'B'.

CDeraticnal Bases

The cperaticn will be three phases, viz:

Phase 1 Before Kick Off - which will include arrangements for public order patrols end the escorting and
segregation of supporters imtil thsy enter into ths stadiun.

Phase 2 During the match ftxm 10 minutes after kick off to ten minutes before the end of the game.

Ra£»_3_After match - ftxm ten minutes before the end of the game mtil all the crowd aid traffic have
dispersed.

Briefing

Prior to going on duty, all Officers will be triefed by the ofTicer in ccnmand of the cperaticn as to the
requirements of the event, evacuation procedures and intelligence received.

CH atne! Investifjg tion/H ain Clothes Departments

Members of the Criminal Investigation Department are on duty at the ground. All ccnplaints of crime made in
connection with this event will be dsalt with by them.

Special Ocretabulary

Members of the Special Constabulary will be on duty at this match. They will be employed as directed.

Dog Section

Members of the Dcg Section will be on duty - they will mainly be used as a deterrent before end after the
match on ths route to ths ground, at ths coach park and escorting snjporters to and fian the ground.
Duties are shown at Appendix 'C'.

Hunted Section

Members of the Mounted Department will be on duty, they will be enployed cutside the ground to maintain
order, segregate fians and escort them to and flxm thsir transport.
Duties are shown at Appendix 'C'.

O a m d Rules

Those rules relevant to the maintenance of caxfer in the ground are shewn at Appendix *A*(3>-

Priscners

All persais arrested or detained in the ground or the vicinity thereto will be taken to the Police Room
where ths officer in charge will enquire into the circumstances and decide what action is to be taken.

Arresting officers must ccnplete Form PACE/19 before resuming Serial duties. Hus must be ccnpleted as
quickly ek possible aid handed to the Custody Officer. Any additional papervork will be canpleted at the
end of the operation but before going ofT duty mless directed to do otherwise by a sipervisary officer.
3.9.3      Wtere tte circmBtanees are such that a perscn Is tobeejected flxm thestadium ftar treach of Ground
           Regulations, then he met be taken to tte Police Room. Jfe will nothephotographed etc hit hie details will
           be recorded in ths register prior to ejection.

3.9 .4     Where tte nunber of arrests or ejections seriously depletes the manpower of any Serial then the Serial
            Servant will infcon Ground Ccntrol in order that reserves may be deployed to rectify the imbalance.

3.   ID     T ra ffic Control

3.10.1      Tfcaffic points - will he mannsd as required.                                      '

3.10.2      Ttsffic Division - renters of the motor cycle wing will be on duty to aisure free passage on main roads
            leaiing to and ftxm the ground and assist with escorting visiting supporters coaches.

3.10.3      No parking cones - these will be placed in accordance withthe previously publishedschedule.

3.11        Obstruction of the Highway tar Street V enders

3.11.1      Fterscns selling bad^s or goods and obstructing the highway should be moved cn hit if they persist they
            should be arrested and dealt with accordingly.

3.12        anprypnr-v and Bvaawtrim ProoeAires

3.12.1      Details are given in Appendix ’A'(l)

3.12.2      Bg-rflpncv Services - Contingency Plans

            Details are given at Appendix ’A'(2).

3 1 2 .3    Brerpgnry Procefrges - Id en tific a tio n o f p erscrrel

            Serial instructions require the nomination and triefing of officers in respect of specific duties in the
            event of en emergency. Details of all officers will be provided to Ground Control to assist in deployment
            staild the need arise.

3-12.4      n — n ty Bureau Tteiined B sracm el

            All such officers on duty at the grand will simply details to the Ground Ccnmander imnediately after
            b ’iefirg. In the event of an emergency, these officers will report to the gyunasum where the Football
            Liaison Inspector or deputising officer will arrange transportation to Ecclesfield-

3-12-5      Bnergmcy Bnritacnt
             ■J
                  boxes, (two at Lappings Lsns and two at Penistcne Road North aids of the perimeter track) have been
             provided by the club and each contains bolt croppers, heavy duty gloves, a hand held public address system
           "-mi «igi|i liIII mi; Hr V-" 1 'nurpinnrir1 and-'Mmn Rnuk1. Stewards have been trained in the use of the bolt
             croppers and the discretion as to use rests with the Ground Ccnmander.

3-12.6      ih fr .. TnrWrient Boxes

            'Fl' Sub Division Jfejar Insistent Box will be taken to the Police Room on each match day. It will be the
            responsibility of the Police Room Sergeant to ensure that the contents remain intact vtoilst unused. Oi
            return to 'Fl', it is the responsibility of the Ccntrol Room Servant to ensure that the box is returned to
            its normal secure storage place.

3-12-7      (XiCTCTQMdinK

            As already stated at paragraph 2.2, the prevention of overcrowding is of paramcunt importance and virilst
            identified club safety stewards will be monitoring developments in areas of the stadiun, nevertheless, all
            officers nust be alert to tte dangers and wten identified, their initial response will be to relieve
            pressure by allowing spectators onto tte perimeter track. Thereafter, guidance will be scugit flxmftjund
            Ccntrol as to reallocation.              Vs/9 cAy

            hi dtoil^tCA                            (Usfci*.
3.12.8   Delayed K idt-O ff

         Tte cptlcn to postpone kick-off rests at the discretion of the officers In conmsnd at the grcund. Crcwd
         safety is tte paramount consideration In deciding whether or not to exercise this option. Hie referee at
         each natch will consult with Ground Ccntrol 15 minutes prior to kick-off for authority to tring the teams
         onto tte pitch.

3.13     Security of HjmstileB
                                                                                            *
         Security of cash in transit fran the turnstiles to the club cash office is the responsibility of a private
         security organization, employed ty SWFC.

3.14     Cbaches

         No special provision tes been mate for the parking of coaches carrying tone si£porters vto have their cwn
         invidual arrangements for unloading/loading arxi parking.

         Away cceches will be daalt with in accordance with 1.2.5 of this Order. Coverage of alcctolic drinks cn
         coaches is dealt with in item 3-15-1-

3.15     Alcoholic Drinks

3.15.1   Full ctetails of the provisions of the Sporting Events (Ccntrol of Alcchol) Act 1985 are given at Appendix
         'A'(4).

4.       APcmsmgnm

4.1      ttess

         All male officers except Dog Handlers aid Mounted Officers cn duty as such will wear full uniform including
         helmets with chin straps down. Female officers should wear slacks. All officers should be in possession of
         snoraks.

4.2      Searching and Property Seized

4.2.1    Searctes will be carried out at the turnstiles to enforce the GroundRules aid the provisions of theControl
          of Alcohol Act.

4.2.2    Where searches arecarried out at tteturnstiles, orelsewhere, and property temporarily seized, tte perscn
          frcm vtai the property istaken,should be infconed of theseizingofficer's ccOlar runier aidvtee it may
          be collected ftcm (tte Police Room) after tte match. Tte officer taking possession of tte property must
          affix a label with the name (only) of the ownerprior to handing it in to the Police Room.

         It will be' the responsibility of the officer In chargs of the Police Room to list property so deposited and
         return to tte owner against signature. Any property not claimed will be taken to Hsnmertcn Road Police
         Station aid treated as found property.

 4.3     Beffrerfments

         Details of meal times will be given at briefing.

         Drinks will be available during this duty adjacent to the Police Room. Sergeants will ensure that members
         of their Serial stagger tteir refresfrnent break so only two at any one time are released. This facility is
         subject to the exingencies of duty.

 4.4     Mgs

 4.4.1   A mep showing the general layout of the stadium aid the surrounding area is attached at Appendix ’A ’(6).

 4.4.2   Large scale maps are available in tte Police Roan.
4.5   Reporting off <faty

      It will he tte respcnsibility of each Serial Sergeant to report the viiole of his Serial off djty or acccxnt
      f a r e ry person ndssii®. No one will go off duty without the consent of Grcund Control. Prior to leaving
      the staiium tte Serial Servant must complete his Debrief Sheet aid include tterecn arrests, ejections aid
      m y incietent/course of a=ticn (other than routine) liiich will fbim data fbr future intelligence purposes.
      This will he submitted to the Police Roan.

5.

5.1   Ground Caitrol is situate in the kiosk (located between the south aid vest stands). Call sign - 'Oamd
      Control'.

5.2   Perscresl radios will operate cn Channel 25. Ttey will be issued to all supervisory ranks aid to all
      officers cn jWfal 1. Additional radios will be issued as operational requirarents dictate.

5.3   In the event of ai energsncy, cham el 7 w ill also be UBed by camanding o fficers only as a ccmnaid channel.

5.4   Call signs - 'Sierra' followed by Serial number, ie Serial 7 - 'Sierra 7'. Inspectors - 'India' foliated by
       Sector umber, ie 'Iixiia 3 - Sector 3'. Chief Inspector and above will use individual Divisional or Sub
       Hivisional call signs.

5.5   Strict radio discipline will be in force at all tines. Messages must be kept as short as possible, Oound
       Control having the option of cutting short a trenanission and will cany out this procedure irrespective of
       rank.

5.6   In aidition to those in the emergency equipment boxes, loud hailers are available in the gymnasium aid will
       be distributed at briefing.

6.    CLUB H B SFC H Sram iE S

6.1   It is the respcnsibility of the du b to make arrangements to limit the number of spectators entering each
       self-contained pen or area to the maxinun capacity figure assessed in accordance with Reconrnendaticn 2(a)
       aid (b) of the Interim Report of the Inquiry by the Right ftnourable Lard Justice Taylor, either
       electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting o r otherwise and to close off further
       axess to sirh pen or area when its maxinum capacity is about to be reached.

6.2   Should the club request assistance to prevent access aid overcrowding or other difficulties, then the
       Contingency Plai outlined at Appendix 'A' (5) will be put into cperaticn.

7-
      H e Football Liaison Officer or officer deputising will be responsible for briefing and de-briefing of
                    INDEX TO A P P E N D I C E S

A P P E N D I X A (1)                    EMERGENCY AND EVACUATION
                                         PROCEDURES

APPENDIX A( 2 )                          EMERGENCY SERVICES -
                                         CONTINGENCY PLAN

APPENDIX A(3)                            GROUND REGULATIONS

APPENDIX A m                             SPORTING EVENTS      (CONTROL)
                                         OF ALCOHOL)ACT

APPENDIX A ( 5)                          CONTINGENCY PLANS - LATE
                                         ARRIVALS, NON TICKET H O L D E R S »
                                         OVERCROWDING ETC

APPENDIX A(6)                            MAPS

APPENDIX ’b                              MANPOWER DEPLOYMENT

APPENDIX C                               MOUNTED & DOG SECTION DUTIES

        SCHEDULE SHOWING MANPOWER COMMITMENT

                        SUPT      C/INSP        INSP    SGT      PC

Ground                   1                         3     13      139

                                     1             3      7       63

Reserves                                           1      2       1*0

Control etc              1                                3           9



TOTALA                   2           1             7     25      251
                                          A PPB H D IX * A ' ( 1 )
                                BMERGEHCY AMD EVACUATION PROCEDURES
In the event of an emergency situation arising in the stadium (ie fire or bomb call) which may
require evacuation of all or part of the ground, the procedure outlined will be followed:

(a) Control Room will pass the following message:-
     'The attendance of Mr Meadows is urgently required at Police Control’
    This will be over the PA System and personal radio and will indicate toPoliceOfficers
     that a provisional emergency and evacuation procedure is in   force.
(b) In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, an oral message will be passed
     by the Police Officer in charge giving specific instructions as to aetion to be taken by
       the public.
(c)    In the event of an all clear situation, the following message will be passed:
       'Mr Meadows is no longer required at Police Control'
(d)    Evacuation procedures for various parts of the ground are shown on the appropriate
       serial order.
                                          APPENDIX 'A'(2)
                               EMERGENCY SERVICES - CONTINGENCY PLAN
AMBULANCE
The South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) will provide two liaison officers
for each football match. One liaison officer will be seated in the South Stand and he will
visit Police Control before the commencement of every game to identify himself and confirm the
position he will be occupying. In the event of an emergency, this liaison officer will attend
Police Control where he will remain and assist in the co-ordination of emergency operations.
The second liaison officer will stand on the perimeter track adjacent to the access route
between the Spion Kop and the North Stand. In the event of an emergency he will attend one of
the two ambulances detailed below where he will be met by the Police liaison officer (see
later) and act as temporary Ambulance Gontrol pending the arrival of the Ambulance Control
vehicle.

SYMAS will provide two ambulances for each game and these will be parked at the side of the
gymnasium (rear of North Stand) in reserved places. The first ambulance will act as temporary
control vehicle and the second will be the initial response to an emergency. Further
ambulances will initially attend outside Herries Road Bus Depot from where they will be
deployed according to need. The SYMAS Divisional Duty Officer will also attend this location
in the first instance. Ambulances will access the Penistone Road North side of the ground via
the gymnasium gate and exit via Gate 'O'. This route has been emphasisedby hatched   markings
and will be kept clear at all times.

The Police Constable on duty on Serial 1 and positioned on the perimeter trackadjacent to the
North Stand/Spion Kop access  will act as liaison officer to the ambulanceservice.  Hewill
identify himself to the ambulance liaison officer at that location and will accompany that
Officer to the temporary control vehicle in the event of an emergency.

Members of Tango 2 Unit will    be deployed as follows:

(a)    The Sergeant and one Police Constable will attend Niagara Sports Club to act as
       reception officers in the initial stages should Operation Support be broughtinto
       effect.
(b)    The remainder of the Serial will remain in Penistone Road North adjacent to the
       gymnasium gate to assist SYMAS vehicle manoeuvres.

FIRE

The attendance of South Yorkshire Fire Service vehicles could be from varying directions
according to the Fire Station from which deployed and accessibility for vehicles at the ground
is limited. The Fire Service have indicated that they will fight any fire in the North Stand
from Penistone Road or Leppings Lane as appropriate. ON NO ACCOUNT MUST FIRE APPLIANCES BE
DIRECTED INTO THE GYMNASIUM ENTRANCE. THIS AREA MUST BE RESERVED FOR AMBULANCES. Any fire
breaking out in the South Stand will be fought from South Stand Lane and appliances will attend
from both Penistone Road and Leppings Lane. An emergency route has been indicated by hatch
markings which must be kept clear at all times. Officers should be aware that most fire
appliances WILL NOT pass below the restaurant extension adjacent to the Directors' entrance.

In the event of the emergency message (at Appendix 'A'(l)) being broadcast over the PA system
or personal radio, the following officers will imnediately take up positions as indicated:
Two identified officers from Serial 3 will be deployed as follows:

{i ) Leppings Lane opposite South Stand access road (one officer)
(ii) Penistone Road (away from city carriageway) opposite South Stand access road (one officer)

One identified officer from Police Room duties will be deployed to Penistone Road North (to
city carriageway) opposite Gate 'O'.

It will be the duty of these officers to inform Fire Services personnel of the precise nature
and location of emergency and to direct the appliances accordingly. These officers should
remain in position in order to direct any additional appliances.

                                         APPBHDIX *A*(3)
                                        GROUND REGULATIONS
5.    Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the field of play.

9.    The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in the ground is
      forbidden.

10.   The consumption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only in authorised places and in
       accordance with the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985-

11.   Fireworks, smoke cannisters, bottles, glasses, cans, flags, banners, poles and other
       similar articles or containers including anything which could or might be used as
       a weapon, are not permitted within the ground, and any person in possession of such
       an article or container may be refused entry or ejected from the ground.

12. Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw any object onto the pitch.

13. Any person who fails to comply with instructions from a steward may be ejected from the
     ground.

15*   Any person who remains in the gangway may be ejected from the ground.

16.   The Club reserves the right to refuse admission to or eject any person who refuses to be
      searched by a Police Officer.

18.   The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents to remove from this ground any
      person who does not comply with Ground Regulations and with the rules and regulations
      of the Football Association and the Football League or whose presents in the ground is
      or could reasonably be construed as constituting a source of danger, nuisance or annoyance
      to other spectators.
                                          APPBHDIX 'A* (4)
                           SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL) ACT 1985
1.    VEHICLES
      (A)    It is an offence for an operator to knowingly carry alcohol or allow it to be
              carried on a public service vehicle travelling to or from a football match.
      (B)    It is an offence to possess alcohol on a public service vehicle or train when
              travelling to or from a football match.
      (C)    A Constable may stop and search a public service vehicle where he has reasonable
             ■grounds to suspect alcohol is being carried.

2.    ENTRY INTO GROUND
      (A)    It is an offence to possess alcohol when entering or attempting to enter a football
             ground.
      (B)    It is an offence to enter or attempt to enter a football ground when in possession
             of bottles, cans etc (or part of) which are capable of causing injury. This
             includes drinking glasses but not thermos flasks.
      (C)    A Constable may search any person he suspects is attempting to enter the ground
             with the articles mentioned.

 3.   CONDUCT IN GROUND
      It is an offence to enter, attempt to enter, or be in a football ground when drunk.
SALE OF ALCOHOL IN GROUND
(A)   Alcoholic drink may only be sold in those parts of the ground designated which will
       be out of view of the pitch. Alcohol may not be taken out of designated area.
(B)   Any Constable in uniform may cause a bar in a football ground to close if he
       believes the continued sale of alcohol is detrimental to good order or public
       safety.

POWERS
In addition to the powers to search, a Constable may arrest any person committing or who
has comnitted an offence under the Act.
                                           A PPB H D IX   ’A '( 5 )

                        CONTINGENCY PLANS - HON TICKET HOLDERS/LATE ARRIVALS

As a general policy all home supporters will access SWFC stadium via Penistone Road North
including those wishing to occupy seats in the North and South Stands.

To this end, serials will be deployed in Leppings Lane at both Catchbar Lane and Penistone Road
North ends to direct home supporters to the correct side of the ground (see serial instructions
for full details).

1.   NON TICKET HOLDERS - LEPPINGS LANE END

The filter cordon in operation to deal with non ticket holders will depend on the size of
anticipated away suflporters.

(A) UNDER 1000

     The external gates giving access to the Leppings Lane area will be secured in the half
     open position, thereby creating restricted access. Police Officers will man these access
     points and will check away supporters to ensure they possess tickets for the game. Any
     non ticket holder will be escorted to the nearest one of the two holding areas (behind
     Gate 'A' or the South Stand access road and sterile area) for containment. Disposal of
     such persons will be dependant upon overall numbers and will be decided by the Ground
     Commander after kick off.

     For full details please refer to the Serial instructions.

(B) OVER 1000

     In addition to 1(A) above, filter cordons utilising portable barriers will be positioned
     across Leppings Lane adjacent to the shop at number 115 andat the groundside of the
     bridge. Police Officers will man these points andwill check away supporters to ensure
     they possess tickets for the game. Any non ticket holder will be escorted to the nearest
     of the two holding areas (behind Gate'A' or the South Stand access road and sterile area)
     for containment.

     Disposal of such persons will be dependant upon overall numbers and will be decided by the
     Ground Commander after kick off.

     For full details please refer to the Serial instructions.        Officers from the reserve
     serials will be deployed to assist as necessary.

2.   LATE ARRIVALS - LEPPINGS LANE END

     Where it is forseen that late comers will arrive at the Leppings Lane end of the ground
     in large numbers so as to create difficulties at the turnstiles, then the two cordons
     outlined at 1(B) above will be additionally utilised to hold back the supporters and
     allow then through into the turnstile area in manageable numbers.

     For full details please refer to the Serial instructions.

     Officers from the reserve Serials will be deployed to assist as necessary.

3.   LATE ARRIVALS - PENISTONE ROAD NORTH END

     The geography of     this side of the stadium is such as to enable    the        spread of support
     over a wide area     thereby negating the eventuality of concentration           of numbers outsid
     turnstiles.

     Jumbo cones will be in position preventing traffic from using the nearside lane on the
     away from city side of Penistone Road North directly outside the stadium.

     Mounted Officers   will be deployed to assist in the control and        movement of supporterswith
     members of the reserve Serials as a back up facility.

     For full details please refer to the Serial instructions.
4.   REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE FROM CLUB TO CLOSE TURNSTILES

     (a )   Leppings Lane End

            The senior officer in charge of Public Order will go directly to the area and
            direct police operations.

            Serial 12 will physically block access on the ground side of turnstiles A-G to
            prevent supporters passing through the turnstile systems.

            Serial 13 will physically block access on the Leppings Lane side of turnstiles
            A-G to prevent supporters entering into the turnstile system.*

            Serial 11 will close the external perimeter gates in Leppings Lane to prevent crowd
            build-up in the turnstile area.

            Mounted officers will be deployed to assist in crowd control. One or more of the
            Reserve Serials (21-24) will be deployed to assist with removal of supporters from
            the turnstile area and control of those outside the external gates.

            Ground Control will address those outside via the public address system as to the
            reasons for closure and that the club is being contacted with a view to
            ascertaining if there is alternative accommodation ie overspill into Pen 7,
            (delaying tactic). If no alternative accommodation available or if decision made
            not to allow entry then, dependant on numbers, consideration to be given to
            containment in one of the two holding areas (see 1(A) and (B) above) dispersal or
            escort back to transport.

     (b)    North Stand

            The senior officer in charge of Public Order will go directly to the area and
            direct police operations.

            Serial 7 will physically block access on the Penistone Road North side of
            turnstiles 77-88 to prevent supporters entering through the turnstile system.

            Serial 9 will physically block access on the ground side of turnstiles 77-88 to
            prevent supporters passing through the turnstile system.

            One or more of serials 21-24, dependant upon the size of the crowd, will direct
            home supporters to the Spion Kop and/or South Stand turnstiles, dependant upon the
            space capacities in those areas and assist in the formation of orderly queues.
            Mounted officers will be deployed to assist.

            The Police Land Rover will be directed to this area and the crowd informed as to
            the, reason for the Police action, utilising the vehicle's-public address system.

     (c)    South Stand

            The senior officer in charge of Public Order will go directly to the area and
            direct police operations.

            ■Serial 13 will be directed to assist Serial 4 in physically blocking access on the
             South Stand car park side of turnstiles 19-32 to prevent supporters entering
             through the turnstile system.

            Serial 21 will   be directed to assist Serial 2 in physically blocking access   on the
            ground side ofturnstiles 19-32 to prevent supporters passing through the
            turnstile system.

            One or more of serials 22-24, dependant upon the size of the crowd, will direct
            home supporters to the Spion .Kop and/or North Stand turnstiles, dependant upon
            space capacities in those areas and assist in the formation of orderly queues.
            Mounted officers will be deployed to assist.


            The Police Land Rover will be directed to this area and the crowd informed as to
            the reason for the Police action, utilising the vehicle's public address system.
(d)      SPION KOP

         The senior officer in charge of Public Order will go directly to the area and
         direct police operations.

         Serial 4 will physically block access on the South Stand car park of turnstiles
         33-42 to prevent supporters entering through the turnstile system.

 -V'J   Serial 2 will physically block access on the ground side of turnstiles 33*42 to
         prevent supporters passing through the turnstile system.     ,

         Serials 5, 6 and 7 will physically block access on the Penistone Road North side
         of turnstiles 43-76 to prevent supporters entering through the turnstile system.

         Serials 9 and 21 will be directed to assist Serial 8 in physically blocking access
         on the ground side of turnstiles 43-76 to prevent supporters entering through the
         turnstile system.

         One or more of Serials 22-24, dependant upon the size of the crowd, will direct
         home supporters to the North and/or South Stand turnstiles, dependant upon the
         space capacities in those areas and assist in the formation of orderly queues.
         Mounted officers will be deployed to assist.

         The Police Land Rover will be directed to this area and the crowd informed as to
         the reason for the Police action, utilising the vehicle's public address system.

         In each of the four above gases, the threat to safety will be considered when
         deciding whether or not to delay the kick-off.

OVERCROWDING

Following the initial response by designated officers on relevant track gates to allow
spectators onto the perimeter track to relieve pressure, the following will apply:

Consideration will be given to authorising the use of bolt croppers by the trained
steward to increase the area of escape available.

The senior officer in charge of Public Order will go directly to the area and direct
police operations, using a loud hailer from the emergency equipment box.

One or more of Serials 21-24 will be directed onto the perimeter track to assist
spectators to leave the terraces, administer First Aid if necessary and escort supporters
to a place of safety or other area of the ground.

The Ambulahce Liaison Officers will be notified.

West Stand Pen 7 (elevated section)
Serial 12 will be directed to the rear of      the elevated section torelieve   pressure caused
by those at the rear of the crowd.

Spion Kop (front section)
Serial 8 will be directed to the rear of the      section of crowd   causing pressure and
encourage supporters to move back to relieve      same.

One or more of Serials 21-24 will also be directed to assist in administering First Aid
etc.

Spion Kop (rear section)
Serial 8 will be directed to the rear of the      section of crowd   causing pressure and
encourage supporters to move back to relieve      same.

One or    more of serials 21-24 will be directed      to clear thecrowdfrom the frontand sides
of the    affected areas to administer First Aid etc.
     The written 'Emergency' and 'Move Back' signs contained in the Emergency Equipment box
     will be utilised.

6.   PITCH INVASION

     If on a small scale then the few supporters involved will not be pursued, but detained
     by members of Serial 1 on attempting to return to the seated or terraced areas.

     If a large scale invasion ensues, then Serial 1 Sergeant will attract the attention of
     the linesman to signal to the referee to stop the game. Serial 2 will be directed onto
     the pitch to escort the players and officials down the players' tunnel which will then
     be physically blocked.

     Serials 4, 7, 11, 13, 15, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23 and 24 will be used in whole or in part to
     form a cordon and sweep the pitch clear. Consideration will be given to utilising Mounted
     as a last resort. Once cleared, consideration will be given to the Public Order situation
     that then exists, the likelihood of repetition and the re-distribution of manpower to
     identified flash points before consulting with the club and officials regarding the
     viability of re-starting the game.
         ,

             -v.                                                                                     ,   .
                   -- - ' V


                                       '
                                                                                         Main   P olice      A ccess


Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                      P olice
                                                                               Room
                                                                        Room
     Hillsborough Ground
                                                                                                \% \

                                                                                                                       73-76   ^
   »*2 '\\ /- <0




Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures



         Police Control

                                                                                                   s u n u iliiil


       KEY
                                           D ire cto rs E n tr tn c t
       TURNSTILES             EZZZZI
              UAHSLEY BRIDGE S TA TIC




A610I to
MANCIIESTEK
                                       APPENDIX *B*



1.   PARADE TIME              12.30PM
                                                               /
2.   SUPERVISION

OVERALL COMMAND              SUPERINTENDENT MARSHALL

GROUND CONTROL               A/SUPERINTENDENT BEAL

PUBLIC ORDER &               A/CHIEF INSPECTOR SEWELL
 LIAISON
INSPECTORS DUTIES

SECTOR 1 (SERIALS             1-4)                  INSPECTOR      MOORE

SECTOR 2 (SERIALS             5      0)             INSPECTOR      DELANEY
                                                                   qs +ISZ.-Z.O
SECTOR 3 (SERIALS 10 - 11)                          INSPECTOR      BENNETT

SECTOR 4 (SERIALS 12 - 13)                           INSPECTOR     SYKBS "

SECTOR 5 (SERIALS14, 1 $ & 18)                       INSPECTOR     CROFT

SECTOR 6 (SERIALS 15 * 17)                           INSPECTOR WOODWARD'
CONTROL
                         PC 1035 Ryan’ PC           m rriBon van
 ^   E8 g f A^ j | g ,    PC 1403 J o n e s .       PC 295* M o r l e d g e

 DHIE^?0RS                                           DRIVER
 PC 3038 Cruttenden                                   PC 2046 H o lm e s
 PRISONER PROCESS
 ' F'   D iv is io n a l    fla ln    C lo th e s


 DOG SECTION                                         MOUNTED SECTION

 1-4 Leppings Lane                                   1-4 Leppings Lane
 5-8 Penistone Road                                  5-8 Penistone Road
                                    A nrW .   i , — I 1, i'.i




                                                                Serial 1
                         PERIMETER TRACK

pq                      PHASES 1 & 2 - BEFORE and DURING MATCH
PC 253 Hyles            T*«nty two (22) Police Constables - perimeter
                          (A) Twelve (12) constables will roan the six Spion
dp    iii n««!h          KOP perimiter gates which must remain OPEM AT ALL
lc    1 12 4 Pratt       TIMES. Each of these designated officers is
pc    1 784 rinnohue      authorised to decide whether or not to allcw
PC    2120 Thorpe         spectators through a perimeter track gate, to
PC     2 333 English      relieve overcrowding. Club Safety Stewards
PC     2 9 6 3 Singh      charged with the responsibility of monitoring
PC     32 31 Harwood      crowd densities, recognising signs of distress and
t»c   700 Haiiiweii      crowd dynamic* will be on duty on th* ptrinwter
PC     1 6 6 9 Walpole    track and the designated officers will identify
PC     3151 Mars den      themselves to the Safety Stewards nearest them.
PC     2 348 Hanson       The twelve (12) designated officers will, whilst
PC    1247 Street         on perimeter duty, stand at the open gates facing
PC    1842 Brookes        the Spion Kop crowd. UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES will
PC     931 Greenway       a gate be left un-manned. If one of the
PC     2 9 8 8 Burkinshaw Designated Officers perceives a problem, otter
PC     621 Bell           than overcrowding on the Spion Kop terraces
                           requiring the attendance of Police personnel, then
PC     1 8 6 3 Buxton     he will arrange same through ground control.
PC     |                 If overcrowding is identified, then the initial
      It^j               response will be to allow spectators onto the
                 v? J ’  perimeter track to relieve pressure. Thereafter,
                           guidance will be sought from Ground Control as to
                           their re-allocation.
                           (B) Six (6 ) constables will take up equidistant
                           positions in front of the North Stand, Should the
                           elevated section of the Leppings Lane terraces be
                           used as an overspill contingency, then the two
                           officers at that end of the ground will take up a
                           position in front of Gate 7, facing the crowd.
                           This gate will remain open and these officers will
                           be Designated Officers with identical authority to
                           that at (A) above.
                           (C) Pour (4) constables will take up equidistant
                           positions in front of the South Stand. 2he
                           sergeant will remain in the vicinity of the
                           players* tunnel throughout this duty and officers
on the track who are not Designated Officers, will
follow his example by standing and facing the
crowd at the following times:
Before kick off, half time and full tine and also
during any stoppage of play or where there is any
crowd unrest.
This will be indicated by the Sergeant leaving the
players' tunnel and standing near the touch line.
Officers on track serial duty must all constantly
monitor the crowds and be alert to the possibility
 of undue concentration of supporters which may
 lead to overcrowding or pre-empt a pitch invasion.

Police Control must be informed of any matters
giving cause for concern.

PHASE 3 - AFTER MMEH
As the ground clears, officers on this serial will
remain in location until instructed otherwise.
Where away supporters are being held back after
full time, these officers may be required to
attend that end of the ground to assist.

 emergency evacuation procedure
 In the event of such a situation arising
 (indicated at Appendix 'Al' and 'A2') then the
 constable on duty adjacent to the north
 stand/Spion Kop access route will accompany the
 Ambulance Liaison Officer (who will be standing al
 the      location) to one of the ambulances parke<
 at the side of the gymnasium which will be used ai
 the temporary Ambulance Control Vehicle.
 Police Constables will be nominated for and
 briefed as to their specific duties, by the Seria
 Sergeant at the start of duty and these details
 will be passed to Ground Control at the same time
 as radio check procedures are conducted.

 All Officers will be in possession of a radio.
                                                                               S e r ia l 2

                         SOUTH STAMP AMD OFFICIAL CAR PARK

                         PHASES 1 fc 2 (Before and During Match)
PS                       (A) 4 C o n s ta b le s w i l l p a t r o l the lower
PC           I           (u n cov ered ) a r e a , in c lu d in g th e b a r s , to
PC I• •  '     I         m a in ta in o r d e r , en su re s a f e t y e t c .
PC 525 Bevington         (B) 6 C o n s ta b le s w i l l p a t r o l in p a ir s in the
PC                       upper area o f th e South S tan d , in c lu d in g b a r s ,
PC                       to m a in ta in order and en su re s a f e t y . S p e c ia l
P C          ‘■' ‘       a t t e n t i o n t o the D i r e c t o r ' s box.
PC                   I
PC                       PHASE 3 (After Match)
PC                       P a t r o l South Stand and car park. Ensure s a f e
pc    r "“ -----         d i s p e r s a l o f s u p p o r te r s v i a P e n is to n e Road and
                         Leppings Lane. C ontact Ground C ontrol fo r
                         fu r t h e r deploym ent.

                         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                         In th e e v e n t o f such a s i t u a t i o n a r i s i n g
                         ( i n d i c a t e d a t Appendix *A l * in th e S e r i a l
                         I n s t r u c t i o n ) PC's w i l l tak e up p o s i t i o n a t the
                         i n t e r n a l p a r t i t i o n g a t e s and the e x i t g a t e s
                         a d ja cen t t o t u r n s t i l e numbers 20/ 21, 2 6 /2 7 . 29.
                         3 2 /3 3 , 37 and 42. F u rth er a c t i o n w i l l be as
                         d ir e c te d .       PC'a w i l l be nominuted fo r
                         in d i v i d u a l l o c a t i o n s at th e s t a r t o f t h i s duty
                         by the S e r i a l S ergean t and t h e s e d e t a i l s w i l l
                          be p assed to Ground C o n trol a t th e same time as
                         ra d io check p roced u res are conducted.

                          Meal d e t a i l s a t b r i e f i n g .
SOUTH STAMP - STERILE ABEA                Serial 3
PHASE I
Barriers will be placed across the access road in the
Sooth Stand car park at the rear of Pol ice Control to
prevent access by ANY supporters or vehicles to or fro#
Lappings Lane unless specifically authorised.
These barriers will be manned at a ll times.
PHASE 2
Ten minutes after natch has conaenced or when authorised
by Police Control (which ever is the later) the barriers
will be removed and pieced in the area close to the
lighting pylon to allow free access and egress.
This serial will then take up standby duties in the
gymnasium.
PHASE 3
Form a line in Leppings Lane from the ground to Eskdale
Road to Monitor supporter* as they leave the ground.
NEAL
Details at briefing.
CCKTIWGEMCY PtAH
Where a game has been classed as "all ticket* in respect
of away supporters then the s te r ile area between Leppings
Lane and the manned barriers will be used as a holding
area for non ticket holders. Officers from the Reserve
S erials and members of the Dog Section will be deployed to
assist with containment. Disposal of supporters will be
decided by the Ground Commander and will be dependant on
numbers involved.
 EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
 In the event of such a situation arising (indicated in
 Appendix 'Al' and 'A2' in the Serial Instruction), the
 Serial Sergeant will arrange the removal of the barriers
 thereby giving unrestricted access to and from Leppings
 Lane. One officer from this Serial will be nominated to
 act as Liaison Officer to the Fire Service and will take
 up a position in Leppings Lane near to the South Stand
 Service Road. A second officer will be nominated for
 similar duties and will take up a position in Pen is tone
 Road North adjacent to the South Stand car park gates.
 These officers will be briefed by Police Control and it
 will be their duty to advise the Fir# Service of the
 precis* nature and location of the emergency and give
 further assistance as necessary. The Serial Sergeant w ill
 nominate these two officers at the commencement of duty
 and inform Police Control of their identity, at the same
  time es radio check procedures are conducted.
                                                   S e r ia l 4
                    OFFICIAL CAR PARK
                      Phase 1 (Before Match)
  ?s        - — --- (A) 2 PC's will be stationed at the players
'PC                   entrance. These officers will assist the doormen in
 PC 417 111 ingwor tpreventing unauthorized access and generally
 PC                   maintain order. They will remain at these locations
 PC irn * L o d g e   until 15 minutes after kick-off.
 PC                   (B) 2 Officers will be at the ticket office to
 PC                   prevent purchase of stand or ground tickets by away
 PC                 ‘.flans. All such persons to be directed to Leppings
 PC                   Lane turnstiles.
 PC                 ] (C) PC's will patrol in pairs in the official car
 PC 2554 Hague        park to maintain order and ensure safety. Special
                      attention to the ticket office, shop and executive
                      suite. Additional attention will be given to
                      turnstile queueing and assistance given to stewards
                      in cases of disorder.
                      NOTE; The gates allowing access to the car park
                      from Penistone Road will close for vehicles 2.30 pn
                      - 3.05 pm. This will be supervised by stewards but
                      assistance will be given.

                     Phase 2 (During Match)
                     'A' and 'B' will remain on duty in the car park,
                     giving special attention to the Directors and
                     players entrances.
                     'C' South Stand - location as directed by control.

                     Phase 3 (After Match)
                     At full time supporters will be allowed to leave via
                     Leppings Lane as well as Penistone Road North. This
                     serial will patrol South Stand car park and assist
                     with safe dispersal of supporters.

                     EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
                     In the event of such a situation arising (indicated
                     at Appendix A(l) in the Serial instruction) this
                     Serial will ensure that the whole of the South Stand
                     service road is kept clear for use by emergency
                     vehicles and the safe egress of spectators.

                     Meal Details At Briefing.
                    PagggaiE BQftD TURHBTHBB HMD SPIOM KOP TOffiftQBS

PS 752 Batty        Phase 1 (Before Match)
PC 81 5 Mogul
PC 2016 Liasides    This serial will be on duty in Penistone Road North
PC 1782 Temple      outside turnstiles 43-60. This end of the ground
pc                  has been reserved for heme supporters and therefore
PC 264 Hirst        all away supporters MUST be prevented from gaining
PC 2409 Larking     access to these terraces. Supporters entering the
PC 2748 Abrahams    ground must be prevented from bringing drink,
PC 2 2 0 9 Brophy   missiles or offensive weapons into the ground and
PC 1847 BungAY      to this end, searches must be carried out.
PC 734 Thornton     officers onturnstile duty should encourage the
                     formation of orderly queues.

                    Phase 2 (During Match)

                    Enter the terraces and take up positions at rear -
                    PC's in pairs. Maintain order and ensure safety,
                    etc.

                    Phase 3 (After Match)

                    Shortly before end of game leave ground and
                    supervise SYT bus loading in Penistone Road. When
                    all supporters and bused have left, return to
                    ground for stand down.

                    Meal Details At Briefing.

                    Contingency Plan

                    In the event of large numbers of late arrivals this
                    serial will assist mounted in the formation of
                    queues in Penistone Road North. Jumbo cones have
                    been placed in Penistone Road North in the nearside
                    lane of the away from city carriageway to prevent
                    vehicles utilizing this lane in the interests of
                    road safety. Members of the reserve serials will
                    also be used to assist in this duty when necessary.
                                                               6

                      PENISTONE ROM) TURNSTHJBS AMP SPICN KDP TERRACES

(PS   2001 Burman     Phase 1 (Before Match)
 PC   PC          '
 PC   2167 Frost      This serial will be on duty in Penistone Road North
 PC   10 Mercer        outside turnstiles 61-76. This end of the ground
 PC                    has been reserved for home supporters and therefore
VC                     all away supporters MUST be prevented from gaining
1'U                    dCCetatt to UiBbe LuiiuCtaa. buppui'tu£U ttnUu.iny U h
PC 2190 Harris         ground must be prevented from bringing drink,
PC                    f(%i.ssiles or offensive weapons into the ground and
PC                     to this end, searches must be carried out.
PC                     Officers on turnstile duty should encourage the
                       formation of orderly queues.

                      Phase 2 (During Match)

                      Enter terraces and take up positions at rear - PC's
                      in pairs. Maintain order and ensure safety, etc.

                      Phase 3 (After Match)

                      Shortly before end of game, leave ground and
                      supervise SYT bus loading in Penistone Road. When
                      all supporters and buses have left, return to
                      ground for stand down.

                      Meal details at briefing.

                      Contingency Plan

                      In the event of l a r g e numbers of late arrivals,
                      this serial will assist Mounted in the formation of
                      queues in Penistone Road North. Jumbo cones have
                      been placed in p e n ia to n e Read North in the nMtfrsUlM
                      lane of the away I r a n c i t y carriageway to prevent
                      vehicles utilizing this lime in the interest of
                      road safety. Members of the Reserve Serials will
                      also be used to a s s i s t in this duty where
                      necessary.
                                                                S e r ia l 7

                            H aH SK ME RQftD TURNSTILES (M0B3H STRMD ENTRANCE)

PS 758 Morgan               Phase 1 (Before Match)
PC 60 Godley
PC 495 Pursley       This serial will be on duty in Penistone Road
PC    1 19 8         North outside turnstiles 77-88. This access route
               Goodwll1
tJU                  to t h e N u i'U t b t a iid lia a b o a ti lo u o tV w U tui iiu it *
PC    1639 Macintosh supporters and therefore all away supporters MUST
PC    346 Thompson   be prevented from gaining access to this stand.
PC                   Supporters entering the ground must be prevented
PC    d l l l Prince from bringing drink, missiles or offensive weapons
PC    513 Franc is   into the ground and to this end searches must be
PC    2289 Green     carried exit. Officers on turnstile duty should
                     encourage the formation of orderly queues.


                            Phase 2 (During Match)

                            Enter and take up positions at the rear of the
                            North Stand to assist in the maintenance of order,
                            safety etc.

                             Phase 3 (After Match)

                            At full time supporters will be allowed to leave
                            via Leppings Lane, as well as Penistone Road
                            North. This Serial will leave shortly before the
                            final whistle and form a line on the central
                            reservation of Penistone Road North facing the
                            turnstiles, to ensure orderly and safe exit by
                            supporters. Remain until area is clear.

                            Meal Details At Briefing.
                                                         Serial 8

 SPION KOP TERRACES

 Phases 1 and 2 (Before and During Match)

 1P<. h t o bf*                hci'mh'i Hip fnmpR t o the fcwrpnees lh
 puli'u. M aintain urUtir uiiU p rev en t lliw u laeh ul‘
 S u p p o r te r s.     In th e ev en t o f away s u p p o r te r s g a in in g
  Intry i n t o t h i s end o f the ground th ey w i l l be co n ta in !
 a t the extrem e sou th ern p a rt o f the t e r r a c e s and seek
 i n s t r u c t i o n s from Ground C o n tr o l as t o t h e i r d i s p o s a l .
 O f f i c e r s to m o n ito r the crowds and be a l e r t t o the
 p o e e i b i l i t y o f undue cuiu'entfHfcien tif ■u p p ot'tere whiuli
 may le a d to overcrow ding or pre-em pt a p i t c h i n v a s i o n .
 Ground C o n tr o l must be informed o f any m a tter g iv i n g
 cause f o r co n c e r n .

 Phase 3 (After Watch)

A f t e r th e f i n a l w h i s t l e , le a v e w ith s u p p o r te r s and
assem ble in P e n is t o n e Road/Leppings Lane to ensure s a fe
p assage o f f a n s . Remain u n t i l a rea i s c l e a r .

EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

In th e e v e n t o f such u u i t u a t i o n a r i s i n g , ( i n d i c a t e d at
Appendix 'A l' in the S e r i a l I n s t r u c t i o n ) , PC's w i l l tak
up p o s i t i o n a t th e e x i t g a t e s and on the e x i t r o u t e s .
F u rth er a c t i o n w i l l be as d i r e c t e d .

PC's w i l l be nominated fo r i n d i v i d u a l l o c a t i o n s a t the
s t a r t o f duty by the S e r i a l S erg ea n t and th e s e d e t a i l *
w i l l be g iv e n t o P o l i c e C o n trol a t the same time gg
check pt'ucedui'es art* conducted.

MEAL

D e ta ils at b r ie fin g .
                                                                              a w ria l H

                           NORTH STAND

PS                         Phases 1 fc 2 (Before and During Watch)
PC 1 7 9 5   K earney
ri'                                  m ImihI   (In         I w |||| pp 1M ni) u ^mIi |»y».l
PC    lOOb C a t c h p u l oM ain ta in o rd er.
PC    1668 L eckey
PC    2 2 3 6 Brown        Phase 3 ( A f t e r Match)
Pc    16 32 S m ith
PC    2212    ^ r a 88    O f f i c e r s to ta k e up p o s i t i o n s on the upper and lower
PC    1697    M yn ett    l e v e l gangways t o enuure o r d e r ly        and s a f e e x i t by
PC                          » u p p o r ttr s.
PC
                           Leave ground as sta n d c l e a r s and p a t r o l P e n ia to n e Road
                           North to en su re s a f e t y o f su p p o r te r s le a v i n g ground.

                           EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

                           In th e e v e n t o f a s i t u a t i o n a r i s i n g ( i n d i c a t e d at
                           Appendix 'A l' in th e S e r i a l O rd er), one PC w i l l take up
                           p o s i t i o n a t e x i t g a t e s ' 0 ' (P e n is t o n e Road) and 'A'
                           (L ep p in gs Lane). These PC's w i l l be nominated a t the
                           s t a r t o f each du ty by the S e r i a l S erg ea n t who w i l l g iv e
                           t h e i r d e t a i l s t o P o l i c e C o n trol a t th e same time a s rad
                           check p roced u res are co n d u cted . The rem ain in g o f f i c e r s
                           w i l l aw ait i n s t r u c t i o n s o v er the PA system o r r a d io , as
                           e v a c u a tio n may be on to the p i t c h or v i a the e x i t s .

                          MEAL

                           D e ta ils at b r ie fin g .
                                                                                           Serial 10

                                  WEST STAND AND ENCLOSURE
t'S                          Hume 1 ( b e f o r e Watch)
PC h h i B u c k i n g h a m
PC 8 1 3 O a k l e y '       (a)     4 PC's t o be l o c a t e d a t f r o n t o f Stand to
»jr                                  tifeveill in | u I I un t i e i l i f t H i t ' * ' * ! ! ff'HMI U » f i H Infill i
PC
PC 1 1 6 5 Newman            (b)     4 PC's t o p a t r o l and m a in ta in ord er -
PC 3 4 8 S t o k e s                 in c l u d i n g bar a r e a .
PC 2 1 6 6 R e e v e s
PC 2 2 2 0 B r o m l e y     (c)     2 PC's t o s u p e r v is e gangway a r e a s .
PC 2 4 3 0 K aye
PC
                             Phaae 2 ( During Match)

                                  A l l PC's in S tan d .

                                  Phase 3 ( A f t e r Watch)

                                  Remain in Stand u n t i l c l e a r , then t o r e a r e n c lo s u r e
                                  f o r d u t i e s w ith away fa n s .

                                  In th e e v e n t o f away s u p p o r te r s b ein g h e ld back f o r a
                                  s h o r t p e r io d a f t e r the f i n a l w h i s t l e , then t h i s S e r i a l
                                  w i l l en su re s u p p o r te r s remain in th e s ta n d u n t i l
                                  d ep artu re a u t h o r is e d by Ground C o n t r o l.

                                  Meal d e t a i l s a t b r i e f i n g .

                                  EMERGENCY AMD EVACUATION PROCEDURE

                                  In th e e v e n t o f such a s i t u a t i o n a r i s i n g ( i n d i c a t e d at
                                  Appendix 'A l' in the S u r i a l O r d e r), 1 PC w i l l take up
                                  p o s i t i o n a t each o f the emergency e x i t s at the fr o n t
                                  t'ui'iiui'B ul* the tilattil, The utliei' ulTluei'S oil lliifi
                                  S e r i a l w i l l a s s i s t ut the s t a i r s .

                                 Fu rth er a c t i o n w i l l be as d i r e c t e d by C o n tr o l. PC's
                                 w i l l be nominated f o r i n d iv i d u a l l o c a t i o n s a t the
                                 s t a r t o f d u ty and t h e s e d e t a i l s w i l l be g iv e n to
                                 P o l i c e C o n tr o l a t the same time a s r a d io check
                                 p roced u res a r e con d u cted .

                                 This Stand is for use by away supporters only.
       urfkiNi   WWip




LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES           SBff.lS.1 Jr.
                                               *
Phase I (Before Match)
This serial will take up a position within the
perimeter gates and fencing giving access to
turnstiles A - G. Supporters entering the groin
must be prevented frcxn bringing drink, missiles
and offensive weapons into the ground ami to
this end uucuciiuu itiuut be carried out. OfJricen
to monitor the barrier between South Stand accei
road and turnstiles to prevent supporters
climbing into barrier and scaling wall into
ground.
Phaae 2 (During match)
Refreshments in gymnasium and further deployment
frcm Ground Control.
Phase 3 (After match)
This serial will form a line in Leppings Lane
from Eskdale Road to Leppings Lane traffic
island to monitor supporters as they leave the
ground.
MEAL
Details at briefing.
OCNTDCEMCY PLAN
On games classified as 'all ticket1 in respect
of away supporters, then should the attendance
of non-ticket holders prove problematic, this
serial will secure the external gates in the
half open position thereby creating restricted
access. Police officers frcrn this serial will
check away supporters to ensure they possess
t ie t e t i for the gone. Any n orK ictet holdets
will be escorted to the nearest one of two
holding areas (behind Gate 'A' or the South
Stand access road service area) for containment.
Disposed of such persons will be dependant upon
overall numbers and will be decided by the
Ground Commander after kick off. Should late
arrivals prove to be a problem then the outer
gates will be secured in an identical manner to
above to allow supporters to access the turnstil
area in manageable numbers whilst simultaneously
                                                                                 S e r ia l 12

                                   LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES

                                   PHASE 1

PS                                 T h is s e r i a l w i l l be on duty i n s i d e th e ground
PC                         |        a t th e r e a r o f t u r n s t i l e s A - G and ensure
PC                                  th a t away s u p p o r te r s do n ot e n t e r th e ground
PC 11H S Ko x                             po8BP8HIon of* items p r o h ib it e d by the
     I                         1   ground v u i e s Ibuniitid Ulittttiitttt, W B t t p u t i B u tu) U4-
PC                                  a l c o h o l . Two o f f i c e r s to a s s i s t stew a rd s at
PC           ,                      South S id e o f e n c lo s u r e to p rev en t s u p p o r te r s
PC       776C la v e s              u sin g pens 1 and 2 . Two o f f i c e r s to a s s i s t
PC       f                          stew a rd s a t North S id e o f e n c l o s u r e t o preven t
PC         '           I             s u p p o r t e r s u s in g pens 5» 6 and 7 .
PC                             I
     ^ if H We b s t e r           PHASE 2
PC 2 5 3 0      L o c k le y             ‘
                                    F u rth er deployment from Ground C o n tr o l.

                                    PHASE 3

                                    In th e e v e n t o f away s u p p o r te r s b ein g h e ld
                                    buck f o r a Bhort p e r io d a f t e r th e f i n a l
                                    w h i s t l e , then t h i s s e r i a l w i l l en su re
                                    s u p p o r te r s remain in the sta n d u n t i l d eparture
                                    i s a u t h o r is e d by Ground C o n t r o l. O th erw ise as
                                    r e q u ir e d by Ground C o n t r o l .

                                     MEAL
                                     D e ta ils at b r ie fin g .

                                     CONTINGENCY PLAN

                                     Where games have been c l a s s i f i e d ' a l l t i c k e t '
                                     in r e s p e c t o f away s u p p o r t e r s , th en f o ll o w i n g
                                     l i a i s o n w llli Ilia Club, llis d e tilsib h llisy bw
                                     taken to a llo w th e s e s u p p o r te r s a c c e s s to the
                                     ground on payment.

                                     Should th a t bu the c a s e then such s u p p o r te r s
                                     w i l l be d i r e c t e d to th e e l e v a t e d s e c t i o n
                                     (pen 7 ) and members o f t h i s s e r i a l w i l l be
                                     d e t a i l e d to s u p e r v is e same.
                                                                              ttolaJuli
                       COACH RECEPTION

PS 4 5 4 Chapman Phase 1 ( B e f o r e Match)
PC 591 Tune
PC 261 C ooper             Standby as a S e r i a l in Leppings Lane near e n tr a n c e s
t*Cl'JYY I'o f LIi I n tu gruuuU Lu owti 11 u iT lv a l u f cuacttou, uupoi'VAuo
PC 1 9 4 9 S t o r e y u n load in g and e n tr y i n t o ground. AWAY s u p p o r te r s
PC 1 5 8 4 C o l l i e r j n u s t WOT be a llo w e d to wander away from the immediati
PC 1 9 6 2 F i o r e - v i c i n i t y o f th e ground - th ey sh ou ld be d i r e c t e d inti
           H ir st          the grou n d .
PC 2 7 8 9 T i n d l e
PC 2 9 6 3 SimpsonThis S e r i a l w i l l assist the S e r i a l s u p e r v is in g
PC 3 3 4 1 Mi t s h e l a p p i n g * tuna t u r n s t i l e s when not engaged 011 eoneft
                            r e c e p t io n m a t t e r s .

                        Phase 2 (D uring Match)

                        Enter ground - r e s e r v e d u t i e s as d i r e c t e d .

                        Phase 3 ( A f t e r Match)

                        S h o r t ly b e fo r e th e end       o f the game le a v e the ground
                        and tak e up a p o s i t i o n         in Leppings Lane/Middlewood
                        Road f o r deployment by               C o n tr o l as r e q u ir e d . Do WOT
                        e s c o r t away su p p o r te r s     to t r a i n s / c o a c h e s u n le s s
                        i n s t r u c t e d by C o n tr o l.

                        Meal d e t a i l s a t b r i e f i n g .
                                                                              S e r ia l 1*

                           PBNISTOMB ROAD/LKPPINGS LAKE

                           PHASE 1 (B e fo r e Match)

                           T h is S e r i a l w i l l be r e s p o n s i b l e f o r manning the
                           b a r r i e r s to be p la c e d a t the mouths o f the
                           f o ll o w i n g roads to p reven t e n tr y by away
PR
HU           D ru ry
PC                         1.    P e n is to n e Road N orth/V ere Road
PC   552 H ' s h o r n e   2.    P e n is to n e Road N o r t h /P i e ld in g Road
PC   2932 B r a d le y     3.    Leppings Lane/Vere Road
PC   1934 S m ith          4.    Leppings L a n e /P ie ld in g Road
PC   139 L a n g le y      5.    Leppings L an e/S h en ston e Road
PC
PC   1239 R a y b o u ld
PC
                           the p a s t c o n s id e r a b le damage has been cau sed by
PC   4 6 9 Shaw
                           groups o f s u p p o r t e r s .

                           PHASE 2 (D uring Match)

                           T h is S e r i a l w i l l remain on p a t r o l throughout
                           the match to p a t r o l the area bounded by
                           Leppings L a n e /P e n is to n e Road North to th e
                           ground. A d d i t i o n a l l y , th e b a r r i e r s a t both
                           ends o f Vere Road w i l l be manned t o p rev en t
                           a c c e s s i n t o t h i s road.

                           PHASE 3 ( A f t e r Match)

                           The b a r r i e r s s i t u a t e d a s a t Phase 2 w i l l be
                           manned u n t i l the area i s c le a r e d o f a l l
                           f o o t b a l l s u p p o r t e r s . V e h ic l e s from s i d e roads
                           w i l l n o t be a llo w e d i n t o Leppinga Lana u n t i l
                           ttU s u p p o r te r s ht*ve e x p e r t ftFe&t

                           Meal d e t a i l s a t b r i e f i n g .
                                                                                      arlm l 15
                   u m m umAxxmm urn wmsm
PS                 FHUSE 1 (Before Etatch)
PC                 Barriera vd.ll be placed at and near the junction o f
PC                 Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane for the purpose o f guiding
PC                 heme suppartere along Catchbar Lane and Parkside Hoed with
PC[                a view to entering the ground via access points in
t<W                          t v * * ) n><« m u   n t   i»< « « - » it # it   w4i)   im w *

PC                 be aUowKi to approach the ground via the Leppings Ur»
PC                 turnstiles. Two way vehicular traffic w ill continue.
PC
PC                 Two officers w ill roan each of the static points showi at
PC                 'A' to 'H' on the attached plan. Officers at points ’A',
PC                 'B' and 'G' will by in possession of loud hellers.
HU                 AtkUticiialiy, Uw I'uUoe Land Hover w ill fcw perked on the
PC                 footpath m uhowi ui ttu atUched plan and i t s public
PC                 address system will be utilized.
PC                 Awqy suppartere w ill be allowed access once vetted.
PC 7 8 B o o t h
                   PHASE 2 (During Efatch)
                   Ten minutes after kick off a* when pedestrians have
                   subsided, vtfiichever i s the later, this Serial w ill take
                   refreshments in the gynnasiun after authority received
                   frcm match control.

                   fflftSB 3 (After Match)
                   For deployment as directed ty match control.

                   MBRL - Details of briefing.

                   ocwnxacY plan

                   Should late arrivals or run ticket holders prove
                   problematic then this Serial must contact Polioe Control
                   in aster time tli? GmUfntency Plan m oudlrMd at AuttnUx
                   'A5' can be ioplaimnted. This Serial w ill m e i n In situ
                   as the need to divert hone sMpporters w ill m a i n a
                   crucial factor.
                            MIDQLEWOQO HQAD




            USD QM S8   %
            GIVING ACCESS
            TO SCHOOL
                                    U2PP1NGS LANE




I
I
    CA30JBAR LANS
                                                    GAIQIBAR LANS




                                    1£PPINGS LANE
                                                           No 156


                                 Police
                                 land Hover
                               LKPPIWCS LAWE/PEHISTONE HOAD WORTH                          S eria l

PS    2620    C r o p le y                                  H a fr t)
PC    18 4   G eeson          B a r r ie r s w i l l be p la c e d a l o n g s id e th e f o o tp a th
PC    2127    Smart           0(1 th e ***ound s i d e o f Law B ro th ers Garage,
PC    2778    Price           Leppings Lane, and on th e o p p o s i t e s i d e o f the
PC    761    Richards         ro a d *
PC    1845    Zo m m ' l d    Two o f f i c e r s w i l l man each o f t h e s e two
l>C                           f i l t e r s and erit;oura§e s u p p o rter * to keep tv
PC    1 6 2 0 P a t t 1s o n tlM* f o o t p a t h in ths I n t e r e s t s o f road s a f e t y .
PC    2 7 1 1 P a t t i s o n Th* remainder o f the S e r i a l w i l l man the mouth
PC                            o f L eppings Lane f o r th e purpose o f g u id in g
PC                            home s u p p o r te r s a lo n g P e n is to n e Road North
                              w ith a view t o e n t e r i n g th e ground v i a a c c e s s
                              p o in t s a t th a t l o c a t i o n . On no accou n t w i l l
                              home s u p p o r t e r s be a llo w e d t o approach the
                              ground v i a Leppings Lane t u r n s t i l e s . Two way
                              v e h i c u l a r t r a f f i c w i l l c o n t in u e . The S e r i a l
                              S erg ea n t w i l l be in p o s s e s s i o n o f a loud
                              h a ile r .
                              Away s u p p o r te r s w i l l be a llo w e d a c c e s s once
                              v etted .

                               PHASE 2 {During match)
                               Ten minutes a fte r kick o ff or when pedestrian
                               flow has subsided, whichever is the la te r,
                               this S erial w ill take refreshment in the
                               gymnasium a fte r authority received from Police
                               Control.

                               PHASE 3 (After Match)
                               T h is S e r i a l w i l l take up a p o s i t i o n a t
                               Leppings Lane t r a f f i c i s l a n d t o en su re the
                               s a f e and o r d e r ly d i s p o s a l o f s u p p o r te r s and
                               p rev en t any c l a s h o f s u p p o r t e r s .

                               OMH'lNflMlflY 1‘I.AM
                              Should late arrivals or non-ticket holders
                              prove problematic, then this Serial must
                              contact Police Control in order that the
                              Contingency Plan as outlined at Appendix 'A5'
                              may be implemented.
                              T h is S e r i a l w i l l remain in s i t u a s th e need to
                              d i v e r t home s u p p o r te r s w i l l remain a c r u c i a l
                              factor.
                                                                       Serial 17

                        PUBLIC ORDER - PARKS1DB ROAD/CATCHBAR LAMB

P S 2 0 9 1 H i g h t o n Phaaa 1 (B a fo r e Match)
PC2298 C o o p e r 4            z - i ax—z ------------- 1
hm          McKewanp ^ a wj j j p a t r o l in p a i r s in Parkaida Road/Catchbar
FJ|,               I.*»*•». MNiiifeMH             Mill* pt'MVMHb Mil# tUftMU Ml*
            „            lupportara.
P C 521     Parton
PC 2 7 3 9 L o n g      ?haae 2 (D urin g Match)

                         «ower l e v e l o f South Road - m a in ta in o r d e r .

                        i»haae 3 (After Match)

                        Ten m in u tes b e fo r e e n d o f match resume p a t r o l in
                        l o c a t i o n s e t o u t f o r Phase 1.

                         MEAL

                         Details at briefing.
                                                                                S e r ia l 18

                          PUBLIC ORDER - PBMSTQMK ROAD

P S 1 7 9 6 R ^ n ^ h a n J h a a e 1 (B e fo r e Match)
r f i l                      .    •

PU l                      WJ •             wil.tfwi iti          4»» HmnnLutt» Huiid i*i*ow
PC2191      L l e w ' y n B r a d f le ld Road t o P a r k sid e Road.  They w i l l m a in ta in
PC]                      ord er and p re v e n t any c l a s h o f s u p p o r t e r s .
PC3135 Burnlees
P C 2 9 6 0 A l e x ' e r P a r t i c u l a r a t t e n t i o n w i l l be p a id to p u b l ic h o u se s .
PC8 93       H a i g h Any undue b u ild up i n s i d e p u b l ic h ou ses t o be reporte<
PC782       H e m s ' t h t o Ground C o n tr o l.
PC3027 Tagg
                          Phase 2 (D uring Match)

                          R efreshm ents i n gymnasium and sta n d b y .

                          Phase 3 ( A f t e r Match )

                         Ten m in u tes b e fo r e end o f match resume p a t r o l in
                         l o c a t i o n s e t o u t f o r Phase 1.
                 MOBILE - CALL SIGH 'TANGO 1'
PS 681 Hill
PC1680 Coates   Phase 1 and 3 (Before and After Match}
PC
PC
                Patrol city side of ground (Penlstone Road) payin*
                iMM'iiuuiei* niintiiiuii Lu puuliu houatea eta, where hun
                supporters gather * maintain order. Any undue build
                up of supporters inside public houses to be reported
                to Ground Control.

                Phase 2 (During Match}

                Remain on patrol around ground.

                Meal details at briefing.

                CONTINGENCY PI.AM

                Should it be necessary to create a holding area at
                the rear of Gate 'A' in respect of non-ticket
                holders, then this Serial will be deployed and will
                utilise the portable barriers in situ for
                containment. Directions for disposal of supporters
                will be given by the Ground Commander and will be
                dependant upon numbers involved. Officer* from
                reserve serials and Dog Section will be deployed to
                SSSiSt •
                       MOBILE - CALL SIGH ’TANGO* 2                   S w i l l 20

PS1438 Carter          PHASE 1 (Before Natch)
PC1940 Pattison        Patrol Halifax Road paying attention to public
PC718 Pont             houses and supermarkets selling intoxicant*.
PC93                   Where possible prevent entry of supporter* into
P C 1 5 1*0 Harwood    off licence premise*. Also •••1st in parking
                       o f away *ui>|mrt«p« cu«<!ha« in Hal Iran Read*
                       Any undue build up of supporter* in*ids public
                       house* to be reported to Ground Control.

                       PHASE 2 (During Match)
                       Remain on patrol around ground.

                       PHASE 3 (After Match)
                       Patrol in Halifax Road. Be in this vicinity
                       from 4.30 pm to await first supporters who
                       leave ground early. Coaches will not be
                       allowed to leave individually. They will
                       travel as a convoy under Police escort.

                      Meal details at briefing.

                      EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
                      In th* event of such a situation arising
                      (indicated at Appendix 'Ai' and 'A2' in the
                      Serial Order) the Serial Sergeant and one
                      Police Constable will attend Niagara Sports
                      Club to act as Reception Officers in the
                      initial stages should Operation Support be
                      brought into effect.

                      The remainder of the Serial will remain in
                      Penistone Road North adjacent to the gymnasium
                      g«t« to Msiat South Yerkihir® MetrepoUCin
                      Affitjuiiiuiti Stji'viu« vtrtiiuiei tu auu***   mi
                   RBEBBKVK

                  Wieae S erials form ths nucleus fo r the
                  iinplsowntation of any of th» contino^nrv «!»«-
                  cutlined in Appendix ^ ' .                        P1"*

    1 Inspector        S erials w ill be required to e rect aid man
    40   PC       ^ l l T ^       barrl“ 8 —


                  tte         Wi 11    re(*uired to erect and man
                  the portable b arriers across           Tana
                  the ground side of the bridge.

                  S n S Siea
                  wrcroA  l S filte
                               ^nS  rinLg ’ S * ' l i 1to»•the
                                            through         W external
                                                               t to anabK

                  turratile^areas?*** *" **" ^              * •"
                  Should a problem arise in Fsnistone              urn-t-K
                                  ute ^ - i T S i s s s
                  form orderly queues then the nunber of S erials
                                               wiu           « * ■ **-



*
                                                      APPENDIX 'C'

DOG SECTION

General Policy Statement

Members o f the Dog S e c tio n w i l l m a in ly be used as a d e te rre n t
b efore and a f t e r the match on the ro u te s to and from the
stadium , a t the coach p a rk s , t r a n s it van p a rk s , ra ilw a y
s t a t io n , p r iv a te v e h ic le p a rk in g areas and e s c o rtin g
s u p p o rte rs to and from the stadium .

They w i l l n o t n o rm a lly be used in p u b lic o rd e r e itu a tio n e but
the Ground Commander has the o v e r - r id in g d is c r e tio n to use
dogs in such circum stances where he fe e ls a s e rio u s p u b lic
o rd e r s it u a t io n may o ccu r.

PHASE 1

Dog S e ctio n O ffic e r s w i l l be in p a irs on m obile p a tr o l around
a l l areas o f the ground. Where a f o o t b a ll su p p o rte rs t r a in
a r r iv e s a t Wadsley B ridge S ta tio n then Dog S e c tio n O ffic e rs
w i l l form p a rt o f the e s c o rt from s t a t io n to Leppings Lane.
Numbers re q u ire d f o r t h i s duty w i l l be a t the d is c r e tio n o f
the In s p e c to r/S e rg e a n t in charge. To a tte n d and a s s is t in any
in s ta n ce s o f d is o rd e r around the ground and areas le a d in g to
the ground.

PHASE 2

Remain on p a t r o l. Two m obiles ( to be nominated), w i l l where
the non-emergency co n tin g e n cy p la n i s p u t in t o o p e ra tio n
r e p o rt to Gate A in Leppings Lane f o r fu r t h e r in s t r u c t io n s .

 PHASE 3

 A s s is t in the e s c o rt o f away su p p o rte rs to coaches, tr a in s a t
 Coal Road o r wherever v i s i t i n g coaches are assembled fo r
 d e p a rtu re . P a tro l area and m o n ito r home s u p p o rte rs away from
 ground to c i t y c e n tre .

 MANPOWER DEPLOYMENT
 D eta ils   at   b rie fin g
                                                          APPENDIX 'C'

MOUNTED DEPARTMENT

Phase 1

1.     Where a f o o t b a ll su p p o rte rs t r i a n a r r iv e s a t Wadsley
       B ridg e S ta tio n then mounted o f f ic e r s w i l l form p a rt o f
       the e s c o rt from th a t s ta t io n to Leppings Lane t u r n s t i le s .
       Numbers re q u ire d f o r t h is d u ty w i l l be a t the d is c r e tio n
       o f the In s p e c to r Mounted Department.

2.     Queues - A s s is t in the fo rm a tio n o f o r d e r ly queues around
       the ground and r e g u la tin g numbers around the t u r n s t i le


3.     To a tte n d where p ra c tic a b le and a s s is t in any in sta n c e s
       o f d is o rd e r around the ground.

        The In s p e c to r in charge, in c o n s u lta tio n w ith the ground
        commander, w i l l deploy h is resources around the ground as
        i s re q u ire d .

Phase 2

Standby d u tie s w it h in ground; should the contingency p la n (non­
emergency) be put in t o o p e ra tio n , mounted o f f ic e r s w i l l a s s is t by
assem bling a t Gate A, Leppings Lane f o r fu r t h e r in s t r u c t io n s .

Phase 3

A s s is t in e s c o rt o f away su p p o rte rs to coaches, t r a in s a t Coal Road
o r wherever v i s i t i n g coaches are assembled f o r d e p a rtu re . P a tr o l
area and m o n ito r the d is p e rs a l o f s u p p o rte rs . Stand down to sta b le s
u t N iagara.

MANPOWER DEPLOYMENT


D eta ils   to   be g i v e n   at   b rie fin g
                                SOUTH YO RKSHIR t P O U C i                                  ^
                                                              Ref:            B/DHQ/BLM/PM
    From:     Chief Superintendent 'B ' Division              Station/Dept:   BARNSLEY
    T«-                                                       Date:
    lo-       Deputy Chief Constable                                     18 August 1989


            SUBJECT:       CONFIDENTIAL
                           RE OPERATIONAL ORDER SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY v NORWICH




              Sir
              I refer to our discussion of the 17 August concerning the above
              subject and forward herewith a copy of the original Operational Order
              for the match scheduled between Sheffield Wednesday and Norwich City
              on Saturday 19 August 1989.
              In general, the Order is relatively comprehensive and covers most of
              the aspects covered in the Taylor Enquiry, but in my view does not go
              far enough sofar as contingency plans are concerned. An example of
              this can be found at Appendix A (5), which indicates contingency plans
              for non-ticket holders    and under paragraph 1(a) and (b) indicates
              containment areas for non-ticket holders with a comment "disposal of
              such persons will depend upon overall numbers and will be decided by
              the Ground Commander after kick-off". Whilst this is correct, there
              are no plans as to what the Ground Commander will do with them.
              (NOTE: I have since made arrangements with Chief Inspector Beal for
              such plans to be available in Ground Control).
              An aspect of the Order which caused particular concern was the fact
              that under the Command structure, Inspector Bennett is shown as being
              in charge of Sector 3 with Serials 10 and 11 and Inspector Sykes is
              shown as being in charge of Sector 4 with Serials 12 and 13.        On
              examination of the Serials it will be seen that that situation will
              give Inspector Bennett control of one Serial inside the ground and one
              Serial outside the ground. Similar arrangements will be in being for
              Inspector Sykes.    I have now amended the Order to show Inspector
              Bennett having responsibility for two Serials inside the ground, one
              in the West Stand and one in the Leppings Lane enclosure and Inspector
              Sykes two Serials outside the ground, one on Coach reception and one
              on external turnstyle duties. This particular aspect was mentioned by
              Lord Justice Taylor when dealing with overlap of Command structure.
              In dealing with the body of the Order which deals with Emergency
              Services under Appendix A (2), comment is made regarding the Fire
              Service.   In capital letters and underlined, it says "ON NO ACCOUNT
              SHOULD FIRE APPLIANCES BE DIRECTED INTO THE GYMNASIUM ENTRANCE. THIS
              AREA MUST BE RESERVED FOR A MB U LANCES". I feel that this is ambiguous
              in that if a Fire Tender was required at the North Stand for emergency
              purposes, then it should be allowed into the entrance. What the Order
              should say is that they should not be allowed to park in the hatched
              reserved area for Ambulance vehicles. (NOTE: This has been amended).



Gen/2
                                                                     2




On the instructions for Serial 8 it indicates duties in connection
with the Spion Kop terraces and suggests that if there is a clash of
supporters, ie visiting supporters entering the home supporters area,
then they should be contained in the extreme "southern" part of the
terraces. This is not practical and would cause extreme difficulties
in that if being taken to that point, then if removed would have to be
escorted around the perimeter track thereby seeking support of their
colleagues and in fact they should be taken to the extreme "northern"
part of the terraces where they can be removed with no difficulty.
(NOTE: This has been amended in the Order).
Other than those general points, I have caused amendments to
contingency plans to indicate that where action is to be taken,
contingency plans are held in Ground Control and will be dealt with by
the Officer in Command.
I forward this report and copy Order for your information, please.




B L Mole
Chief Superintendent

                                                           <
             SYMPTOMS, SIGNS & TREATMENT OF
                 COMPRESSION OF THE CHEST



Compression of the Chest:

A person whose chest is crushed does not breathe
correctly.   The chest cannot rise and fall and the
body is deprived of oxygen.


Symptoms and Signs:

The casualty becomes confused and distressed.
Difficulty   in breathing   - the rate and        depth
increase.
Breathing may become noisy with snoring or gurgling.
Possible frothing at the mouth.  If a lung is damaged
this may be blood stained.
Blueness of the face and lips.
Unconsciousness.
Breathing stops.

Treatment:

Remove the cause and ensure adequate fresh air.
Open the airway.
If no breathing commence resuscitation.
If   no    heart   beat   commence   external     chest
compressions.                                         |
Seek medical aid as soor> as possible.
TELEPHONE:                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                     POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                             SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P HAYES QPM LLB MA
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          DCC/JEL
                                                                18 August 1989

R Pensam Esq FCIS MBIM
Solicitor
City of Sheffield Metropolitan
  District
Administration & Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH




Dear Mr Pensam

INTERIM REPORT OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

Thank you for your letter of 9 August 1989 concerning the recommendations
contained in the above Report.

Regarding the specific questions raised in relation to the various
recommendations, I can inform you as follows


       a•    Recommendations 3, 6 , 5. 8 . 9, 10, 24. 26. 29. 37 and 38

       In accordance with recommendation four a written agreement has been
       completed between the police and both Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
       United Football Clubs, which makes reference to all the recommendations
       above - copies of which are attached.  For your information copies have
       already been sent to the Chief Executive, Mr Podmore.

       In pursuance of -recommendation 26 of the Report, the Chief Constable,
       Mr Peter Wright CBE OStJ CBIM, has nominated me as the Chief Officer who
       is to liaise with the management of each of the South Yorkshire football
       clubs and local authorities concerned in respect of the safety and
       control of crowds.

       I have formed an implementation team comprising senior police officers
       who regularly act as police ground commanders at football grounds in the
       County, to discharge those of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations which
       fall to the police. This important task requires of the police a
       policy across the whole Force area to ensure consistency and simplicity
       and avoid complexity and confusion.

       The primary concern of all of us is the safety of the public who attend
       football matches in South Yorkshire.  I look forward to continued co­
       operation and liaison between ourselves to this end.
R Pensam Esq FCIS MBIM                -   2   -                   18 August 1989


     b.   Recommendation 6

     This recommendation did not fall within the first phase of
     implementation.

     However, we are in the process of completing a training video which will
     deal amongst other matters with crowd numbers, crowd density, what to
     look for in terms of distress and, crowd dynamics generally. Until this
     is available we are using still photographs to this same end.

     I have had produced a number of laminated cards which set out simply the
     signs to look for in terms of crowd distress and these will be available
     to the stewards and police officers concerned with monitoring spectators
     before, during and after each game.


     c.   Recommendations 27 and 28

     These recommendations relate to the police Operational Order in respect
     of each match and have been fully implemented prior to the commencement
     of the 1989/90 football season (19 August 1989).


     d.   Recommendation 30

     Work has already been commenced and a survey completed with regard to the
     existing CCTV facilities together with positive recommendations regarding
     the re-siting of certain cameras, the provision of additional cameras,
     improvements in light intensification and other matters in respect of all
     grounds in South Yorkshire and certain of these have application in
     Sheffield.

     These need to be discussed with the clubs concerned and I will up-date
     you when these discussions have taken place.

     Additionally we have completed a survey of the existing turnstile
     arrangements and the issues in this connection raised by this
     recommendation will be the subject of negotiations and again I will bring
     you up-to-date when there is something to report.


     e.   Recommendations 31, 32, 33 and 34

     These recommendations did not fall within the first phase of
     implementation, ie, not required to be completed before the start of the
     1989/90 football season, but the present systems in operation at each of
     the grounds is now under urgent review.


     f.   Recommendation 35

     I am already in close liaison with the other two emergency services, each
     of whom has nominated a senior officer to manage this. Those persons are
     (i) in respect of the Ambulance Service - Assistant Chief Ambulance
     Officer, Mr Morley; and (ii) in respect of the Fire Service - Assistant
     Chief Fire Officer, Mr Seaman. Chief Superintendent Broomhead
     (Operations & Traffic) will perform this function for the police.
R Pensam Esq FCIS MBIM                                          - 3 -            18 August 1989


     We have agreed that minimally we should meet twice yearly separate from
     the ground certification meetings or the advisory group and more
     frequently if required.


     g.     Recommendation 36

     The information contained in the above recommendation will from now on be
     included in the police Operational Orders prepared before each football
     match. Copies of the Orders are to be supplied to the emergency services
     clu   ^ 6 a S t   ufilTSS   G SyS   O S —G I T S   C flB   SVS n   l.   •



     Nominated officers have been identified in both the Fire and Ambulance
     Services to receive these Orders and furthermore to be up-dated should
     new information become available before the commencement of any match.

     I of course have the precise details should you require them but this
     would seem to be a matter outside the information on the Ground Safety
     Certificate except in descriptive terms as undoubtedly over time the
     personalities will change.


I note with interest the urgency with which you view these matters and find
comfort in this.

I look forward to close, constructive and continued liaison and to meeting you
personally whenever this is possible.

Yours sincerely




Enclosure
   AGREEMENT BETWEEN

rIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL

         AND THE

 toy,TV VOSV^’J TT”   ©OT TCP
                          ► -C * v ’■ i t t e n                  agreement between South Y o r k s h i r e                                     P o lice         (h e re a fte r
    In is     d o c u me nt i s a v ^ i t t e n                  a5 i e - lc l‘ L
                                            T, i •     >\      c              c i r i Uc-" "■ e s ds v F o o t D a i l C l u o                                ( h e . =a-
    _ s r aT- _ c.r; i-o pc            'The P o l i c e ) ar.a i . r . s . . . £ - a ------ ------ .




                                                                                                                                                     15    * —, — • ’     1 Cl £ C
                                                             ^       ’-*-*** c b o ^ o ^ s h S c a c i u n D i s a s t e r                   c-      iw r-r * - -




      v . . . - - - . - - Capa c i t i e s      fo r Terraces

     IThe C l u b w i l l              be r e s p o n s i b l e       for      lim itin g         t h e number o f                      spectators               e.v-e.-r.g

                                                                                            _ - v - -----   c , - £- - - v              fi-u re           assessed           in
      ea c h       s e l f   -contained            pen o r         area      to     u..~                    c --- - - - -




                                                                                               m -'"-srised              svstem v h i c h                  records            the
        —_ c p i „ v         --- ’ 1         “ '“ i s   b”       means c f         the

                                                                                    ach t u r n s t i l e .
       number o f               persons passing                    tnrougn         ea>_.



                                                                                     ■      j_ room when a p a r t i c u l a r                            p en o r         area      j.s
        The C l u b w i i i              in ic tm       i..*.- ?•---------

            rproachirig               ca p a city.           The C l u b w i l l           be r e s p o n s i b l e          fo r        c lo sin g          o ff       fu rth e r



•
                                                                                       . _                               -■ =                      r c be r e a c h e d .
^                  co ~r, 5 r,*-. o r a r e a when i t s                           maximum
         -                                                                          sions            ^ ai ^ - --Cr 'u- ii i*. ii epc
                                                                                                nave a                               in
                                                                                                                                   s m                t.v..ixw
                                                                                                                                                         "hi s r e g a r d ,
         P o lice         a c c e p t The C i u b may on o cc a

                                                           i l l     provide             assistance             if     necessary.
         th e re fo re ,             The P o l i c e      w



                                                                                                                  ----          r ,:    r          ground           E3V     C r i S ’ fi
                     i.                        nr •         d e n ’ * ' 01         uCCSSS        lO    a.   j    i-1ci - -         *•   *          c>
                   pOilCG              G L C S p t L i;U I- UC.* — ~ —
            i:.c
                                                                               t   of     spectators                 so e x c l u d e d            and The P o l i c e w i l l
            p u b lic      o r d e r problems              in      respec

            ^renare             co n tingency plans                  to   deal w ith            such s i t u a t i o n s




            F illin g a n d            M onitoring               ie rra ce s

                                           crovide           on t n e     per_me_er             ;r:c x      a rew ard                       fo r    ea c h     pen oi
                    l   .-u d    w
te rra ce d     area.          The   sole      duty      of   these        stewards,          wno w i l l      be      in   aad itxon         to




                                               .r. r e s p e c t     or    escr. g a t e      m     tne ps..




overcrowam g .




 at   a ll    t i m e s when s p e c t a t o r s         a r e on t h e         terraces,          w ill    be a u t h o r i s e d     as a b ov e .

 Each w i l l         be i n    possession o f            a p o lic e        radio      m     d ire c t     cor.t-c.        » i-     p ci_.e

 ground c o n t r o l          and w i l l     be i d e n t i f i a b l e       by a d i s t i n c t i v e     coloured            tabard.




 The s t e w a r d s      checking the             c r ow d f o r         overcrowding            or d i s t r e s s    w in       n o t be

 issued w i t h          p o lice     ra d io s    but    the       p o lic e      o ffic e rs     on t h e g a t e s       and p e r i m e t e r

 track w i l l         communicate to              p o lice        g r o u n d c o n t r o l any r e l e v a n t        m a tte r brougnt            to

 th e ir      a tte n tio n     by t h e s e      stewards.




  Cutting Eq.




                                                  necessarv.               This      c u ttin g     equ i pm en t      w i ^- l   be o p e r a tec
  number s       01     spectators

  bv e m p l o y e e s o f The C l u b who w i l l                   be t r a i n e d    in      its   use.       The use o t           such

  equipment w i l l            be a t     th e d i s c r e t i o n        o f th e    nom inated           senior      p o lice      o ffic e r    who

  w ill      be t h e    o ffic e r     in charge o f               p o lic in g     the event.
t




 L ia iso n

Before        eac h m a t ch b o t h p a r t i e s         to   th is    asreecer.t w i I I            lia is e     ir.




       iv )           cne number and l o c a t i o n            of   tu rn s tile s     to        be made a v a i l a b l e




       v i;       wr. ere t i c k e t s       are   used,       tnat     cne i n f o r m a t i o n     on t h o s e       tic k e ts




                  spectators             to   the   ground.




at    the ground.              It   is    tnererore        e sse n tia l     The C l u b p r o v i d e         a telephone             lin k

between        the      re fe re e 's     room and t h e        p o lice     control         r oom .




ihe   pG i.cs         nave p r e p a r e d     c o n t i n g e n c y p-^ans f o r     tne     event       of      emergencv s e r v i c e s

being      ca lle d      to   the    ground.         T he se i n c l u d e     routes        of     access,        rendezvous

p o in ts,     a c c e s s ib ility      w ith in    the    g r o u n d and r o u t e s       o f egress.             The P o l i c e w i l l

lia is e      w ith    The C l u b c o n c e r n i n g     these        arrangem ents whenever                    these     plans       are

amended o r           as o t h e r w i s e    acD roD riace.
 t




The C h i e f   C onstable   of   South Y o r k s h i r e   P o lice   has n o m i n a t e d h i s   Deputy,




yr.i h
      AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

               AND THE

    qpitttu   vop.KSHIRE POLICE
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

       ^     --    -e           *-■-    Sheffield United Football Club (hereafter




                                       rim Retort of the Inquiry held by The Rt He

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989




 Ihe agreement between The Police ana ^r.e w l u c     1.3   cS    I O i i O w S »'




Maximum Capacities for Terraces



 each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

 accordance with recommendation two or tne Interim Report.




 The Club will do this by means of the computerised system                     w h i c h     reccras the

 number of persons passing through each turnstile.                The Spion Kop is divided

 into two pens.    One pen is entered via turnstiles in Jonn Street, tne otner Dy

                                              --   v   __ -i-     c *. ---- r-A c   t*n    *r?*a v § n t   £
 turnstiles in    S'norenam street.      me                             ...Ad--- -- r-

 cross flow of    spectators from one pen to the other.



 The Club will    inform the police control room when a               particular pen or area is

 a~pi-cachine caoacitv.    The 'Club will be responsible for closing off further




 Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in t m s                               regard,

 therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




 The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

  public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

  prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
F illin g     a nd     M on ito rin g        Terraces




The P o l i c e      v e il    provide            in     respect           of    eac h g a t e i n        the p e rim e te r                fence     (cr

group o f       gates         if   they are              close          together)         p o lic e    o ffic e rs             authorised           to

decide whether or not                       to     a llo w         spectators            th ro u g h a gate              to r e lie v e

ove rcro w d in g .




A ll    p o lice     o ffic e rs       deployed               at       perim e te r      gates which w i l l                   be k e p t      fu lly        op en

jr £ X       ^ ins s           n                 stO’*s s r - on th.s terTscss                        vi.XI "bs su-h.0ri.s6d ss sbovs.

Each w i l l       be i n      possession of                   a p o lice         ra d io      in   d ire c t        contact w ith               p o lice

   j'ui.U    CwU-      ^-i.                      _O c    xuC       L                2;    C    U—SU    -»w U —   V   C   <*.    <J— * C —    U C w C.. U •




The s t e w a r d s     c h e c k in g th e             crowd f o r . o v e r c r o w d i n g o r d i s t r e s s                w ill       not    be

issued v i t h         p o lic e    radios              but    th e      p o lite      o ffic e rs     on t h e g a t e s            and p e r i m e t e r

track w i l l        communicate             to         p o lice        ground c o n t r o l        an y r e l e v a n t m a t t e r b r o u g h t               to

th e ir     a tte n tio n      by th e se           Stewards.




C u ttin g     Equipment

The C l u b w i l l       provide           and make r e a d i l y                a v a ila b le      su ita b le          and s u f f i c i e n t

c u ttin g     equipment           to perm it              the im m ediate               rem oval o f       enough f e n c i n g                 to re le a se

number s o f         spectators             if     necessary.                   This     c u ttin g    equipment w i l l                    be o p e r a t e d

by e m p l o y e e s    o f The C l u b who w i l l                      be t r a i n e d      in   its    use.            The use o f             su c h

equipment w i l l             be a t    th e d i s c r e t i o n            of    the     nom inated s e n io r                 p o lice       o ffic e r      who

w ill     be t h e     o ffic e r      in    charge o f                 p o lic in g     the    event.
          the   sethod   of   crowd   segregation   (if   any)   inten cea   to   be u s e e




   iv)    the number and location of turnstiles to be made available




     v)   an' estimation or the crnic it viii ta^e sscn. group to pass

          through the turnstiles;




    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements ror aamitting

          spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at tne discretion 01 tne police o m c e r                     m    ccmnan

at the ground.    It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency service

being called to the ground.           These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.                     The Police wil

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f               South Y o r k s h i r e          P o lice    has n o m i n a t e d   his     Deputy,

Xt   re tsr     Hayes 0?M LLE MA. as t h e                                C hief    O ffic e r w ith r s s ^ c n s ib ilit v          for




SIGNED      ..........................................................   on b e h a l f   of   S h e ffie ld   U nited       F o o tb a ll   Cl1 UD




S I 'rNE1? -                                                . .
City of Sheffield             M etrop olitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM, Solicitor                                                        Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                            Town Hall,
                                                                                            Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference          FW

Your reference                                                                                         .-mi             i
                                                                                               iSouth Yorisshir«Poiic^'|
Date
                      7 t h August, 1989
                                                                                                i             n% »        !
                                                                                                :       1 i   AUG1989     !i
                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                        ChfS# Conatabks   ‘
M r • P • W n g h t C .B .E «, OSt J.C.B.I.M.,
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,                      —
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY




Dear Sir,

Re: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club -
Interim Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

I have now had the opportunity of giving consideration to the interim
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.  I propose to call a meeting of the
Advisory Group in the near future but in the meantime, would appreciate your
views upon a number of specific matters.

I refer to recommendations 4 and 5 concerning the filling and monitoring of
terraces.  There is a clear need for arrangements to be formalised in this
respect I look forward to hearing from you with your views upon this matter and
any proposed arrangements.

With reference -to recommendation 6,-1 look forward to hearing from you with any
proposals you have for the training of police officers with regard to
recognition of crowd densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics.

Please confirm that recommendations 8 and 9 concerning the opening of perimeter
fences and the presence of stewards and police officers will be implemented.

I look forward to hearing from you with details of any arrangements which have
been made by virtue of recommendation 1 0 .

With reference to recommendation 24, please let me have details of any
discussions which have taken place with the club concerning the printing of
information on tickets.




PB/57/RL78                                                                        734004 - Frances Woodhead
                         For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring..........................         (STD Code 0742)   R4602
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal) r
2   .

With reference to recommendations 26 to 31, please let me know what steps have
been taken to implement the recommendations.  In particular, have you nominated
a chief officer to liaise with the club and the local authority concerning
safety and crowd control?  Is there to be one chief officer designated in
respect of all the grounds or is there to be an individual officer in respect of
each one?
                                                                           I
I look forward to hearing from you with your views upon recommendations 32, to 34
inclusive concerning the adequacy and nature of radio communications, public
address systems and possible use of advertising boards.

Please would you advise me on whether or not any steps have   been taken to co­
ordinate emergency services as mentioned in recommendations   35 to 38.

Additionally, any general comments you have would be welcome.  I willcontact
you in the near future to arrange a meeting of the Advisory Group.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department




PB/57/RL78
                                                          DCC/jEL
                                                          13 August 1989

* Pensam Esq FCIS «BI«
Solicitor
City o f Sheffield Metropolitan
 .District
Administration & Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH




Dear Mr Pensam

INTERIM REPORT OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

Thank you for your letter of 9 August 1989 concerning the recommendations
contained in the above Report.

Regarding the specific questions raised in relation to the various
recommendations, I can inform you as follows':-..


     a.   Recommendations 3. 4. 5. 8. 9. 10, 24. 26, 29, 37 and 38

     In accordance with recommendation four a written agreement has been
     completed between the police and both Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
     United Football Clubs, which makes reference to all the recoamendat ions
     above - copies of which are attached, for your information copies have
     already been sent to the Chief Executive , Mr Podmore.

     In pursuance of recommendation 26 of the Report, the Chief Constable,
     Mr Peter Wright CBE OStJ CBIM, has nominated me as the Chief Officer who
     is to liaise with the management of each of the South Yorkshire football
     clubs and local authorities concerned in respect of the safety and
     control of crowds.

     I have formed an implementation team comprising senior police officers
     who regularly act as police ground commanders at football grounds in the
     County, to discharge those of Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendations which
     fall to the police. This Important task requires of the polict a     ,
     policy across the whole Force area to ensure consistency and simplicity
     and avoid complexity and confusion.

     The primary concern of all of «s is the safety of the public who attend
     football matches in South Yorkshire. I look forward to continued co­
     operation and liaison between ourselves to this end.
* Pensam Esq fCIS MBIM               -   2   -                    18 August 1989


     k* ' Recommendation 6

     This recommendstion did not fall within the first phase of
     Implementation.

     However, we are in the process of completing a training video which will
     deal amongst other matters with crowd numbers, crowd density, what to
     look for la terms of distress and, crowd dynamics generally. Until this
     is available we are using still photographs %o this same end. *

     I have had produced a number of laminated cards which set out simply the
     signs to look for in terms of crowd distress and these will be available
     to the stewards and police officers concerned with monitoring spectators
     before, during and after each game.


     c.   Recommendations 27 and 26 .

     These recommendations relate to the police Operational Order in respect
     of each match and have been fully implemented prior to the commencement
     of the 1989/90 football season (19 August 1989).


     d.   Recommendation 30

     Work has already been commenced and a survey completed with regard to the
     existing CCTV facilities together with positive recommendations regarding
     the fe-sitlng of certain cameras, the provision of additional cameras,
     improvements in light intensification and other matters in respect of all
     grounds in South Yorkshire and certain of these have application in
     Sheffield.

     These need to be discussed with the clubs concerned and I will up-date
     you when these discussions have taken place.

     Additionally we have completed a survey of the existing turnstile
     arrangements and the Issues in this connection raised by this
     recommendation will be the subject of negotiations and again I Will bring
     you up-to-date when there is something to report.


     e. ■ Recommendations 31, 32, 33 and 34

     These recommendations did not fall within the first phase of
     implementation, le, not required to be completed before the start of the
     1989/90 football season, but the present systems in operation at each of
     the grounds Is now under urgent review,


     f.   Recommendation 33

    I an already in close liaison with the Other two emergency services, each
    of whom haa nominated a senior officer to manage this. Those persons are
    (1) in respect of the Ambulance Service - Assistant Chief Ambulance
    Officer, Hr Norley} and (11) in respect of the Fire Service - Assistant
    Chief Fire Officer, Mr Seaman* Chief Superintendent Broomhead
    (Operations & Traffic) will perform this function for the police.
t   Pensam Esq PCIS MBIM                3                        18 August 1989


       We have agreed that minimally we should meet twice yearly separate from
       the ground certification meetings or the advisory group and more
       frequently if required.


       g*   Recommendation 36

       The information contained in the above recommendation will from now on be
       included in the police Operational Orders prepared before each football
       match. Copies of the Orders are to be supplied to the emergency services
       at least three days before the event.

       Nominated officers have been identified in both the Fire and Ambulance
       Services to receive these Orders and furthermore to be up-dated should
       new Information bec6me available before the commencement of any match.

      I of course have the precise details should you require them but this
      would seem to be a matter outside the information on the Ground Safety
      Certificate except in descriptive terms as undoubtedly over time the
      personalities will change.


I note with Interest the urgency with which you view these matters and find
comfort in this.

I look forward to close, constructive and continued liaison and to meeting you
personally whenever this is possible.

Yours sincerely




Enclosure
City of Sheffield            M etrop olitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM, Solicitor                                                       Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                           Town Hall,
                                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference

Your reference
                                                                                              S outh Yorkshire Polio® j
D a ta                *^th August, 1989                                                                    111 >
                                                                                                    1 i AUG 1989
                                                                                                   Chtof C onstable
Mr. P. Wright C.B.E., OSt J.C.B.I.M.,
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY




Dear Sir,

Re: Sheffield Wednesday Football Club -
Interim Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

I have now had the opportunity of giving consideration to the interim
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. I propose to call a meeting of the
Advisory Group in the near future but in the meantime, would appreciate your
views upon a number of specific matters.

I refer to recommendations 4 and 5 concerning the filling and monitoring of
terraces. There is a clear need for arrangements to be formalised in this
respect I look forward to hearing from you with your views upon this matter and
any proposed arrangements.

With reference to recommendation 6, I look forward to hearing from you with any
proposals you have for the training of police officers with regard to
recognition of crowd densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics.

Please confirm that recommendations 8 and 9 concerning the opening of perimeter
fences and the presence of stewards and police officers will be implemented.

I look forward to hearing from you with details of any arrangements which have
been made by virtue of recommendation 10.^

With reference to recommendation 24, please let me have details of any
discussions which have taken place with the club concerning the printing of
information on tickets.




PB/57/RL78                                                                       734004 - Frances Woodhead
                         For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.......................................(STD Code 0742)   R4602
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
2   .
With reference to recommendations 26 to 31, please let me know what steps have
been taken to implement the recommendations.  In particular, have you nominated
a chief officer to liaise with the club and the local authority concerning
safety and crowd control?  Is there to be one chief officer designated in
respect of all the grounds or is there to be an individual officer in respect of
each one?
                                                                         .!
I look forward to hearing from you with your views upon recommendations 32, to 34
inclusive concerning the adequacy and nature of radio communications, public
address systems and possible use of advertising boards.

Please would you advise me on whether or not any steps have been taken to co­
ordinate emergency services as mentioned in recommendations 35 to 38.

Additionally, any general comments you have would be welcome. I will contact
you in the near future to arrange a meeting of the Advisory Group.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department




PB/57/RL78
City of Sheffield            M etro p o litan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                       Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                          Town Hall,
                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference
                   GP/DMB
Your reference

Date
                   6th September, 1989




   Mr. P. Hayes, Q.P.M.,LL.B.,M.A.,
   Deputy Chief Constable,
   South Yorkshire Police,
   Police Headquarters,
   Snlg Hill,
   Sheffield,
   S3 8LY.

   Dear Mr. Hayes,

   Report of Lord Justice Taylor

   Thank you for your letter of 15th August.  I share your view regarding
   continued co-operation and liaison to ensure the safety of everyone
   attending football matches in South Yorkshire.

   I have also noted the contents of the documents which are enclosed with your
   letter in relation to Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United. You will
   also now be aware of the new Sheffield United General Safety Certificate and
   the amendments to the Sheffield Wednesday Certificate which take into
   account many of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Recommendations.

    I certainly look forward to meeting you as soon as such a meeting can be
    arranged.  If I can be of further assistance to you please do not hesitate
    to let me know.

    Yours sincerely,




    Acting Head of Department.




    MS2AAS/JH




                        For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.......................................(STD Code 0742)        R4602
                                                      Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)                              w          t>
                                                                                                        734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                       CH4              t-fc-

                                                                        -2 s|S^S^

                                                                     3 it.



                                                             DCC/JEL
                                                             22 August 1989

E Hutchinson Esq BSe DipTP MRTPI
Diractor
Department of Planning
Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
Central Offices
Kendray Street
Barnsley S70 2TN




Deaf' ,                                                      ■   ■

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

As you will be aware a specific requirement arising out of Lora Justice
Taylor's Interim Report following his Inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster
is for a written agreement between the football clubs and the police. Tha
purpose of this agreement is to identify unequivocally the separate
responsibilities of both parties in relation to matters identified in the
Report.

There are five clubs in South Yorkshire and so fsr I have reached agreement
with all of them except Barnsley.

Ia an effort to achieve the necessary accord and agreement in writing I have
this date met with Mr G Buckle (Chairman) and Mr M Spinks (Secretary) at
Barnsley Football Club. As a result it is now agreed that Mr Spinks will this
date sign the agreement and return it to me forthwith.

During the discussions we considered ia part the ainutes of the meeting held
under your chairmanship on 10 August 1989 to deal with the provisions of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1973. As a pre-condition to Mr Spinks signing
the written agreement X have agreed that in relation to the football match to
be held on Saturday 26 August when Barnsley are at home to Brighton & Hove
Albion with an anticipated crowd attendance of 6,000, we will not insist on
the strict application of the recommendation described at paragraph (3)(lli).

Mr Spinks has undertaken at this match to provide the police ground commander,
on an on-going basis, with all the information available about crowd
numbers entering the various parts of the ground. Be will oa this occasion
conduct a number of experiments to determine how l»«at the club eaa collate the
informatioa available from the mechanical counters at each of the turnstiles.

For your information I am pleased to be able to infora you the club accepts
fully Its responsibilities la terms of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
at 3(a) and (b), 20 and 31 and is being Most co-operative in this regard.
E Hutchinson Esq BSc DipTP MRTPI                                22 August 1989


In addition to the club's need to have accurate information about spectator
levels In order to fulfil their responsibilities as above, there is a need for
the police to have this sane information on an on-going basis so as to be
aware of potential problems such as late arrivals, etc., and that effective
arrangements to provide the police with this information must be in place at
the forthcoming match with Middlesbrough on 9 September 1989 and thereafter.

If you require any information or further assistance from ourselves please do
not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely
                                                                                                               D C C /J E L
                                                                                                               22    A ugust     1989

E H u tch in so n     Esq       BSc   D ipT P       MEtTPI
D irecto r
D epartm ent o f P la n n in g
B a r n sle y M e tr o p o lita n Borough                  C ou n cil
C en tral O ffic e s
Kendray S tr e e t
B a r n s l e y S 7 0 2TN




Dear                       ■


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT                           1975


As you w i l l be aw are a s p e c i f i c r e q u ir e m e n t a r i s i n g o u t o f L ord J u s t i c e
T a y lo r 's In te rim R eport f o llo w in g h is In q u iry in t o th e H illsb o r o u g h d is a s t e r
i s fo r a w r it t e n agreem en t b etw een th e f o o t b a l l c lu b s and th e p o l i c e .          The
purpose of t h is agreem ent i s to id e n t if y u n e q u iv o c a lly th e sep arate
r e s p o n s i b il it ie s o f both p a r t ie s in r e la t io n to m a tters id e n t if ie d in th e
R ep ort.


There are f iv e clu b s in                   South Y o r k sh ir e          and      so    far   I    have    reached        agreem ent
w it h a l l o f them e x c e p t             B a rn sley .


In    an   effort     to       a ch iev e    th e    necessary           accord        and    agreem ent        in    w ritin g    I    have
t h i s d a t e m e t w i t h Mr G B u c k l e ( C h a i r m a n ) a n d Mr M S p i n k s ( S e c r e t a r y ) a t
B a r n s le y F o o t b a ll C lu b .    A s a r e s u l t i t i s n o w a g r e e d t h a t Mr S p i n k s w i l l                      th i
d a t e s i g n t h e a g r e e m e n t a n d r e t u r n i t t o me f o r t h w i t h .


D u rin g t h e    d i s c u s s i o n s we c o n s i d e r e d         in part        t h e m i n u t e s otf t h e m e e t i n g h e l d
under your         c h a ir m a n s h ip on 10 A u gu st                1989 to        d e a l w ith th e p r o v is io n s o f th e
S a f e t y o f S p o r ts Grounds A ct 1 9 7 5 .       A s a p r e - c o n d i t i o n t o Mr S p i n k s                      sig n in g
th e w r itte n agreem ent I have agreed th a t in r e la t io n to th e f o o t b a ll                                           m atch to
b e h e l d on S a t u r d a y 2 6 A u g u s t w h e n B a r n s l e y a r e a t home t o B r i g h t o n                       & Hove
A lb io n w it h an a n t i c i p a t e d crow d a tte n d a n c e o f 6 ,0 0 0 , we w i l l n o t i n                          s i s t on
t h e s t r i c t a p p l i c a t i o n o f th e recom m en d a tio n d e s c r i b e d a t p a ra g ra p h                     (3 )( i i i ) .


Mr S p i n k s h a s u n d e r t a k e n a t t h i s m a t c h t o p r p v i d e t h e p o l i c e g r o u n d c o m m a n d e r
on an o n - g o in g b a s i s , w it h a l l t h e in f o r m a t io n a v a i l a b l e a b ou t crow d num bers
e n te r in g th e v a rio u s p a rts o f th e ground.           He w i l l o n t h i s o c c a s i o n c o n d u c t                         a
number o f e x p e r i m e n t s t o d e t e r m i n e how b e s t t h e c l u b c a n c o l l a t e t h e
in fo rm a tio n    a v a ila b le        from      th e    m ech a n ica l     cou n ters        at    each    of    the     tu r n stile s.

For    your    in fo r m a tio n      I     am p l e a s e d    to      be   a b le    to    in fo rm    you    the    clu b    accep ts
fu lly it s r e sp o n sib ilitie s                 i n t e r m s o f L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r 1s           recom m en d ation s
a t 3 ( a ) and ( b ) , 2 0 an d 31                 and i s b e in g m ost c o - o p e r a t i v e i n               th is regard.
                                                                           3 U
                       Metropolitan Borough Council
                             Department of Planning
                 Director, E. Hutchinson, BSc. DipTP. MRTPI.
               Central Offices, Kendray Street, Barnsley. S70 2TN
                    Tel. (0226) 733222 Fax. (0226) 293570


My Ref.   CBCO/KJ/JH                       Your Ref.

Date      14th August, 1989               Enquiries to:   Mr. K. Jackson    Ext.   260




The Secretary,
Barnsley Football Club Ltd.,
Grove Street,
Barnsley.




Dear Sir,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Further to a meeting of the Working Party held on the
10th August, 1989, please find enclosed notes of the meeting.

Yours faithfully,




Director of Planning




♦
                       Please address all correspondence to the Director
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

Note of a meeting held at the Oakwell Ground. Barnsley on the
10th August. 1989

Present:

Representing Barnsley F C :   G.   Buckle   (Chairman)
                              B.   Taylor   (Vice-Chairman)
                              M.   Spinks   (Secretary)
Apologies from:               J.   Dennis   (Director)

Representing the Officer Working Party:

E. Hutchinson (Director of Planning)
A. Harper (Building Control)
K. Jackson (Building Control)

Deputy Divisional Commander T. Swann (South Yorkshire Police)
Superintendent R. Simpson            (South Yorkshire Police)
Superintendent G. Marsh              (South Yorkshire Police)
Chief Inspector D. Helliwell         (South Yorkshire Police)
Sergeant D. Rosevere                 (South Yorkshire Police)

Divisional Officer G. Robbins               (South Yorkshire Fire Service)
                   D . Paddy                (South Yorkshire Fire Service)
                   A. Ryder                 (South Yorkshire Fire Service)

Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer D. Jones (South Yorkshire
Divisional Superintendent I. Horner                     Metropolitan
                                                        Ambulance Service)



1.   Purpose of the meeting

     The primary-purpose of the meeting was to review the Safety
     Certificate for Barnsley Football Club Ltd. in the light of
     the recommendation contained within the "Taylor Report" with
     particular reference to the recommendations marked with an
     asterisk (*) which should be implemented before the start of
     the 1989/90 season.

     Mr. Taylor welcomed everyone to the meeting and to the Oakwell
     Ground.

     Mr. Hutchinson chaired the meeting and opened by commenting
     that the meeting firstly considered all the recommendations of
     the "Taylor" report marked with an asterisk (*) and then consider
     any other items of business at the end of the meeting.

2.   The Recommendations of the "Taylor Report"

     (1-2) Mr. Harper    opened by commenting that the Working Party
     had re-considered   the ground capacities and these had been
     reduced by 15% or   by the number of turnstiles at 750 persons/hour
     whichever has the   least capacity.
                              - 2 ~                                 Action

Mr. Spinks asked if it was possible to give two ground capacities
for normal admission and for all ticket matches where admission
through turnstiles did increase in speed. Whilst accepting to
some extent this view, Mr. Harper pointed out that the recom­
mendations did not differentiate on this point.

Mr. Taylor explained that the Club had for sometime been
negotiating with the Co-op to purchase the land adjacent to the
Spion Kop to obtain better access to the ground but so far no
progress had been made. He asked if the Local Authority may be
able to assist in the matter. Mr. Hutchinson pointed out that
they had tried on previous occasions to assist but to no avail
and that the Authority's hands were tied somewhat as it could
not compulsory purchase the land. However, when the present
problems of the LA were overcome he would again look into the
matter.

Mr. Harper then read out the new ground capacities that would
be included in the renewed Safety Certificate, i.e.

             Brewery Stand            7,500
             Pontefract Road End      8,670
             Terrace North            3,315
                                                                    Local
             Terrace South            3,145
                                                                    Authority
             Main Stand (seated)      2,164
             Spion Kop                5,250
             Disabled Stand             '55
             Total Capacity        30,099

(3) Mr. Harper pointed out the Working Party's requirements in
that:

(i)     the monitoring of crowd ingress was the responsibility
        of the Football Club but with the facility for Police
        to obtain update of data

(ii)    in the long term i.e. before the start of the 1990/91
        season a system of electronic monitoring be installed
        to the approval of the Working Party

(iii)   that before the start of the present season the Club
        install a manual system of monitoring the crowd by
        employing a person in each sector of the ground whose
        duty will be to update the crowd numbers through the
        turnstiles in each section every 15 minute, and would
        constantly update Police control.

Mr. Buckle commented that in his view the Club at present had a
manual system and so complied with the recommendation.

Mr. Simpson passed the comment that whilst each turnstile had a
counting system, it was not possible to obtain up to date
information on the number of spectators in any section of the
ground at any one time.
                           - 3 -                                    Action

Mr. Spinks asked that if the information was available and say
the Spion Kop was full to the new capacity with 2,000 spectators,
still outside the ground, would the Police close the turnstiles?.

Mr. Simpson replied that it was clear that the cpacities must
not be exceeded and that the turnstiles would be closed. He
went on to say that the Police's new contingency plans would
take account of dealing with those fans still outside the ground.

After much discussion, it was agreed that:

(i)    the Club set up a satisfactory monitoring system to the
       approval of the Officer Working Party before the start
       of the season. This system to be reviewed by the Working
       Party as the season progresses.                              Barnsley F

(ii)   the Club investigate and keep under review the intro­
       duction of an electronic system of monitoring

(4-5) Mr. Simpson explained that the South Yorkshire Police
had set up an implementation team to consider these items and
that he had been requested to negotiate with Barnsley FC to
present a draft agreement to be considered by the Police team
by Tuesday next.

After a great deal of discussion it was agreed that:

(i)    the Police consider the draft agreements reach with all
       other South Yorkshire clubs but excluding Barnsley FC

(ii)   the Police present to Barnsley FC their agreement based      Police
       on the above for consideration.                              Barnsley F

(7) Mr. Harper explained that all the gates and frames in the
perimeter fences and radial fences be painted green and suitably
marked "Emergency Exit" where appropriate.

Mr. Spinks asked why the colour green had been chosen?
Mr. Jackson explained that all emergency signs were green
letters on white background and it was felt that the gates would
accord with them.

It was agreed that all gates and frames in perimeter fences         Barnsley F
and radial fences be painted green and that "Emergency Exit"        Working
signs be fixed to those identified upon site inspection by the      Party
Working Party.

(8) Mr. Harper explained that the gates in the perimter fence
had already been removed and the view of the Working Party was
to maintain the situation, with the Police manning the openings.    Police

It was agreed to observe the above comments.
                            - 4 -                                  Action*

(9) Mr. Simpson explained that this would form parts of the
agreement discussed in items (4-5).

It was agreed that the same action be taken as for items (4-5).    Police
                                                                   Barnsley F

(10) Mr. Robbins explains that his recommendation to the Club
would be that they should obtain two sets of bolt croppers for
use in emergency.

Mr. Simpson explained that the Police's policy was that their
officers would not use the equipment, but the ground commnder
would decide when such equipment should be used.

After further discussion it was agreed that the Club obtain two
sets of bolt croppers and that two stewards be trained in their
use.                                                               Barnsley I

(11-12) Mr. Harper explained that the present system of testing
and monitoring the crush barriers met these requirements.

Mr. Spinks explained that the works identified in this year's
inspection and testing had been authorised and an order had been
placed for the works to be carried out.

It was agreed to continue with the present procedures.             Barnsley I
                                                                   L. Author!

(18) Mr. Harper explained that all turnstiles should now be
regularly inspected to determine their suitability to meet the
anticipated admission rate. He pointed out a suggestion by
Mr. Robbins that the Club could submit an annual certificate of
compliance by a suitably qualified person.

Mr. Jackson suggested that this may form part of the report of
the crush barrier testing.

After further discussions it was agreed that the turnstiles
be checked annually and a certificate form part of the report
on crush barriers.                                                 Barnsley I

(19-20) Mr. Harper explained that these items had been dis­
cussed in with items (1-3) and suggested that the same
agreements be adopted.

The above was agreed.                                              Barnsley F
                                                                   L. Authori

(22) Mr. Harper explained the need for correct signing outside
and inside the ground.

After some discussion it was agreed that an inspection of the      Barnsley F
ground should be carried out by a member from each discipline      Working
of the Working Party to prepare a report as to the position and    Party
type of directional signs, informative signs (including ground
rules).
                                                                    Action

(23-24) Mr. Harper explained that the format of any tickets
including stubs, should have clear and sufficient information
on them as to be unambiguous and that the format" should be
agreed in future with the Police and this item would be included
as a condition of the Safety Certificate.

It was agreed   that the Club would liaise with the Police on the   Barnsley 1
format of any   future ticket issue.                                Police an<
                                                                    L. Author:

(26) Mr. Swann informed the meeting that the Police had
designated Deputy Chief Constable Hayes as the Liaison Officer
for South Yorkshire Police.

(27-28) Mr. Simpson explained that these two items were at
present being considered by the Police implementation team, but
wishes, to point out the likelihood of additional costs to the
Football Club.                                                      Police

(29) Mr. Simpson explained that the option of the postponement
of kick-off would now rest with the Police ground commander
and to assist   in the matter it would be an advantage tohave a
direct telephone link with the referee's changing room.

Mr. Buckle thought that this was a fair comment and may have
other benefits.

After further discussions it was agreed that a direct telephone
link would be provided between the referee's changing room and
the ground control room.                                            Barnsley i

(35-38) Mr. Simpson explained that there existed at present
standing instructions        which included a section on the
events of emergency procedures which had been prepared in co­
ordination with the other emergency services. He also requested
that following the end of this meeting he would like to arrange
a meeting with the other members of the emergency services to
review the present arrangements prior to the re-issue of the        SYFS
standing instructions which would be circulated to all members      SYP
of the Working Party.                                               SYMAS

(39) Mr. Harper explained that the Safety Certificate included
a condition that one First Aider be provided for each 2,000
spectators and the condition would be amended to read one
First Aider for every 1,000 spectators.

Mr. Jones pointed out that the Ambulance Authority would not
duplicate or wish to undertake the duties of the St. Johns or
Red Cross as First Aiders, but in the event of any disaster
would assume command over them.

Mr. Spinks wished to make the point that the St. Johns were a
voluntary organisation and they may not always be able to supply
the First Aiders required.

Mr. Jackson pointed out it may be an advantage for the Club to
train stewards in First Aid.
                          - 6 -                                     Action

Mr. Jones explained that the Ambulance Authority was an approved
training organisation and would be willing to undertake the task.

Mr. Spinks commented that he was already in possession of their
training charges.

It was agreed that the Club would consider the training of
stewards in First Aid.                                              Barnsley F

(41) Mr. Harper commented that he understood that the Club had
a doctor in attendance at all matches.

Mr. Taylor confirmed that a doctor was in attendance at all
first and second team games and that a replacement was in
attendnace when necessary.

Mr. Jones explained that at Hillsbrough two doctors were to be
in attendance, one for players and one to fulfil this requirement
of the Taylor Report.

Mr. Harper commented that he thought one doctor could fulfil
both roles, providing he was informed of his duties and his
position on match days identified to the ground commander in the
ground control room.

It was agreed that the doctor on match days be informed of his
terms of reference in accordance with item (41) of the Taylor
Report and his position match days be identified to the ground
commander.                                    .             .       Barnsley F

(42-43) Mr. Harper explained that the Local Authority recognised
the SYMAS as the ambulance authority and would seek their advice
on the number of ambulances to be required for large crowds, but
for expected crowds of more than 5,000 one fully equipped
ambulance would be required to attend the event.

Mr. Jones confirmed that the ambulance authority would provide
this cover and confirmed the approximate cost to the Club.

After further discussions it was agreed that the ambulance
authority would provide an ambulance at all matches with expected   SYMAS
attendances in excess of 5*000 and the number in attendance at      Local
matches with larger crowds would be stipulated by the LA after      Authority
consultations with the ambulance authority. The position of
such emergency vehicles to be agreed by the Working Party.

Structural Engineer's report on Oakwell Ground

Mr. Harper asked the Club's representatives for their response
to the report.

Mr. Buckle and Mr. Spinks both made the point that the report       Barnsley F(
had only just been received by the Club and as yet the Club's
Board of Directors had not had the opportunity to consider the
report.

Mr. Harper asked that he be informed of the Club's actions on
the report after the Board of Directors had considered same.
                           - 7 -                                          Action

4.   Safety Officer

     Mr. Harper asked the Club for an update on the situation.

     Mr. Spinks explained that he had interviewed a number of
     candidates and indeed had selected one person for appointment
     only to be given backword.   At present no appointment has
     been made. He also pointed out that he had previously under­
     taken the position but had found that on match day he was unable
     to undertake both his duties as Club Secretary and Safety Officer
     and he would therefore be unable to carry out the function of
     Safety Officer for the forthcoming season.

     Mr. Harper endorsed Mr. Spinks' views by highlighting matches
     when Mr. Spinks was not available in the control room.

     Mr. Swann stated that in order to police the game effectively
     he required a Safety Officer in post and situated in the
     control room by the first game.

     Mr. Hutchinson explained that if a Safety Officer was not
     appointed the terms and conditions for the Safety Certificate
     were being broken and he would have to report back to Council
     Members with a view to withdrawing the Safety Certificate.

     After a great deal of discussion it was agreed that the Club
     continue to consider the urgent appointment of a permanent
     Safety Officer but in the meantime they would ensure that a
     temporary Safety Officer would be in post for the first match
     of the season and until such time as a permanent appointment is
     made.                                                                Barnsley I

5*   Leeds United Match 30th December, 1989

     Mr. Swann explained the background to the Leeds United fixtures
     in previous seasons in that the games had been played on Sundays
     with a 12.00 kick off. He went on to explain that because the
     Club had a game on the 1st January, 1990 the Police had felt it
     unfair to request the Leeds game be played on Sunday,
     31st December, I 989 and had therefore requested a 11.00 a.m.
     kick off.on Saturday, 30th December, 1989 but to date the Club
     had only agreed to a 12.00 kick-off.

     Mr. Taylor explained that the Club had already agreed to the
     kick-off being put back from 3*00 p.m. to 12.00 a.m and he felt
     that this would alleviate any problems.

     Mr. Swann wished it placed on record that in the interests of
     the safety of members of the public in the town centre he would
     recommend that the kick-off be 11.00 a.m. However, as a
     compromise he suggested a 1 1 . 3 0 a.m. kick-off the same as that
     agreed by Sheffield United and Leeds United.

     After a great deal of discussion it was agreed that the Club
     consider the recommendations of the Working Party of an 11.00 a.m.
     or 1 1 . 3 0 a.m. kick-off and report their decision back to the
     Working Party.                                                        Barnsley F




 CBC0/KJ/JH
 14th August, 1989
                CONFIDENTIAL
                                                   SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                     Ref:                 T H Q /T FB/SJR

        From:   C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t    -    O p er a tio n s     & T ra ffic            Station/S£$¥:         H eadquarters

    To:                                                                                              Date:                24   A ugust        1989.
                D eputy     C h ief   C o n sta b le



                SUBJECT:                         OPTIONS/CONTINGENCY DOCUMENT




                P lea se     fin d    attach ed ,          the    O p tio n s/C o n tin g en cy          D ocum ent      prepared        by    Ground
                C om m anders.        It    is     for    use     in   the      Ground        C ontrol    and   S u b -D iv isio n a l    C o n tro l,
                but as m en tio n ed in         the p refa ce      to    the p a p ers,                   the l i s t     of   op tio n s is not
                e x h a u s tiv e , nor sh o u ld in d iv id u a l i n i t i a t i v e s be               in h ib ited    in   any d ev e lo p in g
                situ a tio n .



                 ________ A________________


                C h ie f S u p erin ten d en t
                (O p eration s & T r a f f ic )




                C op ies     to:


                C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t                       'A '    D iv isio n
                C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t                       'B '    D iv isio n
                C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t                       'C ' D i v i s i o n
                C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t                       'D' D iv isio n
                C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t                       'F' D iv is io n
                C h ief    In sp ector B ettiso n                      C a re er D ev elop m en t
                C h ief    Inspector       D o n n elly                'D l' S u b -D iv isio n




Gen/2
                                                     SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E POLICE
                                                                                                        Ref:             T H Q /T F B /SJR

        From:     C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t      -   O p er a tio n s       & T ra ffic          Station/D8ptX    H eadquarters
                                                                                                        Date:            24 August 1989
                  See Distribution


                SUBJECT:                        MINUTES -OPTIONS/CONTINGENCY MEETING
                                                HELD TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1989   ~




                 The a t t a c h e d m in u te s r e g a r d in g th e              above   m e e tin g ,   are    forw arded   for   your
                 in fo r m a tio n and r e t e n t i o n p le a s e .




                 (O p era tio n s    & T ra ffic)



                D istrib u tio n       to:


                D eputy C h ie f       C o n sta b le
                C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t                              -            'a '   D iv isio n
                C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t                              -            'B '   D iv isio n
                C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t                                           'C '   D iv isio n
                C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t                                           ' D' D i v i s i o n
                C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t                                           1F 1 D i v i s i o n
                C h i e f I n s p e c t o r Cham bers                                       'Al'    S u b -D iv isio n
                S u p e r i n t e n d e n t S im p son                                      'Bl'    S u b -D iv isio n
                C h i e f I n s p e c t o r Warne                                           'Cl'    S u b -D iv isio n
                S u p e r in t e n d e n t H ale                                            'Dl'    S u b -D iv isio n
                C h ie f I n s p e c t o r D o n n elly                                     'D1'    S u b -D iv isio n
                C h ie f In sp e c to r Beal
                                                                                            'FI'    S u b -D iv isio n




Gen/2
            OPTIONS/OONTINGBCY MEETING - TUESDAY 22 AUGUST 1989


PRESENT:    Chief Superintendent Broamhead - Operations 8 Traffic (Chairman)
            Chief Inspector Chambers         'Al'
            Superintendent Simpson           1B11
            Chief Inspector Warne             'Cl1
            Superintendent Hale              'Dl'
            Chief Inspector Donnelly         'Dl'
            Chief Inspector Beal             'Fl'


Chief Superintendent Broomhead said he wished to emphasise the below
points. Those present should ensure these points were applied at the
Football Grounds for which they were responsible.


1)   GATE CONTROL OFFICERS

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said the Taylor report recommendations
called for one such officer for each gate in the perimeter fence. Force
policy, however, would be to provide two. One officer would be the gate
control officer, the other would be responsible for public order matters
and also stand in for the gate control officer should that officer have
to leave his position for any reason. This policy will apply across the
force and provide a cannon starting point for the policing of all South
Yorkshire's football grounds. The policy could, however, be altered in
due course in the light of experien.ee but any such alteration will require
a decision from Headquarters.


2)   CONTACT BETWEEN POLICE OFFICERS AND SAFETY STEWARDS

Chief Superintendent Broomhead referred to the Taylor report recommendation
which requires stewards on the perimeter track who are monitoring the
crowd for overcrowding or distress to have access to police officers with
radios. He said these officers have to be identified to the stewards
and asked how this could best be done. After a short discussion it was
decided that when stewards are initially briefed by a police officer they
should be told that if they require access to police radio they should
contact a police officer on the perimeter track who is wearing a tabbard.


3) SUPPLY OF FOOTBALL ORDERS TO FIRE AND AMBULANCE SERVICES

Chief Superintendent Broamhead said that regardless of where a match was
being played a copy of the police operational order in respect of it should
always be sent to the central operations rooms of both the South Yorkshire
Fire Service and South Yorkshire Ambulance Service. These orders should
not be delivered to local fire and ambulance stations. The orders should
arrive at the operations rooms of thege two services not later than three
days before the match. There would be exceptional occasions, replays
for example, where it would not be possible to do this in which cases
the orders should be delivered as soon as possible. Chief Superintendent
Broomhead said he would encourage the Fire*and Ambulance Services to liaise
with their stations for the area in which the match in question was
occurring.
4)   CONTINGENCY PLANS CIRCULATION

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said the contingency plans would be
circulated to Force Control, Sub-divisional Control and Ground Control,


5)   DIVISIONAL CHIEF SUPERINTENDENTS TO BE UPDATED

Chief Superintendent Broomhead reminded those present of the necess ity
of keeping their divisional commanders aware of the work being carried
out by the Taylor Report Implementation Team and its sub committees.
He said this was important even though minutes would be circulated.


6)   POLICE SAFETY MESSAGE

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that Chief Inspector Warne had, at
last Saturdays Rotherham football match, broadcast a tannoy message within
the ground shortly before kick off, advising spectators of the new safety
measures the police had taken. This had been very well received. Chief
Superintendent Broomhead suggested a similar message should be broadcast
at the other football grounds within the county.


7)   BINOCULARS IN GROUND CONTROLS

Those present assured Chief Superintendent Broomhead that binoculars were
present in all five ground controls before, during and after matches.


8) DISTRESS RECOGNITION AND RESUSCITATION CARD

Chief Superintendent Broamhead reminded those present that each police
officer working at a football match should be in possession of one of
these cards. Quantities of the cards had already been supplied and others
could be easily provided if required. They should also be supplied to
stewards.


9) JOINT POLICE EMERGENCY SERVICE EXERCISE

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said such an exercise had recently been
held at Sheffield United Football Ground and had been very successful.
He said the basic objective was to test emergency vehicle access into
and out of the ground in the event of a serious incident. He asked those
present to arrange similar exercises in respect of their grounds.
Superintendent Simpson said that whilst a full blown exercise had not
been held at Barnsley tests had been carried out to ensure there was
adequate access for fire engines and ambulances either into the ground
itself or to its immediate exterior. Jtfe asked if this was sufficient.
Chief Superintendent Broomhead said that if Superintendent Simpson was
satisfied then what he had done was sufficient.


10) CENTRAL INCIDENT ROOM - FORCE OPERATIONS

The incident room adjacent to Force Operations Room is now operational
whenever a football match is being played within the county. Chief
Superintendent Broomhead said he would speak to Superintendent Marsh and
- 3 -

ensure this Incident Room monitored manpower availability throughout the
force at match times so as to be able to mobilise additional resources
should these be required at a particular football ground. He would also
ensure this room was aware of casualty bureau trained officers who were
on duty at the time.

11} GATE CONTROL TABBARDS

Chief Superintendent Broomhead said the force had ordered a supply of
lime green fluorescent tabbards with 'Gate Control1 printed on the front
and back. These would be issued as soon as they were received. In the
meantime gate control officers should wear ordinary fluorescent tabbards.

There then followed discussions about the content and wording of the draft
contingency plans. Various amendments were made and these were recorded
by Chief Superintendent Broomhead.

The meeting then concluded.
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



                       CONFIDENTIAL




               THE OPTIONS TO COPE WITH THE

               FORESEEABLE PATTERNS OF ARRIVAL

               OF SPECTATORS AND THEIR DEPARTURE




CIRCULATION RESTRICTED TO:       FORCE CONTROL

                                 GROUND CONTROL

                             "   SUB DIVISIONAL CONTROL
PREFACE




1.        THESE OPTIONS ARE TO CATER FOR THOSE UNFORESEEN EVENTS WHICH IN EVITABLY
          OCCUR DESPITE OUR BEST PLANNING.   ADDITIONALLY THEY SHOULD BE USED BY
          GROUND COMMANDERS AS A FRAMEWORK FOR THEIR LOCAL ARRANGEMENTS.




2.        IN   CONSIDERING   ANY   OF   THESE   OPTIONS,   THE SAFETY OF THE PUBLIC IS
          PARAMOUNT.



3.        THIS L IS T OF OPTIONS IS NOT EXHAUSTIVE, NOR ARE THEY IN ANY PARTICULAR
          ORDER.        THEY ARE FRAMED IN A WAY WHICH SHOULD NOT IN H IB IT IN D IV ID U A L
          IN IT IA T IV E S IN A DEVELOPING SITU ATIO N.




4.        THE WRITTEN AGREEMENTS WITH THE CLUBS APPORTION R E S P O N S IB ILT IY , BUT
          THERE IS NOTHING IN THAT AGREEMENT WHICH PRECLUDES THE POLICE ACTING
          INDEPENDENTLY TO ENSURE SAFETY.
IT MUST BE STRESSED THAT THE OPTIONS STATED ARE NOT IN ANY ORDER OF PRIORITY



ALL    TICKET OR PART TICKET HATCH



1 ,.      OPTION     -    OPERATE F I L T E R S CLOSE TO THE GROUND.




2.        THE CHECKING OF QUEUES IN TO THE T U R N S T I L E -                           LAST   FILTER.




3.        THE PROBLEM CAUSED BY THE T I C K E T L E S S                      FAN


           i.            V IT A L   -    I N TE L L IG E N C E   FROM O R I G I N A T I N G   FORCE AS TO NUMBERS WHICH
                         CAN BE EXPECTED.




           ii.           SUPPORTERS WHO ARE ST OP P ED AT THE OUTER CHECK P O I N T S                          -   ALLOW TO
                          PROCEED, TURN BACK, OR HOLD.




           i i i .       THE INNER CHECK P O I N T S               -    ALLOW TO PRO CEED,        TURN BACK,   OR HOLD,




           iv            ARRIVAL AT THE GROUND -                       ALLOW TO PROCEED,         TURN BACK OR HOLD.




           v .           THE O P T IO N S AT THE GROUND


                         a)             ALLOW THEM IN TO A P RE -D ETE RM INE D AREA ON PAYMENT.




                         b)             DETAIN OR C O N T A IN .




                         c)             CONTROLLED D I S P E R S A L .




                         d)             ESCORT BACK TO TRA NSP ORT .
                                                  -2-


      4.   INFORM POLICE    OFFICERS AND STEWARDS OPERATING IN   THAT PART OF THE
            GROUND INTO WHICH THE SUPPORTERS ARE TO BE RECEIVED, AND ARRANGE THEIR
            RECEPTION.




      5.   CONTROLLED ARRIVAL - CONSIDER DELAYING THEIR AR R IVAL.




      6.   CONSIDER DELAYING THE K IC K -O F F.




4 ^   7.   S E N S I B L E MANAGEMENT OF THE SUPPORTERS AMD KEEP THEM INFORMED.
UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL OF LARGE NUMBER OF SUPPORTERS



1.     WHAT IS THE INTELLIGENCE?




2.     CAN THEY BE ACCOMMODATED AT THE GROUND OR S PEC IFIC AREA?
OJ




                                           ADDITIONAL RESOURCES, I . E .   OPERATION
       SUPPORT.




4.      DEPLOY RESOURCES AND GAIN EFFECTIVE CONTROL.




       ALLOW THEM TO PROCEED OR TURN BACK OR HOLD OR DISPERSE.




6.     WHERE THE DECISION IS TO PROCEED


        i.       INFORM POLICE OFFICERS AND STEWARDS OPERATING IN THAT PART OF
                 in E GROUND xiVTG WHICH THE SUFruRTERS nRE TO BE RECEIVED AND
                 ARRANGE THEIR RECEPTION.




       ii.       CONTROLLED ARRIVAL - CONSIDER DELAYING THEIR ARRIVAL.




       i i i .   CONSIDER DELAYING THE K IC K -O F F .




                 SENSIBLE MANAGEMENT OF THE SUPPORTERS      AND KEEP THEM INFORMED.
EARLY DEPARTURE
     I t,




            IRST CONSIDERATION I S SAFETY OF ALL SUPPORTERS BOTH THOSE ATTEMPTING TO
                                                            .
     Ji j




            rti'N u   J.            IM L i'irix iN _Li\ u




              ATTEMPT TO DETERMINE THE REASON.




2.            WHERE PRACTICABLE,                                DETAIN IN THE GROUND.




O             TTC£         D   fl   P S O IL IT Y




4.            ID EN TIFY THE EXIT ROUTE BUT SPONTANEITY AND VOLUME MAY DICTATE THE
              EXIT ROUTE - THEN - OPEN THE APPROPRIATE GATE(S) - ADVISE POLICE
              OFFICERS AND STEWARDS.




5.            DEPLOY RESOURCES TO CONTROL DEPARTURE.




6.            ATTEMPT TO MAINTAIN SEGREGATION.




7.            ARRANGE EARLY TRANSPORT.




8.            ADVISE NEIGHBOURING DIVISIONS/FORCES
          ; IS     WHhRii AN AR EA WI t H i N THh GROUND APPROACHES CAPACITY



                 ASSESS   REMAINING CAPACITY  IN THE   GROUND           (WHICH   INCLUDES THE
                 CONTINUATION OF SEGREGATION,   I.E. VISITING           SUPPORTERS INTO HOME
                 C T T' D 1D ' ^ ' O fT'T7l D Q 1   -n "Q U 1 ^ Q   ^




    2.           WHERE CAPACITY IS AVAILABLE - DEPLOY POLICE RESOURCES TO THOSE
                 TURNSTILES TU BE CLOSED AND TO THOSE WHICH WILL RECEIVE THE SUPPORTERS.




                 i.NfORM POLICE OFFICERS AND STEWARDS WITHIN THE GROUND AND THE CLUB WKAT
                 IS INTENDED.




    4.           OPTION - CONSIDER DELAYING KICK OFF - KEEP REFEREE INFORMED.




    5.       CLOSE THE TURNSTILES.




    6.           INFORM THE SUPPORTERS.




•   7        CONTROLLED MOVEMENT TO THE PRE-DETERMINED TURNSTILES.




    8.       NEGOTIATE WITH THE CLUB - WHERE POSSIBLE - FOR ADMISSION TO THE PRE­
             DETERMINED AREA FOR THE SAME ADMISSION FEE.



    9.       IF NO SPACE AVAILABLE, DECIDE - CONTAIN OR DISPERSE - DEPLOY RESOURCES
             TO EFFECT THE DECISION MADE - AND THEN INFORM THE SUPPORTERS.



    10.      ENSURE THE SECURITY OF THAT AREA WHICH IS AT CAPACITY.



             PUBLIC                ORDER PATROLS.
ADVISE NEIGHBOURING DIVISIONS/FO RCES WHERE EARLY DISPERSAL IS EFFECTED.
ACTION TO BE TAKEN ON FORESEEABLE PATTERNS OF ARRIVAL



EARLY A R R I V A L S




1.          PRE-MATCH IN T E L L IG E N C E .




2.          OBSERVE AND MONITOR.




3.          SWEEP,      CONTAIN OR CONTROLLED D I S P E R S A L .




4.          ARRANGE EARLY A D M I S S I O N TO THE GROUND WHERE P O S S I B L E .




5.          CONSIDER SPECTATORS COMFORT FOR THOSE ADMITTED INTO THE GROUND.




6.          C ON SID E R   IN TE LL IGE NCE      FROM   THESE   EARLY     ARR IVA LS    WHICH     MAY AFFE CT      POST
            MATCH PLANNING




LATE ARRIVALS



1.          PRE-MATCH IN T E L L I G E N C E .




2.          MAKE AVA IL AB LE S U F F I C I E N T T U R N S T I L E S TO ACCOMMODATE THE LATE COMERS.




3.          DEPLOY S U F F I C I E N T P O L I C E R E SO U R C E S/ R E S E R V E S TO MANAGE THE LATE A R R I V A L S .
GROUND APPROACHING CAPACITY



HERE WE RELY HEAVILY ON PRE-MATCH I N T E L L IG E N C E                     ON   WHICH TO BASE OUR     PLANS.




IF    GROUND   C APA CI TY     IS   APPROACHED      THERE         IS    CLEARLY A NEED       TO CLOSE    ALL    T U R N S T IL E S   TO
ENSURE   THE   SAFETY           OF      THOSE   SUPPORTERS      WITHIN THE GROUND.     WHEN THERE REMAINS
SUPP ORTERS O U T S I D E ,    S T I L L IN TEN T ON G A IN IN G ENTRY INTO THE GROUND, THE OPTIONS ARE AS
FOLLOWS.




1.        C ON SI D E R A D D IT IO N A L RE S O UR CE S,    I.E.       OPERATION SU P P O R T .




2.        IF   NO    SP AC E   AVAILABLE,        D EC ID E    -        CONTAIN    OR   DISPERSE    -   DEPLOY    RESOURCES           TO
          EFFECT THE D E C I S I O N     MADE -     AND THEN INFORM THE S U P P O R T E R S .




3.        ENSURE THE S E C U R IT Y OF THE GROUND.




  .       PU B L IC ORDER P A T R O L S .




5-        A D V I S E NEIGHBOURING D I V I S I O N / F O R C E S WHERE EARLY D I S P E R S A L I S       EFFECTED.
THE   EMERGENCY OP04ING OR FORC I N G OF G ATES TO A L LO W         ACC ESS.




THE SCENARIO ENVISAGED IS WHERE THE GROUND IS NEAR TO, OR AT CAPACITY AND
THE SITUATION OUTSIDE THE GATE IS ONE WHERE BECAUSE OF THE PRESSURE CREATED
BY THE CROWD, THERE IS A SERIOUS R IS K TO L IF E . ALL OTHER CONTINGENCIES HAVE
BEEN TRIED/CONSIDERED AND HAVE F A IL E D . AS THE LAST RESORT:



1.                 ID EN TIFY THE GATE.




2.                 I D E N T I F Y THE AREA WHERE THE SUPPORTERS CAN S AF E L Y ENTER.
                   T H I S MAY MEAN -



         i)        EVACUATING THE TERRACE V IA         GATES TO THE P I T C H OR THROUGH E X I T
                   G A T E S , TO CREATE S P A C E .



         ii)       STOP THE GAME AND B R I E F THE R EFE RE E.



         i i i )   CONSIDER U S E OF C UT TI NG EQUIPMENT.




3.                 INFORM P O L I C E ,   STEWARDS AND CLU B.
                                                                \




4.                 DEPLOY RESOURCES TO:



         i)        CONTROL ENTRY IN T O THE GROUND



         ii)       F A C I L I T A T E EVACUATION OF THE TERRACE



         i i i )   MAINTAIN SEGREGATION




5.                 U SE OF P . A .




6.                 ALERT EMERGENCY S E R V I C E S




7.                 IMPLEMENT EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY P L A N S .




8.                 MOVE TO MAJOR IN CIDENT PROCEDURES I F NECESSARY
                                              SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                         Ref:
    From:    C h i e f   S u p erin ten d en t    Thom pson                             Station/Dept:       A ° HQ

    To:      D eputy      C h ief   C o n sta b le                                      Date:                16.8   .8 9



            SUBJECT:
                                            WRITTEN AGREEMENTS BETWEEN SOUTH YORKSHIRE P OL IC E
                                            AND FOOTBALL CLUBS




              I r e f e r t o y o u r memorandum d a t e d 15 A u g u s t 1 9 8 9 an d c o n f i r m t h a t t h e
              form o f a g r e e m e n t r e l a t i v e t o D o n c a s t e r R o v e r s F o o t b a l l C lu b h a s b e e n
              s e r v e d o n t h e F o o t b a l l C l u b a n d t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e o f t h e DMBC.


              A lth o u g h S u p e r in t e n d e n t G reenw ood i s on a n n u a l l e a v e , th e a c c u r a c y o f
              th e a g reem en t was e s t a b l i s h e d b e f o r e s e r v i c e .   In f a c t , I b e li e v e you
              a r e aw are t h a t th e l e t t e r was am ended t o               'M r M C o l l e t t ' who h a s now
              ta k en o v e r th e C h airm an sh ip o f th e C lu b .           The a c t u a l c o n t e n t w as in
              a g reem en t w it h d i s c u s s i o n s b etw een m y s e lf and S u p e r in t e n d e n t G reenw ood,
              a mem ber o f t h e i m p l e m e n t a t i o n t e a m .


              A sig n ed      copy     is    retu rn ed   h erew ith .




              C h ief     S u p erin ten d en t




Gen/2
                                                SOUTH YO RK S H IR E POLICE
                                                                                              Ref:        JS T /P C

        From:   A ctin g    C h ief    Inspector     Cham bers
                                                                                             Station/Dept:            A1
        To:     C h ief    S u p erin ten d en t   T hom pson                                 Date:                   16 A u g u st   1989



                SUBJECT:               AGREEMENT BETWEEN DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB
                               1       AND THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



                    A t 9 - O O a m o n W e d n e s d a y 1 6 A u g u s t 1989 I h a n d e d t o M r . C . B . J e y n e s ,
                    C h ie f E x e c u tiv e o f th e D o n c a ste r M e tr o p o lita n Borough C o u n c il, a
                    cop y o f t h e a g r e e m e n t b e tw e e n t h e D o n c a s t e r R o v e r s F o o t b a l l C lu b
                    and th e S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e ,   w h ich   in c o r p o r a te d   Lord   J u stice
                    T a y lo r 's reco m m en d a tio n s.
                           A




                    A ctin g       C h ief   Inspector




Gen/2
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN

DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB

           AND THE

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
  This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as   'The Police') and Doncaster Rovers Football Club      (hereafter

  referred to as   'The Club').




  This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

  recommendation   four of the Interim Report of the   Inquiry held by   The Rt Hon

  Lord Justice Taylor     into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15   April 1989,




  The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




^ ^taximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

  each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




  The Club will do this by means of a ticketing arrangement which will record

  the number of persons passing through each turnstile.      Each of the four banks

  of turnstiles will be monitored by a steward aware of the maximum capacities

  for each of the individual areas.




^^he   Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

  approaching capacity.     The Club will be responsible for closing off further

  access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.           The

  Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

  therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




  The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

  public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

  prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
  Filling and Monitoring Terraces

  The Club w i l l p ro v id e on the p e rim e te r tr a c k a steward f o r each pen or

  te rra c e d area d u rin g such tim es th a t th e re are s p e c ta to rs i n th a t pen or

  te rra c e d a re a .     The s o le d u ty o f these stew ards, who w i l l be i n a d d itio n to

  any o th e r stewards employed by The C lub, w i l l be to check crowd c o n d itio n s in

  th e pen o r te rra c e d area to w hich th e y are assigned f o r p o s s ib le overcrowding

   o r d is t r e s s .   The Club w i l l p ro v id e The P o lic e w it h a p la n o f th e ground

   showing where th e stewards w it h t h i s r e s p o n s i b i l it y w i l l be s itu a te d .



   The P o lic e w i l l p ro v id e i n re s p e c t o f each gate i n the p e rim e te r fence (o r

^ ^ r o u p o f gates i f th e y are clo se to g e th e r) p o lic e o f f i c e r s a u th o ris e d to

   decide w hether o r not to a llo w s p e c ta to rs through a gate to r e lie v e

   o ve rcro w d in g .



   A l l p o lic e o f f ic e r s deployed a t p e rim e te r gates w hich w i l l be kept f u l l y open

   a t a l l tim es when s p e c ta to rs are on the te rra c e s , w i l l be a u th o ris e d as above.

   Each w i l l be i n possession o f a p o lic e ra d io i n d ir e c t c o n ta c t w it h p o lic e

   ground c o n tr o l and w i l l be i d e n t i f i a b l e by a d i s t i n c t i v e c o lo u re d ta b a rd .



   The stewards checking the crowd f o r overcrow ding o r d is t r e s s w i l l not be

   issue d w it h p o lic e ra d io s bu t th e p o lic e o f f ic e r s on the gates and p e rim e te r

   tr a c k w i l l communicate to p o lic e ground c o n tr o l any r e le v a n t m a tte r brought to

   t h e i r a t t e n t io n by these stew ards.



   C u ttin g Equipment

   The Club w i l l p ro vid e and make r e a d i ly a v a ila b le s u ita b le and s u f f ic i e n t

   c u t t in g equipment to p e rm it th e immediate removal o f enough fe n c in g to release

   numbers o f s p e c ta to rs i f n e cessary.            T h is c u t t in g equipment w i l l be operated

   by employees o f The Club who w i l l be tr a in e d i n i t s use.                      The use o f such

   equipment w i l l be a t th e d is c r e t io n o f the nominated s e n io r p o lic e o f f i c e r who

   w i l l be the o f f i c e r i n charge o f p o lic in g the event.
  Liaison

  Before each match b o th p a r t ie s to t h i s agreement w i l l l i a i s e i n re s p e c t o f the

   fo llo w in g m a tte rs

          i)    th e a n tic ip a te d number o f s p e c ta to rs expected having            regard

                  to the separate s u p p o rte r groups;



         ii)    the method o f crowd s e g re g a tio n ( i f any) in te n d e d          to be used;



       iii)       any in fo rm a tio n i n r e la t i o n to crowd problem s;



         iv )    th e number and lo c a t io n o f t u r n s t i le s to be made a v a ila b le

                  to each group;



          v)      an e s tim a tio n o f the tim e i t w i l l take each group to pass

                  th rough the t u r n s t i l e s ;



         v i)     where t ic k e t s are used, th a t the in fo rm a tio n on those t i c k e t s

                  corresponds w it h the planned arrangements f o r a d m ittin g

                  s p e c ta to rs to th e ground.



^P o s tp o n e m e n t o f k i c k - o f f i s a t the d is c r e tio n o f the p o lic e o f f i c e r i n command

   a t th e ground.           I t i s th e r e fo r e e s s e n tia l The Club p ro v id e a telephone l i n k

   between the r e fe r e e 's room and the p o lic e c o n tr o l room.



   The P o lic e have prepared co n ting e n cy plans f o r the event o f emergency s e rv ic e s

   being c a lle d to the ground.              These in c lu d e ro u te s o f access, rendezvous

   p o in ts , a c c e s s ib i li t y w it h i n th e ground and ro u te s o f e gress.      The P o lic e w i l l

   l i a i s e w it h The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

   amended o r as o th e rw ise a p p ro p ria te .
k'   The C h ie f C onstable o f South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e has nominated h is Deputy,

     Mr P e te r Hayes QPM LLB MA, as th e C h ie f O f f ic e r w it h r e s p o n s i b i l it y f o r

     l ia i s o n w it h th e management o f each f o o t b a ll c lu b and lo c a l a u th o r ity

     concerned i n re s p e c t o f the s a fe ty and c o n tr o l o f crowds.



     Any v a r ia t i o n o f t h i s agreement i n respect o f a p a r t i c u l a r match w i l l be

     agreed by th e p a r t ie s i n advance in w r it in g .




     SIGNED                                        on b e h a lf o f D oncaster Rovers F o o tb a ll Club



                       SIGNED                   . . on b e h a lf o f South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e



     DATE     .! k .
si&v   R o ve rs   F o o tb a ll   C lu b .L td               .     .          •   TPB/IIMW




 .jcl for* yo;ur a t t e n t io n i s . the ' amendment to th e W ritte n ,
                                 on youi* b e h a lf by Mrs K ' J iltc la le t


 sincerely


                                                  \j     ■^/z///'vv~. 7>^-,
                                                  H -#                             >



                                                             /A .


                                                       / '




            ^==7v «*                   . tr                       1~«.

                   . ■                  . [/£ * ■                        (}.           J~>   ■
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                Ref:       AGC(OPS)/TFB/HMW
                                                                                                            {
        From:    A/Assistant Chief Constable, Operations                                        Station/Dept:       Headquarters
        To:       Chief Superintendent A Division                                               Date:      1   December 1989


                 SUBJECT:      .       DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB - AMENDMENT TO WRITTEN AGREEMENT


                   Please arrange for the attached amendment to the original agreement
                   off 16 August 1989 to be signed by the Secretary or Director of
                   Doncaster Rovers Football Club and return, please.
                   Once signed, I will supply copies to yourself and to the Club.




                   A/Assistant Chief Constable
                   Operations               iJTrt                  YORKS. POLICE
              YORKS. POLICE

    A-         »*^£?P'fCUC»0|eK                                    ii.
              4 L it e I9S9
                                                              A1 SUB/DiV.
              A D .M Q                                        DONCASTfiS
          D( )
             J   ^m      EL.       “


                  2 C h ie f S uperin te n de n t Thompson
                  The document o f amendment has been signed by Mrs K J O ld f ie ld the
                  S e c re ta ry o f the Doncaster Rovers F o o tb a ll C lub.




                  In s p e c to r
                  6 December 1 9 8 9
                  A1 Sub d iv i s i o n .


   SOUT H YORKS. POLICE
                                                                               (h

              - 7 DEC 1989
                                                             iJluJL&
                 A*O.H.Q.
              I Q N ^ s t e r ______,                                      7^/9

                 -3-     A/ACC     (OPS)    MR B r o o m h e a d

                         The d o c u m e n t /^ f amendment              has   been   sign ed   and   is   returned   for   your
                         a tten tio n .     (
                                            / / _______


Gen/2                    C hief    S u p erin ten d en t
                         7 .1 2 .8 9
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                       RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE INTERIM REPORT
                       INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


          NOTICE OF AMENDMENT TO THE AGREEMENT OF 16 AUGUST 1989



 TAKE NOTICE THAT THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB
 AND SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OF 16 AUGUST 1989, IS HEREBY AMENDED AND
 ADDED TO.
 THE AMENDMENTS ARE AS SPECIFIED IN APPENDIX
 THE AGREEMENTS SHALL COME INTO OPERATION ON                                  (DATE)


SIGNED..] . . . . . . . . . . .                  ON BEHALF OF DONCASTER ROVERS FC
SIGNED .1                                        ON BEHALF OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
          1        1       1
DATE          h:        fa. . .tlf*!•.........
APPENDIX '   ' - AMENDMENTS
CURRENT PROVISION                      AMENDED PROVISION
The Club will do this by means of a    The Club will do this by means of
ticketing arrangement which will       a steward with a hand-held 'clicker'
record the number of persons passing   (counter) which will record the
through each turnstile. Each of the    number of persons passing through
four banks of turnstiles will be       each turnstile. Each of the four banks
monitored by a steward aware of the     of turnstiles will be monitored by a
maximum capacities for each of the      steward aware of the maximum capacities
individual areas.                       for each of the individual areas.
      AGREEMENT BETWEEN

ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

           AND THE

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as   'The Police') and Rotherham United Football Club (hereafter

referred to as   'The Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation   four of the Interim Reportof the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor     into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.




The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.     The Club will be responsible for closing off further

^access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.       The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or
    terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

    any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

    the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

    or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

    showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




    The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

    decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

    overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

    at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

    Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

    ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




    The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

    issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

    track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

    their attention by these stewards.
)


Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.        This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.        The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters

     i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

          to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

          to each group;




     v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

          through the turnstiles;

                           4



    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

          spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.    These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.    The Police will

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                       .. on behalf of Rotherham United Football Club




SIGNED                             behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
 BARNSLEY
 FOOTBALL CLUB LTD
         ^    E   S    T    A   B   L   I   S   H   E   D    1887

 O A K W E LL G R O U N D   BARNSLEY    SO UTH YO R K SH IR E S71 1ET   TELEPH O N E: BARNSLEY (0226) 295353


 MJS/JM                                                                 22nd August, 1989.
 DCC/JEL



 Mr. P. Hayes,
  Deputy Chief Constable,
  South Yorkshire Police,
^^olice Headquarters,
^0nig Hill,
  Sheffield.
  S3 8LY


 Dear Mr. Hayes,
 I write in reply to your letter dated 15th August 1989 addressed to our Chairman,
 Mr. G. Buckle, and following our meeting of earlier today.

 I am now able to return the agreement which I have signed on behalf of the Conpany
 with the full consent of my Chairman and Board of Directors.

 Like yourselves we are greatly concerned for the safety and general well-being of
 supporters who attend Oakwell and we shall continue to use our best endeavours to
 ensure the safety of everyone who attends our matches.




                                                        Yours sincerely,




                                                        M. y. SPINKS,
                                                        Secretary.




DIRECTORS: G. BUCKLE L.L.B. (CHAIRMAN) J. A. DENNIS C. H. HARRISON M. R. HAYSELDEN   R. F. POTTER   C. B. TAYLOR
                                SECRETARY: M. J. SPINKS TEAM MANAGER: A. J. CLARKE
                                        REGISTERED IN ENGLAND NO. 66716
 AGREEMENT BETWEEN

BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB

       AND THE

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
  This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as 'The Police') and Barnsley Football Club (hereafter referred to

  as 'The Club').




  This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

  recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

  Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




  The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




^ yiaximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

  each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




  The Club will do this by means of a mechanical number recorder fitted to each

  turnstile.    The figures recorded will be carried by a runner to a central

  point where   they will be collated by an employee of The Club.




  The Club will inform the police control    room when a particular pen or area is

^Approaching    capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

  access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

  Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

   therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




  The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

  public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

   prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
  Filling and Monitoring Terraces

  The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

  terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

  terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

  any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

  the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

  or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

  showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




  The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

^ ^ r o u p of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

  decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

  overcrowding.




  All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

  at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

  Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

  ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




  The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

^Tssued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

  track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

  their attention by these stewards.




  Cutting Equipment

  The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

  cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

  numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

  by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

  equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

  will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
 Liaison

 Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

 following matters

      i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

           to the separate supporter groups;




     ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




    iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




     iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

           to each group;




      v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

            through the turnstiles;




     iv)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

            corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

            spectators to the ground.




^festponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

 at the ground.      It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

 between the referee's room and the police control room.




 The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

 being called to the ground.      These include routes of access, rendezvous

 points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.      The Police will

 liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

 amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




                                    Pt/VQ
SIGNED .                     ..   on behalf of Barnsley Football Club   A-7-0




SIGNED                            on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
              T


DATE
    Sheffield Wednesday
                 Football Club pic




              W ith e o m p lim en ts ^
    Hillsborough, Sheffield   S6 1SW.   Telephone: (0742) 343122
    Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No.547709 WEDNES
J      t   o.N 0742 337145 R egistered in England No. 62478
       AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

            AND THE

      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
  This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as 'The   Police') and Sheffield   Wednesday Football Club (hereafter

  referred to as 'The   Club').




  This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

  recommendation four   of the Interim Report    of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

  Lord Justice Taylor   into the Hillsborough    Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




  The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




^ ^laximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

  each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




  The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

  number of persons passing through each turnstile.




   The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

   approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

^feiccess to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.         The

   Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

   therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




   The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

   public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

   prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




   Filling and Monitoring Terraces

   The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

   terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.




Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
   Liaison

  Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

  following matters:-

        i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

              to the separate supporter groups;




       ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




      iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




       iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

              to each group;




        v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;




       vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.




^ P o s t p o n e m e n t of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

  at the ground.     It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

  between the referee's room and the police control room.




  The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

  being called to the ground.      These include routes of access, rendezvous

  points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.           The Police will

   liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

  amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                            on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                                  Football Club




SIGNED                           on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
                  T


         "O   -   T> -
DATE
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

           AND THE

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
  This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as 'The Police') and Sheffield United Football Club (hereafter

  referred to as 'The Club').




  This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

  recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

  Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




  The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




^ yiaximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

  each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




  The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

  number of persons passing through each turnstile.      The Spion Kop is divided

   into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

   turnstiles in Shoreham Street.    The Club will provide stewards to prevent a



•
   cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other.




  The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

   approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

   access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

  Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

   therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




   The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

   public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

   prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
   Filling and Monitoring Terraces

   The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

   terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

   terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

   any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

   the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

   or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

   showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




   The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

^ ^ g r o u p of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

   decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

   overcrowding.




   All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

   at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

   Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

   ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




   The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

^ ^ s s u e d with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

   track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

   their attention by these stewards.




   Cutting Equipment

   The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

   cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

   numbers of spectators if necessary.    This cutting equipment will be operated

   by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

   equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

  will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
  Liaison

  Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

  following matters

        i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

             to the separate supporter groups;




       ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




      iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




       iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

              to each group;




        v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;




       vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.




^ P o s t p o n e m e n t of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

   at the ground.     It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

  between the referee's room and the police control room.




   The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

   being called to the ground.     These include routes of access, rendezvous

   points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.          The Police will

   liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

   amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




                         SIGNED ...
                                 on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club




                SIGNED           on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
                                                                    £< cxx's          \< i£t

                                                                   £~>]/ ^                           C

                                                                   r f     /tc/cuij-^t^9 - > —   ^




                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                          RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE INTERIM REPORT
                          INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


                  NOTICE OF AMENDMENT TO THE AGREEMENT OF 16 AUGUST 1989


    1   TATTF. NOTICE THAT THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL
        CLUB AND SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OF 16 AUGUST 1989, IS HEREBY
        AMENDED AND ADDED TO.

    2   THE AMENDMENTS ARE AS SPECIFIED IN APPENDIX 'A'

^   3   THE AGREEMENTS SHALL COME INTO OPERATION ON 18 OCTOBER 1989




        SIGNED                                  ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD UNITED FC

        SIGNED                                  ON BEHALF OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                         7
        D A T E ____
                                            APPENDIX 'A' - AMENDMENTS




CURRENT PROVISION                                                          AMENDED PROVISION

U nder th e h e a d in g                                                   The am ended p r o v i s i o n
M aximum C a p a c i t i e s     for   T erraces                           Maximum C a p a c i t i e s
                                                                           for T erraces
The C lu b w i l l do t h i s by m eans o f t h e
c o m p u te r ise d sy ste m w h ich r e c o r d s th e                   The C lu b w i l l do t h i s b y m eans
num ber o f p e r s o n s p a s s i n g th r o u g h e a c h               o f th e c o m p u te r ise d sy ste m w h ich
tu r n stile .      T h e S p i o n Ko p i s d i v i d e d i n t o         r e c o r d s t h e num ber o f p e r s o n s
tw o p e n s .     One p e n i s e n t e r e d v i a t u r n s t i l e s   p a ssin g th rou gh each t u r n s t il e .
in John S t r e e t , th e o th e r by t u r n s t i l e s in
Shorehanr S t r e e t .      The C lu b w i l l p r o v id e
stew ard s to p reven t a c r o ss flo w of s p e c ta to r s
from    one   pen    to   th e    oth er.
        Mr. A. P age, JP, F .A . S .I .
        C h ie f M etr o p o lita n Ambulance O f f i c e r ,                              AP/RM/MDS/144:3

                                                                S' I"'1C' ’                thq/ t fb / sjh


       K oorgate^R o.d,                                                                    25            * »
       ROTHERHAM. S60 2BQ




W      Dear Mr, P age,

      X r e f e r fco your l e t t e r d a ted 22 A ueust IQfiQ       Wh<„v, T
      Constable.                                                      *kich I respond to on behalf of the Chief
                N.



      the nominated officer” f0 / the^SoJth7 Yorkshire* Met °h l ^ 0fflcer {Staff Officer) is
      Recommendation 35 of Lord Justice Taylor’s report.    opo ltan Aobulance Service vide

      In re la tio n to Recommendation 36 of that                      ««-
     Sub-Divisional Officers responsible for do!Hc n*                   i          have been        with the
     Yorkshire, for the Operational 0 M er                                   L ufootba11 *rounds       South **
     Headquarters. Normally this Operational Order a h ™ n H              **tch, to be forwarded to your
     U      to be played and w y a m e n S e n t t ^ t t o ? o r ^ ^             *Z ^
                                                                                 th? e day® befor* * »atch
     s e n t to you direct from the Division              There w*ri       itional information, will be
     arranged a t short notice, and I have In *Hnrt r              b *      occasions when matches are
     cannot apply, but I ca^ « B u r e you that J UP.                 PlflyB ^       the ’threc da*
     completed, it will be dispatched to you                         " 88 ®ach ° P ® r a tio n a l Order i s

            I ,have the lnf° ™ a t i o n to hand that you reouest in w i . h              4- »
     - the location and q u alification s of each of t-h* * ,n                    1 »           Recommendation 41
     t h . f o o t b . l l grou n d . - , „ 1 U                                                    *»« « t . n d , t

    Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




    T .F . Broomhead
    C h ie f Superintendent-
    (O p er a tio n s & T ra f Mr )



    Copy to: Mr. Hayes - Deputy Chief Constable
                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                        AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                            FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                               ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                                       TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 828820


                          OUR REF:
                                                AP/RM/MDS/144:3                                   Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                          YOUR REF:
                                                                                                         CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                          Please ask for:   ACMAO R Morley, ext 261                                      AMBULANCE OFFICER




  22   August 1989


  Mr P Wright                                                                            ' £ r ' .... b \ .    C .J l
  Chief Constable
  Police Headquarters                                                     |             U lO                  //
  Snig Hill                                                               |   Z 4       A -               £
  SHEFFIELD
  SI


 Dear Mr Wright
                                                                        < r~ ty   f j              ^ (fr-o J y

 ^ 7 l o r 'f " f p ^ t ! ° Ur attention c e rt* i ” « c o m.end.tion» »«de in Lord Justice                                    7
                                                                                                                        h -i

 Kaco— e m U t i o n 35 - The Nominated Officer for the South Yorkshire
                          Metropolitan Ambulance Service is Mr Roger
                          Assistant Chief Officer (Staff Officer).                                      1

 Ke c o neo dati on 36 - Make, direct reference to the provision of the Police
                         Operational Plan prior to each match, to be forwarded
                         to the Ambulance Service. I should be grateful if you
                         would ensure that this information arrives at my
                         Headquarters in good time to enable Mr Morley to
                         process and distribute copies to my Liaison Officers
                         and Control Room.

Becni midatioa 41 - Refers to the specific location of the Medical
                          Practitioner. Again it is vital that my Service is
                          aware of the location of the Medical Practitioner and
                          also the qualifications held by the attending doctor


I am sure you have already taken steps to ensure that the above

                                                  “ i r    be of       f- " h~                            - -
Yours ^ n c l r o l y __________




A P ag e____________                        r
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER




                                                                                                              CP65/32586
TELEPHONt.:                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                             SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P HAYES QPM LLB MA
                                      ✓

DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                     DCC/JEL
                                                           23 August 1989

F H Smith Esq QPM BA
Honorary Secretary
ACPO No.2 (North East) Region
Cleveland Constabulary
P 0 Box 70
Ladgate Lane
Middlesbrough
Cleveland TS8 9EH




I refer to your faxed letter of 23 August 1989 and as requested forward the
following information in relation to the implementation of the Taylor
recommendations.

There are five football league clubs in South Yorkshire, these being Sheffield
Wednesday F C , Sheffield United F C , Barnsley F C , Rotherham United F C , and,
Doncaster Rovers FC.

In pursuance of recommendation 26 of the Report, the Chief Constable has
nominated me as the Chief Officer with responsibility for liaising with the
management of each of the football clubs and local authorities concerned in
respect of the safety and control of crowds.

All those recommendations in which the police are involved‘and which were
required to be in place by the start of the football season, namely 19 August
1989, have been achieved.

Written agreements have been entered into with all five clubs and these are
signed by myself and an official on behalf of the clubs.

An implementation team under my chairmanship is working on all the remaining
recommendations in liaison with the clubs, local authorities, and the Fire and
Ambulance Services.

Considerable progress is being made and it is thought likely all the
recommendations will be implemented in a very short timescale.

The additional manpower requirement arising from the above may well present
problems logistically in Force and in the fullness of time may result in
significantly higher cost to the clubs in which connection resistance can
be expected.

Yours sincerely
      .   -•••• •
f1:
 ■L
  i'-..

•Q        remote I'WTinii      i?:   £i iT
 1                  06--:; 3
TELEPHONE:                                                                S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                                    POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
TELEX: 547996                                                                SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742)   523409                                                           SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P W R I G H T CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                                                 FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION



DATE                           • • • • • • • • • • •   #!•




TO


FOR                                                                       ...............

ATTENTION

OF


COMMENTS




                                                                                                :: s s : » . )

FROM                           .                                                                      .


TEL NO                                                                                                       .

NO OF                                                                                                       ....
PAGES
(INCLUDING THIS PAGE)




IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY PLEASE CONTACT

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
TEL NO: 0742 768522 EXTENSION 3409
 TELEPHONE:                                             S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE
 SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                  POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
 TELEX: 547996                                                SNIG HILL
 FAX: (0742) 523243                                            SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


 P HAYES Q P M LLB M A
 D E P U T Y CHIEF CONSTABLE                                  DCC/JEL
                                                              23 August 1989

 F H Smith Esq QPM BA
 Honorary Secretary
 ACPO No.2 (North East) Region
 Cleveland Constabulary
 P 0 Box 70
 Ladgate Lane
 Middlesbrough
 Cleveland TS8 9EH




 I refer to your faxed letter of 23 August 1989 and as requested forward the
 following information in relation to the implementation of the Taylor
 recommendations.

 There are five football league clubs in South Yorkshire, these being Sheffield
 Wednesday F C , Sheffield United F C , Barnsley F C , Rotherham United F C , and,
 Doncaster Rovers FC.

 In pursuance of recommendation 26 of the Report, the Chief Constable has
 nominated me as the Chief Officer with responsibility for liaising with the
 management of each of the football clubs and local authorities concerned in
 respect of the safety and control of crowds.

  All those recommendations in which the police are involved and which were
- required to be-in place by the star-t of the football season, namely 19 August
  1989, have been achieved.

 Written agreements have been entered into with all five clubs and these are
 signed by myself, and an official on behalf of the clubs.

 An implementation team under my chairmanship is working on all the remaining
 recommendations in liaison with the clubs, local authorities, and the Fire and
 Ambulance Services.

 Considerable progress is being made and it is thought likely all the
 recommendations will be implemented in a very short timescale.

 The additional manpower requirement arising from the above may well present
 problems logistically in Force and in the fullness of time may result in
 significantly highly cost to the clubs in which connection resistance can
 be expected.

 Yours sincerely




           7                                              r
                           ■15=42         CLEUELPINB:P0UICE                                  0642'!326326;::P.02




    Aij* *' 'iatioii of C h i e f folic© Officers                  ~                                               ****3

                                               '* j j   a- a*          - **.*   ~

    I'lonoi’acv ba^'-euitry:                                                        - fao* VI
    r,H. Jimitn,            fa,A.                                                   ‘■■'oiLceHeaoqu.wr.ft! ■
                                                                                                           :
    Y t\ir ”Sr:t;                                                                      aftsj-Ks i..skm:
                                                                                    VUW3:'ii?15ru\::C''
     ■u ref:         Flib / PG / OAE-                                               ClCv^t's'-d 1bS V..--




                                 A; L C b i e : Corr:U:&o i. e;
                                 No 2 Reg i ou A A. , r , v


0



                                    ■ r

                 /      ■ 'fo-ti ' a t t a c h e d t e l e x ma s&age n a s b e e n r e c s i v e a iron?
                 i yjo, ] R e g i o n A . C . P . O . r e o u e s i i i n a m r o r n i a t iuti &b ;~o
                   t h e i m p i e m e a t s 1 1 o r o f t n e l a v l o r r e c o r n m e n a s t k l. „■

                              To m e e t t n e r e q u e s t e d r e s p o n s e t i m e , i w o u l a be
                       ■-.I - e - t u i i f y o u r r e p l y c o u l a be f a x e d t o 0 6 4 2 - 3 z d 326
                          i ' 1 ■ I ■> i \ i() .a.m. t o m o r r o w , *i4 t h A u g u s t , cc e n a D i e
                     :a? i.o p r e p a r e a R e g i o n a l r e p l v .

                      a v: ; .                          Vo u r s   r a x t h I u I-1 y -




                                                        Hersc?rarv b e e 1 e i a •:y
i:>:<£U5   i_.i_tvtL.HrNL' ruun-c
      1989-18-23     15:42            CLEVELAND POLICE                                                  0642 326326                               P . 01

         f t I.

                                                                                                                                                               *4 *1




                                  CL £ V E                    M D



                        v J M ll           6 1#*                                                       's                                      ./ ..v-^ * ,,
 DIV»/QEPT.            t** *a-« *£*   # #«p** 9 sMb       js i e>              f-«G. . » $ * r * 3 i « s It i S- i *   « ;i 3 % * J. s a * 1 3 3 £% % * *




 BRA'NQ-S

 MAIC                    7                            Vl/v
                                                                        RANK



                                             FACSIM1L                     Mi K S S

                        ,.-p* .,.'P                   5     /;

 TO                    W      stt'.                                 ■   fax   , NO.                0 1 4 - 2                             6 2 5Z,+ <

 ATTENTION OF

FROM                     .fteN.                           M* /                        AXJc.


NUMBER OF P A G E S                   .§*.                (Including ln»

message:                                     ..... ...........




                                         m
DATE                                                                                                                                TU vt

SiGhCD




*S = A Q S   p e n m u s t b e u s e d w i t h this f o r m ,

A N Y PROBLEM S R E G A RD IN G THIS TRANSM ISSION, m .£.A SE T E L £ P H O ^
          MEETING BETWEEN THE CHAIRMEN AND SECRETARIES
           OF THE FIVE FOOTBALL CLUBS AND THE POLICE
                       IN SOUTH YORKSHIRE
          TO DISCUSS THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
             INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS


         TO BE HELD AT THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
      SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA ROAD, SHEFFIELD
          AT 2.00 PM ON THURSDAY 24 AUGUST 1989


                          A G E N D A




Apologies for absence


Opening address by the Deputy Chief Constable


Functional responsibilities of the Implementation Team


The written agreements


Finance


Liaison/the way forward


Any other business
Similar letter sent to:-

Mr M Spinks, Secretary, Barnsley Football Club, Oakwell Ground, Grove Street,
  Barnsley S71 1ET
Mr N Darnil, Secretary, Rotherham United Football Club, Millmoor Ground,
  Rotherham S60 1HR
Mr D Capper, Secretary, Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane,
  Sheffield S2 4SU
Mr G Mackrell FCCA, Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough,
  Sheffield S6 1SW
                                                       DCC/JEL
                                                       6 September 1989

Mrs K J Oldale
Secretary ■
Doncaster Rovers Football Club
Belle Vue
Doncaster D84 5HT




     Dear Mrs Oldale

     1 have pleasure In forwarding two copies of the minutes of the
     meeting held at the South Yorkshire Police Sports & Social Club,
     Niagara Road, Sheffield, on Thursday 24 August 1989.

     In terms of the Taylor Recommendations 1 believe we are making
     excellent progress and this has been made possible by the high
     degree of understanding and co-operation between ourselves.

     May I thank you for attending the meeting and for your
     contribution.  If at any time you feel I can be of assistance
     please do not hesitate to get in touch.

     Yours sincerely




Enclosure
                          MINUTES OF A MEETING BETWEEN
            THE CHAIRMEN AND SECRETARIES OF THE FIVE FOOTBALL CLUBS
                       AND THE POLICE IN SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  TO DISCUSS THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                     INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS
            HELD AT THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB
                     AT 2.00 PM ON THURSDAY 24 AUGUST 1989


Present:

P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable (Chairman)
Chief Superintendent T F Broomhead, Operations & Traffic
Chief Inspector G Chambers, 'A' Division
Superintendent R M Simpson, 'B' Division                       South Yorkshire
Chief Inspector C Warne LLB, 'C' Division                      Police
Superintendent P Hale, 'D' Division
Chief Inspector J Donnelly LLB, 'D' Division
Chief Inspector D Beal LLB, 1F 1 Division
Superintendent M J Torr, Training
Sergeant D Foster, AVA Department
Mr K Chappie, Director, Doncaster Rovers Football Club
Mrs K J Oldale, Secretary, Doncaster Rovers Football Club
Mr J Dennis, Director, Barnsley Football Club
Mr M Spinks, Secretary,   Barnsley Football Club
Mr N Darnil, Secretary, Rotherham United Football Club
Mr D Dooley, Managing Director, Sheffield United Football Club
Mr D Capper, Secretary, Sheffield United Football Club
Mr G Mackrell FCCA, Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club


 1/1989    OPENING ADDRESS BY THE DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE

 Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that he had written to football club chairmen on
 15 August expressing the hope that they could meet with himself and other
 police representatives in the near future.  Today's meeting was timely in that
 it combined the normal annual meeting with an opportunity to discuss events
 that had occurred since the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
^Report on the Hillsborough Disaster.

Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that the Chief Constable, Mr Wright, had
determined that the recommendations of the Report involving the police would
all be implemented in South Yorkshire.   It was however not only the
responsibility of the police but also the clubs and the local authorities to
ensure that such implementation occurred.

At a press conference following a recent Police Authority meeting, Mr Hayes
said he had commented on the excellent co-operation which had for a long time
existed between the clubs and police in South Yorkshire.  This had resulted in
all the immediately achievable recommendations of the Taylor Report being
implemented and showed a clear willingness on the part of the football clubs
to assist the police in every way possible to that end.

Mr Hayes said that with mutual respect, a proper understanding of each other's
problems, commonsense and goodwill, all things were possible. With this in
mind progress could be made rapidly. Much had already been achieved but there
was still more to do.

It was then agreed to follow the prepared agenda paper provided to assist
discussions.
                                        - 2 -


     2/1989   FUNCTIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE IMPLEMENTATION TEAM

    Mr Hayes gave the meeting contact telephone numbers of key members of the
    police implementation team. He reminded the meeting that the written
    agreements had been completed as a matter of urgency but further work would
    now progress with individual members of the team having responsibility for key
    areas. Details of these areas and the officers concerned were given to the
    meeting. A wealth of information was being collated and this would be
    available to the clubs at any time.


     3/1989   THE WRITTEN AGREEMENTS

    Mr Hayes reminded the meeting that the agreements had to be completed by
    19 August 1989 and this had been achieved.  Mr Hayes commented that although
    the Taylor Report recommendations did not have the force of law they did
    nevertheless have Central Government approval and as such they would be


•
    regarded by ourselves as being imperatives.

    He reminded the meeting of the mechanism that had been used to   achieve the
    agreements, at the clubs' request drafts being prepared by the   police and
    subsequent refinement being made by negotiation. Although the    agreements
    differed slightly in some areas the core of agreement remained   the same for
    everyone.

    There then followed a discussion during which Mr Dooley (Sheffield United FC)
    asked if the agreements were likely to change following Lord Justice Taylor's
    Final Report. Mr Hayes said there was always the possibility of change and a
    'notice of amendment' had been prepared should such change be necessary.

    Mr Mackrell (Sheffield Wednesday FC) told the meeting that there might be
    problems on the horizon with the local licensing authorities as Sheffield had
    asked for a schedule of stewards' deployment to be prepared and forwarded to
    them.  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club did not at this stage wish to provide
    a definitive list as matters were still in a position of change.



•
    Mr Hayes said that he appreciated that in the short term some experimentation
    was necessary. He was to have a meeting with the local authority in the near
    future where he would raise the matter.

    Mr Mackrell also commented that there was some difficulty in achieving an
    effective working relationship with the local authority which was echoed by
    Mr Dooley. The difficulty was compounded by the fact that there was no one
    individual who could determine urgent policy, it being handled by an 'advisory
    group'. Chief Superintendent Broomhead confirmed this.

    Superintendent Hale also remarked that he had had difficulty in relation to
    the agreement of safety matters at football grounds referred to the local
    authority.

    Mr Darnil (Rotherham United FC) and Mr Spinks (Barnsley FC) said that they
    did not have similar problems with their particular local authorities.
    Superintendent Simpson confirmed this for Barnsley.

    Mr Hayes said that he would express the Sheffield clubs' concerns to the local
    authority in Sheffield about the problem in terms of certification, clubs
    being excluded from meetings and the unwieldy nature of the decision making
    process.
                                          - 3 -


     4/1989   FINANCE

    Mr Hayes reminded the meeting of the scale of charges presently applied to the
    policing of football matches.  In the light of the recent police pay award it
    was proposed to increase these charges by 9.25%.  It was agreed that from the
    start of the current football season the payment for police services would be
    based on the existing contract, amended as necessary to    take account ofthe
    pay award, subject to a possible review as below.

    Mr Dooley commented that the financial returns for a Littlewoods Cup match
    between Sheffield United and Rotherham United had already been completed.
    Mr Hayes said the principle was none-the-less agreed and that anomalies would
    be resolved later by negotiation.

    Mr Hayes informed the meeting that it was a consequence of the Taylor Report
    the police numbers at football matches would increase. This matterwould have
    to be reported to the Police Authority as it would then     be a matter forthem


•
    to determine if the scale of charges should be altered as a result of this
    increase and such a change may occur during the present season.

    Mr Spinks asked if all those organisations utilising police manpower paid for
    those services. He was told that they did.

    Mr Dennis asked whether the Police Authority would complete such a review and
    what would the effect of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report be on such a
    review. Mr Hayes said he did not know if such a review would in fact take
    place, it was a matter for the Police Authority following his report to them
    on the matter. He did not know at this stage if his Report would include
    recommendations for increase but that was obviously a possibility.

    Mr Mackrell stated that clubs might well consider using private security
    companies within their grounds. Mr Hayes remarked that this was a matter for
    the club but that in the light of recent reports such as Popplewell and now
    Taylor the presence of police officers inside the ground now seemed to be
    almost mandatory.


^    5/1989   LIAISON/THE WAY FORWARD

    Mr Hayes said that following the implementation of all the recommendations
    made by Lord Justice Taylor which had to be in place by the beginning of the
    season, there were a number of residual matters which now had to be
    considered.

    Chief Superintendent Broomhead then outlined those matters which were
    currently being addressed, referring to a briefing paper which had been
    previously circulated (a copy of this paper is attached at Appendix 'A').

    Mr Hayes commented that    these recommendations needed to be implemented as soon
    as possible and suggested a method of rapidly dealing with them. A position
    statement would be prepared by the police 'expert' on the matter. This would
    then be discussed, refined and implemented at local level following
    consultation with himself.   It was accepted by the meeting that this would be
    an excellent starting point and was welcomed by the clubs.

    Mr Hayes emphasised the   local nature of such agreement and implementation, the
    expert's position paper   being only a starting point.
                                         - 4 -


    Mr Darnil (Rotherham United FC) said that the sooner those agreements were
    reached the better so that the clubs could bid to the Football Trust for funds
    to assist in any implementation necessary.

    Mr Hayes said that a key element would be the training of both police officers
    and stewards, such training concentrating in the main on how to interpret
    crowd stress and density.

    Superintendent Torr at the request of the meeting outlined the proposed
    training package. A video was to be prepared which would assist in
    identifying signs of distress and analysing crowd dynamics.  Such a video
    would have to be credible and of a high production quality.  In the interim a
    booklet of photographs was being circulated to all officers, showing differing
    numbers of people in a similar area.

    Superintendent Hale commented that the value of such a booklet was limited,
    particularly to stewards who would relate far more to areas of the football


•
    ground they knew.  Superintendent Torr said that work was in hand to show
    actual crowds on local club stands and terraces when they are half, three-
    quarters and full by means of photographs which would be made available to the
    club for use by the stewards concerned.

    Superintendent Torr continued saying that a laminated card had been circulated
    to all officers on duty at football grounds giving signs and symptoms of
    treatment of persons in distress from crushing. These cards could also be
    circulated to club stewards if the club so wished.


     6/1989    ANY OTHER BUSINESS

         6.1   Frequency of Meetings

    The members of the meeting felt that there was not a need for regular meetings
    at this level, most work now needed to be done at local level.  If meetings
    were needed they could be arranged as necessary apart from the normal annual



•
    meeting now well established.


         6.2   Ambulance Service

    Mr Mackrell commented that all members of the meeting should be aware that the
    South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service required clubs to signs forms
    of indemnity.  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club were unhappy with this and
    needed to look more closely at the matter with their legal advisers. All
    clubs stated that they had received similar notices.

    The fact was noted by the meeting.




    There being no further business the meeting closed.
                                                                                          APPENDIX 'A'



                                   LIAISON/THE WAY FORWARD



 TURNSTILES


 METHOD OF C O UN T I N G - RESULTS TO BE AVAI L A B LE IN POLICE GROUND CONTROL.


 CLOSE C I R C U I T T E L E V I S I O N


 TO BE INSTALLED TO ENABLE CROWD D E N S I T I E S O UTSIDE THE GROUND, WITHIN
 CONCOURSE AREAS AND IN PENS AND OTHER STANDING AREAS, TO BE MONITORED
 BEFORE AND THRO U G H OU T THE MATCH - THE RESULT OF ALL CCTV MONITORING TO
 BE AVAILABLE IN T H E P O LI C E GROUND CONTROL.


 SIGNPOSTING

 IN   RESPECT OF SP ECTATORS               BOTH I N S I D E AND O U T S I D E THE GROUND,         S I G N S TO BE
 COMPREHENSIBLY REVIEWED.              I T SHO ULD, I N RELATION TO THE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
 EACH MATCH,       BE U N- A M B IG U O U S , E Y E -C A T C H I N G , S I M P L E AND CLEAR AND SHOULD
 BE DES IGNED TO ENSURE R A P I D MOVEMENT OF SPECTATORS TO T H E IR APPR OPR IA TE
 VIEWING A R E A .



 INFORMATION ON TICKETS

FOR L I A I S O N A S AGREED IN THE WRITTEN AGREEMENT WITH THE C L U B S .



COMMUNICATIONS


a) POLICE GROUND CONTROL

CO NSI DERATION TO BE GIVEN TO SOUND PROOFING THESE CONTROL ROOMS A GA IN ST
E X C E S S I V E CROWD N O I S E S .


b) TELEPHONE LINKS

TO    COMPLIMENT          RADIO      COMMUNICATIONS,         THERE     SHOULD      BE     A       COMPLETELY
SEPARATE SYSTEM 6 F LAND L I N E S WITH TELEPHONE                      LINKS    BETWEEN           THE   P OL IC E
GROUND CONTROL AND KEY P O I N T S I N THE GROUND.

c) THE PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

WITHIN THE P O L I C E GROUND CONTROL ROOM, THERE SHOULD BE A P U B L I C ADDRESS
SYSTEM TO COMMUNICATE WITH I N D I V I D U A L AREAS I N S I D E AND . O U T S I D E THE
GROUND.  IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENTS SHOULD BE PROCEEDED BY A UfflhfD SI GN AL TO
CATCH THE A TTE NT IO N OF THE CROWD, D E S P I T E THE HIGH LEVEL OF N O I S E I N THE
GROUND.   T H I S ARRANGEMENT SHOULD                    BE   PROMINENTLY     A D V E R T IS E D    ON    EVERY
PROGRAMME SOLD FOR EVERY MATCH.


d) ILLUMINATED ADVERTISING BOARDS

THESE BOARDS SHOULD BE USED WHERE POSSIBLE TO ADDRESS THE CROWD.
 TURNSTILES

 METHOD OF COUNTING - RESULTS TO BE AVAILABLE IN POLICE GROUND CONTROL.


 CLOSE CIRCUIT TELEVISION

 TO  BE INSTALLED TO ENABLE CROWD DENSITIES OUTSIDE THE GROUND. L'JTHIN
 CONCOURSE AREAS AND IN PENS AND OTHER STANDING AREAS, TO BE MONITORED
 BEFORE AND T HROUGHOUT THE MATCH - T HE RESULT OF ALL CCTV MONITORING TO
 BE AVAILABLE IN THE P O LI C E GROUND CONTROL.


 SIGNPOSTING

IN RESPECT OF SPECTATORS BOTH INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE GROUND, SIGNS TO BE
COMPREHENSIBLY REVIEWED.   IT SHOULD, IN RELATION TO THE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
EACH MATCH,   BE UN-AMBIGUOUS, EYE-CATCHING, SIMPLE AND CLEAR AND SHOULD
BE DESIGNED TO ENSURE RAPID MOVEMENT OF SPECTATORS TO THEIR APPROPRIATE
VIEWING AREA.


INFORMATION ON TICKETS

FOR LIAISON AS AGREED IN THE WRITTEN AGREEMENT WITH THE CLUBS.


COMMUNICATIONS


a) POLICE GROUND CONTROL

CONSIDERATION TO BE GIVEN TO SOUND PROOFING THESE CONTROL ROOMS AGAINST
EXCESSIVE CROWD NOISES.

b) TELEPHONE LINKS

TO COMPLIMENT RADIO COMMUNICATIONS, THERE SHOULD BE A COMPLETELY
SEPARATE SYSTEM OF LAND LINES WITH TELEPHONE LINKS BETWEEN THE POLICE
GROUND CONTROL AND KEY POINTS IN THE GROUND.

c) THE PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

WITHIN THE POLICE GROUND CONTROL ROOM, THERE SHOULD BE A PUBLIC ADDRESS
SYSTEM TO COMMUNICATE WITH INDIVIDUAL AREAS INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE
GROUND.  IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENTS SHOULD BE PROCEEDED BY A LAND SIGNAL TO
CATCH THE ATTENTION OF THE CROWD, DESPITE THE HIGH LEVEL OF NOISE IN THE
GROUND.   THIS ARRANGEMENT SHOULD BE PROMINENTLY ADVERTISED ON EVERY
PROGRAMME SOLD FOR EVERY MATCH.

d) ILLUMINATED ADVERTISING BOARDS

THESE BOARDS SHOULD BE USED WHERE POSSIBLE TO ADDRESS THE CROWD.
                    TAYLOR REPORT (FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS)

    BRIEF HISTORY

The question of charges to Football Clubs for Police services has always
been a contentious issue.

At present the criteria for charging the clubs is laid down in the form
of a coimercial contract between the Police Authority and each club. This
contract includes a scale of charges based on the estimated crowd.

The contract itself is relatively new and was not introduced until the
1987/88 season and resulted from the problems encountered in 1987 as a result
of the serious financial difficulties of Rotherham United which lead to
a financial loss to the authority.

Prior to the introduction to the contract the arrangements were that prior
to each season a meeting was held with the clubs to discuss the proposed
scale of charges.

The current scales are attached.

Interestingly the current scales represent a reduction to that previously
charged. The scale of charges for the 1981/82 season is also attached.
Following representation from the clubs that South Yorkshire charges were
comparatively higher than elsewhere in the country the charges were reduced
for the 1982/1983 season to the criterial currently operating.

The Harris judgement clearly stated that the Police duties inside the ground
are a special service and that the police were asked by the club to ensure
safety and generally supervise the crowd and most importantly the club should
pay for these services.

Attached are brief working notes on the financial implications. The section
on manpower, and who should pay, is intended as a discussion document and is
not put forward as the only way forward. Indeed it does produce anomaly
whereby despite lower average crowds Sheffield United would in fact pay more
than Sheffield Wednesday because of the fact that there are more gates to cover.




Superintendent
 I l l u s t r a t i o n of f i l t e r i a f o r ' L e v y i n g Charges, f o r P o l i c e S e r v i c ^ r e f e r r e d
 t o in Cl a use 1


Crowd                   Superi n-
At t endance            tendents           Inspectors            Inspectors            Sergeants           Co ns t a b l e s


 2000 or below                                                                                1                    6
 2001 -       3000                                                                            1                    8
 3001 -       5000                                                                            2                   11
 5001 -       7000                                                                            2                   14
 7001 -       9000                                                                            2                   17
 9001 - 11000                                                                                3                    20
11001 - 13000                                                                                 3                   23
13001 - 15000                                                                                3                    co

15001 - 17000                                                                                4                    29
17001 - 19000                                                                                4                    32
19001 - 21000                                                          1                     4                    35
21001 - 23000                                                          2                     5                    38
23001 - 25000                                                          2                     5                   41
25001 - 27000                                                          2                     5                    44
27001 - 29000                                                          2                     6                   47
29001 - 31000                                                          2                     6                    50
31001 - 33000                                                          2                     6                   53
33001 - 35000                                                          2                     7                   56
35001 - 37000                                     1                    2                     7                   59
                                                                                             *7
j/oul - 39000                                     1                    2                     /                   62
39001 - 41000                                     1                    2                     8                   65
41001 - 43000                                     1                    H                     8                   68
43001 - 45000                                     I                    2                     8                   71
45001 - 47000                                    1                     3                     9                   74
47001 - 49000                                     1                    3                     9                   77
49001 - 51000                                    1                     3                     9                   80
Crowd                  Normal Rate   P u b l i c Hol i days
At t e nda nce         (VAT n ot     Charge (VAT not
                       included)     included)
                            I                    I



 2000 or below           503.80            665.00
 2001 -      3000        643.80            849.80
 3001 -      5000        937.60          1237.60
 5001 -      7000       1147.60          1514.80
 7001 -      9000       1357.60          1792.00
                                            <0
 9001 - 11000           1746.40          2305.90
11001 - 13000           1956.40          2583.10
13001 - 15000           2166.40          2860.30
15001 - 17000           2460.20          3248.10
17001 - 19000           2670.20          3525.30
19001 - 21000           2880.20          3802.50
21001 - 23000           3269.00          4316.40
23001 - 25000           3479.00          4593.60
25001 - 27000           3689.00          4870.80
27001 - 29000           3982.80          5258.60
29001 - 31000           4192.80          5535.80
31001 - 33000           4402.80          5813.00
33001 - 35000           4696.60          6200.80
35001 - 37000           5012.90          6618.80
        ^ r\ «-t/->.
37C01 - W ^UW           5222.90          vQ c
                                         coo      nn
                                             '\J iWW

39001 - 41000           5516.70          7283.80
41001 - 43000           5726.70          7561.00
43001 - 45000           5936.70          7838.20
45001 - 47000           6325.50          8352.10
47001 - 49000           6535.50          8629.30
49001 - 51000           6890.20          9095.70
/
                          \ LSVVIKC QSARG2S FOR POLICE               ^ « jlT «           9^ ’S3 j ^ 3




    U n d e r ■ : , CCO
      li-000
      6,000


    2 1 , COO


    36,000
    4 1 , COO                                                                    i.Vr>
                                                                                 J
                                                                                 11




                                         • >*c   - *• ■
                                                          •r   r-v

                 >c c r.-c':.sc                                      i*.   ->c
                                                                             .

     rr.esc      c:\hrocs                 a" tne ?

    S r’ .ou j

    -o 1i c o fo r ;:             .. a   It'.
    .o n si
    -1.
The cost of reserves for each match will add substantially to the football
budget.

How much of the extra cost can be passed on to the clubs will be a matter of
policy.

Additional areas of cost will be -

(1)   New radio equipment conmunications

(2)   Training
                                          POLICE MANPOWER

 The report has clear implications on police manpower at football matches
 which will be increased considerably.

 m e n a m s judgement states tnat tne p o n c e insiae tne ground were carrying
 out the duties owed by the club to those when it had invited onto its
 premises (.the spectators) ano tnst t m s is in addition to that which an
 ordinary citizen would not expect and were not entitled. It was therefore
 a special police service under Section 51(1) of the Police Act 1964 for
 which the Police Authority could charge. Those duties on behalf of the
 club in addition to public order were crowd management and safety/rescue
 and the enforcement of ground regulations.

 It is quite clear that policing inside the ground and related to the duties
 described above should be paid by each club. It is also clear that criteria
 for levelling charges certainly does not now reflect the levels of policing
 required by the Taylor report (if it ever did prior to this report).

 Officers exclusively on duty inside the ground include all officers
 designated to perimeter exits and exits out of the ground in the event of
 an emergency. Added to this must be officers there without specific
 essential duties, but responsible for general crowd manag e me nt .

It is difficult to find the reasoning which leads to the scale of manpower
related to the crowd size. It appears to have been set purely relating
to crowd management and general safety. Since it was set, both the enquiries
resulting from Bradford and Hillsborough have designated specific duties
within each football ground. Because of this I would argue that these
specific duties should form the minimum level of policing regardless of
crowd size and that thereafter additional police officers are added according
to the levels set out in the current criteria for levying charges.

Thus the minimum levels for each ground would be as at Appendix 'A'.

Appendix 'B 1 gives the average manpower charged to the club in the season
1988/89 and the effect of using the suggested new criteria set out above.

In addition there are other personnel whose duties are essential to the
football matches, but could be said to have functions relating to both inside
and outside the ground. These are shown at appendix 'C1.

On major area included -in the report are police reserves, which should be
GUI i t H I l O S'v Sr^y' Ilia t e n . nG W BV SF 1116 FBCOiiiTiBnGa t i OR G GSS I"lOt g I V S aHV
i n d i c a t i o n of the numbers o r who s h ou l d pay, as i t s t a t e s t he y must be
a v a i l a b l e f o r depl oyment i n s i d e o r o u t s i d e the gr ound.

(On suggestion for reserves is one sergeant and 10 constables for each 5,000
 of crowd. However the levels and who should pay will be a policy decision.)

If the above is used as a basis of charging the clubs as a general approximation,
the costs to the club would double.

Costs for the season 1987/88 are attached, the figures for 1988/89 not yet being
available.
                                                                                       APPEND r v       iA !



(1)
                    Crjo f"   ^'C   Q   TJ             Che f   f 1 o "<n    W     Barnsley          Done            therns^


No of               13 (26)                            13 (26)                    3 (6)             3 (6)      10 (20)
perimeter
gates

No of               23                                 14                         16                4          12
emergency
exi ts

Minimum             36 (49)                            27 (40)                    19 (22)           7 (10)     22 (32
off icers
required



(2 )

Minimum level wit h supervisors


                     Insp                    Sgts                          PCs
  SUFC               1                       4                             36
                     (2)                     (6)                           (49)


  SVSFC              1                       3                             27
                     2                       (5)                           (40)


  B ar ns 1ey                                2                             19
                     (1)                     (3)                           (22)


  Rotherham          1                       3                             22
                    (1)                      (4)                           (32)



                u                                  .




                                                                                                                              *7
                                                                 APPENDIX ’B'

(1)      Officers paid for by the Clubs using average gates for ISBc
         and existing charging criteria.



      SUFC                        w

      18,563


      SWFC             1                           32
      11,666


      Earnslev                    2                17
      8,336


      Doncaster                   1                8
      2,199


      Rotherham                   2                l\
      4 Q°5
i




If minimum levels set by essential duties (appendix 'A') are added to above
using above as general crowd safety/management the figures are as below.

      -----

                       C/Insp             Insp          Sgt        PC


                       *1             o                 8          68
      SUFC
                       (1)            (31               (10)       (81)


      SWFC                                2             6          50
                       f1 ^               ( *3 >        (O   1     (p o
i                                                       '                   1
                                                        .1         36       j
      Barnsley
                                          (i)           (5)        (39)

1
      Doncaster                                         2          15
                                                        (2)        (18)

j
I     Rotherham                           i             5          33
i                                         (i)           (6)        (43)


Figures in brackets (as appendix 'A')
                                                                   APPENDIX


         ;r=cnnei cn 01        ;ntiai duties


                   SUFC        SWFC            Barnsley      Doncaster    Rotherham


                   sgt    PC   sgt    PC       sgt   PC      sgt    PC    sgt   PC

Controi roorr
CCTV               i      3    1      2        1     2       1      2     1      2


Police Roan        i           1      3        1     1       1      1     1      1


                   2      5    2      5        2         3   2      3     1      3
      Set     £9.50


      1 PS + 10 PCs    =       £93.2 x 4 hrs   = £372.80



(2)   Cost   to Football Club

      PC     £19.90

      Sgt £24.00


      1 PS + 10 PC's       =   £223 x 4 hrs    = £892.00
                AEDITICKAL FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS TO T H E CLUE

Quite apart from the increased cost of policing which may new result from
the Tavlor enquiry, the clubs will also nave a considerable amount of
e xoenGiture on i m p r o v e m e n t s .

In any negotiations into the charges for policing these replications will
be brought up, together with the fact that this has to be set against a
15% cut in the capacity of terraced areas of the ground (however in League
matches capacity crowds for our clubs are a rarity).

The areas for expenditure include the following (the recommendation number
from the Taylor report is given at the end of each item).

1   Additional safety stewards (R 5).

2   Clear distinct marking of emergency perimeter fence exits (R7).

3    Provision of cutting equipment (RIO).

4   Extension of CCTV to cover all areas of the crowd inside      and outside
    the ground (No club has complete cover) (R21).

5   Clear signing of all exits, entrances, turnstiles (away/home supporters)
    I   ).

6   Improved Police control rooms to include soundproofing (R31) .      (eg new
     control room at Sheffield United is estimated at £10,000).

7   Linked landline system to all strategic points (R32).

8   Public address system inside and outside (R33). (eg PA system outside
     the eround at Sheffield United estimated at £14,000).
                                                     SHEFFIELD                          ”   U m ik a j iu   ULV Loio** a


                                                           OUST OF                                   i                                                    OFFICERS               giAi
                                       OFFICERS ON         OVERTIME    OFFICERS IN                 OFFICERS ON                   OFFICERS DEPLOYED        PAID FOR               4l)<
VOS        FIXTURE            GATE     OVERTIME            PAYMENTS    DUTY TIME                   DUTY IN ALL                   INSIDE GROUND            BY CLUB                m
                                       Cl I PS PC                      s ci i PS            PC     S CI I PS                PC   S CI I PS PC             CI I PS         PC


1 ft 87 OXFORD                17,900    1   1   9    62    2,765.78    l        1   3       20      1       1    1     10   82   1        2   7    55        1    4       32 *) t ■n-
                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                       1 Ch Supt                    1 Ch Supt                    1 Ch Supt
1 8 87 NlfWCASTLE             22,030    1   6   24 196 14,239.19       1 1 2        6       62      1   2 8 30 25H               J      5 13 130             2    5       3H      ?

                                        1 Supt
1 8 87 O O V E W W            17,171    2 5 19 144 14,158.14           Bank Holiday                 1       2    5     19 144    1    1   3   .10 97          I   -1       (2 V -

)                             16,164        2   11   71    3,991.61    1    1   1   3       20      1       1    3     14   9L   !        2    7   50        1    4       2')    2, 1.
    9 87 WATFORD

                              16,300        2   11   68    3,505.38    1    1   1   3       22      1       1    1     14   90   1        2    7   52         I   4       2‘» \ >■'
'■» 9 87 CHARLTON
         (Lit!; lewood Cup)
                                            2    0   43    2,910.21    1        1   3       21      1            3     11   64   1        2    7   46             2       ]7     1, 1
    10 87 SHRIiWSDURY          8,576

                                                                  1 Ch Supt                         1 Ch Supt                    I Ch Supt
                                        1 6     27 230 16,284.95 ,                  7       67          2 10 34 297                  1 5 13 118               2   6       53 3, V'1
0 in m     MAN (Tl’D          32,400                                  i.. A

l in m                        15,861        2    8    56    3,687.95   l    1   1   4       24      1        1   3     12   80   1        2    7    54        1   4       29 LJ-
           NORWICH
          (SIW)P Cup)                                                                                                                                             2        11         5>’
                               3,756        2    6    45    2,035.82        1   1   2       14               1   3      8   V)        I   2    7    52
    11 87 IKXJRHl-MJUTH
                                                10    64    5,029.91   l    1   1   3       23      1        1   1     13 .0/    1        2    7    58        1       1    2'» *>t 1
1 11 87 LUTON                 16,960        2
                                                                                                                                 l                  68        1   4        ><)   «',
.! 11 07 QPR                  16,933    1   3   15 102      6,026.75   l        2   4       28      1        1   5     19 130             3    8

        (51MOD Cup)                                                                                                                                                        14          •<
                               5,228        3   11    58    3,472.41   l        1   3       33       1           4     14   91   !        2    8    52            2
] 12 87 STOKE

                                                            4,490.26                3       22       1             3   13   91   I.       2    7    61       1     3       2h    L'!"
7 19 0 7   WlhfllLF.DON       14,289        3   10    69               l

                                        1 Supt
                                                                                                     1       1     5   13 142    1    1   3   10   116       2    5        44 4, J‘
n 12 87    perhy              26,191    1 5 13 142 21,554.16 Bank Holiday
                                        1 Supt                                                                                                10   116       2     5       44
                              26,433    1 5 13 141 20,766.56 Bank Holiday                            1       1     5   1.3 141    1   1   3
i     1 07 EVERTON
           (FA Cup)                                                                                                                                 120       2       7          4, *'
                                            6   26 24^ !16,393.79       1   1   3   3       37       1       i *       29 277     1   2   5   12
           WERTON             33,306
                                                         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY 1907/88 - LEMJUE DIVISION 1


                                                               COST OF                                                                               OFFICERS              CllAI
                                                               OVERTIME       OFFICERS IN           OFFICERS ON          OFFICERS DEPLOYED           PAID FOR              •ir> <
                                          OFFICERS ON
                                                               PAYMENTS       DUTY TIME             DUTY IN ALL          INSIDE GROUND               BY CLUB               iixr
\XE         FIXTURE             GATE      OVERTIME
                                          CI I PS PC                          S Cl 1 PS        rc   S CI I PS        PC- S CI I PS PC                CI I PS      ix;


                                                                     1 Ch.Supt                      1 Ch Supt              1 Ch Supt
                                            1       18 142 14,055.86     1 4              9    79       2 9 27 221             l •;> 12         91        I   4   35 ‘V ’'
     1 88 CHELSEA              19.859           5

                                                                     1 Ch Supt                      1 Ch Supt              J Ch Supt
          (Littlewoocla Cuj )                                                                                                                                     1>•> i,"
                                            1   6   27 208 13,211.22     1 4              4    58       2 10 31 266            1 5 12 122                 2   7
     1 88 ARSENAL           34,535

                                                                     I Ch Supt                      1 Ch Supt              1 Ch Supt
          (FA Cup)                                                                                                                                    1   2   7   <>2 4/r
                               38.953       1   7   26 197 13,878.53 1   1 3              6    69   2   2 10 32 266        1      5 13 130
     1 88 EVERTON
                                                                3,989.24 1        1       4    32   1     1 2     15 106   1   1   I       7    60        1   3   2\>      1,'<•
     2 88 So uthampton         14,769           2   11    74
                                                                                                                                                          1   4   >)t..i
                                18,046          5   12. 142 11,016.38 1                   8    48   1         5   20 19d   1       3       9    90
     2 88 TUriTTSNIIAM
                                                                                                    1     1   7   31 212   1       4       10 102         1   4   35 2,4*
« 3 88 Norrrs forest            19.509      1   7   22 132 12,325.85 1                    9    80

                                                               13,704.38      1   1   1   4    47   1     1 6     17 149   1   1   2       8    80        I   3   2t, 1
> 3 80 p o m ,smouth            13.695          5   13 102

                                                                                           /   65   1 1       8   26 23 1 1        3        9   93        1 4
' 4 RH WEST HAM                 17.325      1   5   19 160 11,906.36 1                3
                                                                                                                                                     1 Ch ;upI
       (FA Cup Semi)                                                                                                       1 Ch Supt                 2 Supt
                                                                     1 Ch Supt                      1 Ch Supt
       LIVERPOOL     )                                                                                                         2 10 22 260            2 10 *.)«> 2I.H
                                51.622      6 47    68 490 78,800.74 2   2 2 36 382                 2   8 49 104 772
> A AM Mrrrrs idrest )            1
                                                                                      3   10   66         2   9   31 200       1 3         11 113         I   4   2’ ''t 1
\     A   RM ARSENAL            16,681      2   6   21 194 11,592.80

                                                                                          11 103    1     2 11    37 221   1           5   15 158     1   2   7    S'» ■1 , '
7 CJ OO
/    Of) 1».TVPUHfYM.
         L  LVul‘1UUu           35,893      ? 10    26 219 16,355.61 1                1

                                            3 Supts                    6 Ch Supts        6 Ch Supts         f- Ch Supts
                                                                                                           21   12 82 246 2232                        2 31 112 Mii.l
Jl'NuS                         518,763     17 113 416 3309 442,149.84 18 13 38 119 1040 21 35 151 535 4349

                                                                                         ID IN THESE FIGUKE.
JTAL W 11!IKS 26 (29 19 >6/7)            T1 E FA CUP SEMI-F’LNAL OF 9 1 88 IS Nar INCLUL

OT AL GA 1ES       510,763               A\ ERAGE GATE - IS*,952

                                         A' ERAGE GATE 198( n     -   22,22
    <j’AL CJ' (IS 1906/07 - 64 1,417
                                                           i1                                                 •
•y’DPhCJ                     12 >,654    D CREASE                      2 ,2( >
                                                                           SHEFFIELD UNITED I9U7/88 - LEAGUE DIVISION 2


                                                                                  COST O F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O F F IC E R S                   CUAJ
                                                      O F F IC E R S ON           O V E R T IM E      O F F IC E R S        IN         O F F IC E R S ON
V                                                                                                                                                                      O F F IC E R S            D EPLO YED        P A ID       FOR                 TO *
          F IX T U R E                  GATE          O V E R T IM E              PAYM ENTS           DUTY T IM E                      DUTY I N       ALL              IN S ID E GROUND                            BY C LU B                        EXC
                                                      CI    I       PS    PC                          S    CI       I        PS   PC   S   C l    I     PS      PC     s    CI           I        PS        PC     CI       I     PS      PC

                                                                                                       I   Ch S u p t                  1 Ch S u p t                    1 Ch         Supt                           SpecinJ        C I i m i ' kc
08.87       SWFC     (WORLD              8,7 4 2                    13    120      ' 4 , 8 4 1 .27     I   I      1          9    57   1  1     1       22      177    1        1        1       20         160                   2           1           '•
         STUDENT GAMES
         A (THAI.)


08.87                                                                                                  1 Ch S u p t ;                  1 Ch S u p t                    1 Ch Supt .
            BOURNEMOUTH                  9.757                  2   10     72      3 , ' * 5 3 . 36    1    1                3    54   1    1     2     13      121,   1        1        2        12        112          1          }       . "     1,

08.87       BLACKBURN                    8 ,5 4 0               1 11       7 3     4 , 508.20          1    1       2        5    48   I    1     3     16      121    1        1        1        15        108                   2         ! /     1, 1'

09.87       S TOKE                      10,086                        6    65      4,576.13           1     1       1        12   59   1   1                           1                 2       12         121          1          (      .' i i   1,
                                                                                                                                                  1     18      124

09.87       C R Y S T A L PALACL         7,787                        1    18      3,185.51                 1       1        9    72       1      1         9    94             1        1        9          94                             1V ! . 1

09.87       MlLLWALL                     8 ,040                 1 21      125     5,704.35                  1           1    '4   58       2      2     25      18 '            I        1       l r>       130                            1' ' 1 , 1

10.87       H U LL                      1 0 , M '46    1        3   15    137     5,8 5 1 .7 3         1    1       1        '1   51   1   1      4     19      188    I        1 3              15         1 57         1          5      .■<> I , ‘

          L lttle w o o d o     C up]                                                                           1
10.87       BURY                         6,377                  1     7    63      2,714.43            1    1                3    34   1    1     1     10             1    1        1       7               70                             1 ’i

            ENGLAND V
10.87       T URK EY     (U2 I )         5,854                  1 6        47      1,782.39            1    1                2    25   1    1     1         8          1        1    1       8               64


10.87       L E IC E S T E R            10,593                  2   10     90      4 ,91 1 .3 0        1    1                3    35   1    1     2     13      1?')   1        1 1 1 2                     127             1         (


10.87       B IR M IN G H A M            9,287                  1 10       80      5,1 3 0 .9 9        1                1         40   1          1     10      121    1                 1        10        120          1          }               1,

                                                                                                       1 Ch S u p t                    1 Ch S u p t                    1 ''li       Supt
10.87       LEEDS                       12,095                      18    167    17.376.23             1            4        5    48   1          4     23      21'    1                 3       21     1    87                                     I .*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1        3




                                                                                                                                                 •
11.87       M lD D LE S B R O U G I1    11,278                  2   18    148     8,629.92            1                 1         40   1          3     18      I8t    J                 3       18         168          1        3        2: 1
                                                                             <
n .f t      MAN U N IT E D               1,097                        1    10 ^       218.38           1                     1     8   1                    2    11                                                               1          6           ’j
                                                                                                                                                                       1                           2         16
         ' (FRIENDLY)
                                                                  COST OF                                                                                                        OFFICERS
                                            OFFICERS ON           OVERTIME             OFFICERS IN                   OFFICERS ON                    OFFICERS DEPLOYED            PAID FOR
TB           nxnme                 GME      OVERTIME              PAYMENTS             DITTY TIME                    DUTY IN ALL                    IUSIDE GROUND                BY CLUB
                                            CI I PS PC                                 S CI I PS               FC    S CI I PS                PC    S  CI I PS PC                CI I PS         PC


                                                                                       1 Ch Su p l .                 1 Ch S u p t                   1 Ch    Supt
 11.87       U l'A D .lN G        6,977                11   60     3,103.2*4           1      2       3   '1   32    1   2         1    1J    82    1   2      1    1I     82            ,•      1’I

                                                                                       1 Ch S u p t;                 1 Ch S u p t                   1 Ch    Stipl
 12.87       HUDDKRSF1FXD         9,269                9    57     2,872.55            1      2       1   33   'Ml   1   2     1        42   101    1   2      .1   12     85        1    5      /'i


                                                                                       1 Ch       Supt               1 Ch Su p t .                  1 Cli   Supt
 12.87       SWINDON              7,448                                N IL            1      1       J   6    64    1     1       1     6    72    1   1      1     0     56            (       1,•


 13.87       A S T 0 N V IL L A   15,089    1 Supt
                                            1   1      13   126   11   ,'170.91        BANK H O L I D A Y            1     1   1        13   12(i   1   1      1    1 < 1l ' l       1   '1      <'11


0 1 . 8f     OLDHAM               9,574                11    65    2,80*4.82           1              1   5    '10   1             1    16 105      1          1    H      95        1   3

                                                                                       1      1       2              1         2                    1   1     2     10     86
      00




                                                                                                          3                I             3    25                                         2       1;
h-*




                                                            70                                                 25                                                                                          '
        m




             F .A .   CUP         8,907            1   13          3.191.53
o




             M A ID S T0N IS


, 0 2 . 8*   SHREWSBURY           8,227            1    7    30    2 , ' 166 . 5 5            1       1   7    58          1   2        14    88        1      2    12     78            <•’     1/ 1


 O ZM        B .F.C .             11,861           1   11    73    6 , 7 8 0 . 2*1 1          1       1   7    75    1     1   2        18   1 48   1   1           10 128           1       <   2


.03.88       MAN C I T Y          13,906    1      1   16    94     ' 1 , 6 2 2 . OH   1          1   1   2    36    1     1   2        18   1 30   1   1           1()   114        1       5   .   ■(


                                                                                       1 Ch S u p l                  1 Ch S u p t                   1 Ch S u p t
                                                                    '1,557.20                         2   6    '16         1       2    14    87        1           14                   c           i ;
 0 3 . 8(     IP S W IC H          8,753                8    41                               \                                                                            83


                                            1 C h S u p t 1 Su ) t                                                   1 Ch S u p t                   1 Ch    Supt
                                  13,888        '4    18 126 11 , 8 4 7 . 9 0          BANK HOLIDAY                  1             '1   18   126    1           5   16    1 13       1       5   <’ <1
.OJU . 8 t    BRADFORD


              PLYMOUTH             9,005           2   16    80     4,0 3 1 .3 5       1      1           2    23    1 1           2    18 103      1   1           16     9 3       1    3      .'D
.0*1.81


                                                        8    48     3,15*<.29                                        1     1       3    15    93    1   1           13     82        1       3
      oo




                                                                                       1      1       3   7    '15
 =t




                                  12,091
 o




              W .B.A.


              Ploy orr                                                                                                         •
                                  1 9,261   .1 2       15         1 5 ,'*01.55 1                      2   6    '12   1     1       *4 21 141        1   1      4    19 123           1       4       35
 0 5 .bt|.    BRISTOL C I T Y
                                                            SHEFFIELD UNITED 1987/88 - LEAGUE DIVISION 2


                                                                    COST OF                                                                       OFFICERS
                                                OFFICERS ON         OVERTIME      OFFICERS IN        OFFICERS ON        officer;
                                                                                                                               :; d ep lo y ed    PAID TOR
         FIXTURE                    GATE        OVERTIME            PAYMENTS      DU'l’Y TIME        DUTY IN ALL        INSIDE GROUND             BY CLUB
                                                CI I PS PC                        S CI I PS     PC   S CI I PS     PC   S CI I PS PC              CI I PS         h   :

                                                1 Ch Supt 2 Sup ts         7 Ch Supts        8 Ch S u p t s     B Ch Supt s
>TALS                             26 8 ,3 8 1    4 27 303 2184 139,188.40 22 21 31 .148 1159 24 25 58 451 334 3 24 23 37 364 294b                      If,   7   1,;i 11



AL MA rCIII'-S 2 7 ( 2 6   1906   /87)                                            INTERNATIONAL KNt LAND V TURKEY NOT   Ni'I.UDED IN THESE F' (jUH f::.;

AL GATES        26 8,38 1                        AVERAGE GATE       -   9 ,9'*o

AL GATES 1 9 0 6 / 8 7      245   840            AVERAGE GATE       -   9,455
                                                 1986/87

HEASE           -            22 541              INCREASE                 485


                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                 «




                                                                i                                          •
                                                                    *
                                                              BARNSLEY 1987/88 - LEAGUE DIVISION 2


                                                              COST O F                                                                            OFFICERS                   ClIAI
                                        OFFICERS ON           OVERTIME   OFFICERS IN           OFFICERS ON              OFFICERS DEPLOYED         PAID 1-DR                  ■It) <
VTE       FIXTURE              GATE     OVERTIME              PAYMENTS   DUTY TIME             DUTY IN ALL              INSIDE GROUND             BY CLUB                    i:xr
                                        Cl  I PS PC                      S CI   I PS      rc   S CI I PS          PC    S CI I PS PC              CI I PS              PC

                                                                        1 Ch Supt              1 Ch Supt                t Ch Supt
    0 07 LEEDS             .9,967           1   3   10 142     7,167.37 1      L      7   68   1   I 4 25 210           1   1 4 19 152                I       3 2 n 1t' i
    8 87 DRTC (Friendly)         550                      1     972.6U 1         1    6   32   1        1    6    33                                          1         1>
                                                                                                                        1                3   10                                    i




    8 87 CRYSTAL PALACE        4,853                10   55   2,604.17 1     1   1        20   1    I   1   10    75    1   1   1.   10      55           2           II          M'■
    9 87 PLYMOUTH              6,976    1       1   10   45   2,089.5] 1              3   13   1    1   1   13    511   1   1   1    10      49           2           14           i;


    9 87 SWINDON               7,773    1       2   11   63   3,207.72 1              3   20   1    1   2   14    83    1   1   1     a      44           ?       _   1 / 1 1 /'

         (Littlewoods Cu) >)
    9 87 WES'IHAM          10,330       1       3   16 100    5,205.94 1         3    3   48   1    1   6   19 14)1     I   1 2      10      74      1    3           20     1    M i -



    9 87 sure              1 0 ,2 0 0   1       2   19 124    5,544.90 1         2    5   44   1*   1   4, 24 1611      1   1   2    n       91      1    3 20               1 Ml

10 87    MULL                  7,310            2   14   92   4,587.31 1     1        3   21   1    1   2   17 113      i   1   2    10      65           ?           17     I ! /f
10 87 HEADING                  4,396    1       2    9   55   2,366.41 1             2    21   1    ]. 2    11    lb    1   1         8      44                       1|
                                                                                                                                                          2                       Ml!'

      (Littlewoodn Cti|•)
10 87 SWFC              19,439          1       3   19 140    7,732.63 2         2   17   55   2    1   5   36 195          1   3    11              1
                                                                                                                                             90           4           (r> ?       •!>-

10 87    STOI®                 5,108    1       2   11   74   4,208.63 1             3    20   1    1   2   14   94     1   1   2     7      51           2           14
11 87    BRADFORD          11,596               3   17 106    5,595.04 2             4    40   2        3   21   146    2       3    11      80      1    3           2 i    1,

U     87 SHREWSBURY         5,364               1    8   56   2,467.32 1     L 1     5    17   1    1   2   13    73    1   1   J     6      39           2           14          'tr

12 87 WBA                   5,395               2   11   45   2,327.77 1     1       2    39   1    1   2   13   84     1   1   2     7      39           2           14          MM

                                                                         1 Ch Supt             1 Ch Supt                L Ch Supt
12 87 MILUWALL             .5,011       1       2   11   63   3,285.82   1       2   2    25   1   1 4   13      88     1   1   2     7      45           2           14          MM

                                        1 Supt
12 p-» OLDHAM               8,676       1       2   13   85 ^ *8,958.48 Bank Holiday           1    1   •   13   85     I   1 2       7      45           2           17     1            :
                                                                   IWUflNBLEY 1907/08 - LEAGUE DIVISION 2


                                                               GOKT OF                                                                                              OFFICERS           C llA i
                                        OFFICERS ON            OVERTIME        OFFICERS IN                        OFFICERS ON              OFFICERS DEPLOYED        PAID f-OH          'I'D        <
■VIE      fixture             GATE      OVERTIME               PAYMENTS        duty time:                         DUTY IN ALL              INSIDE GROUND            BY CLUB            \ 'M   ’.

                                        Cl  I PS PC                            S Cl   I PS                   PC   S Cl I PS          PC    S Cl I PS PC             Cl  I PS      IC


          (FA Cup)
   1 88   DOLTON              9,667           3    15 108          6,191.50    1        1                2   30       1     3   17 130           1   3    10   73

          (FA Cup)
   1 88   BIRMINGHAM         13,219       1   4    20 154          9,683.62                              5   41   1   1     7   25 19!           1   4    14 116        1    3         I,l ■<

  2 88    WJVCKBURN           8,972           4    IB 138          6,738.94    1        1                4   28       1     4   22 166           1   3    12   85                J/

  2 88    IPSWICH             6,482       1   1    11   62         3,070.0')            1       1        4   24       2     2   15   8(>         2   2     8   55                1.1

  3 88    DOUHNEHXmi          6,140           1     9   49         3,162.80             1       1    3       21       1 2       12   70          1   2     7   36                14

  3 88    LEICESTER           7,447                10   57         2,999.15             1       2.       3   20       1     2   13   77          1   2     7   44                1/

  3 88    MAN c m             9,031           4    10 133          0,956.35             1       1        3   28       1     5   21 161           1   3     9   71      1     3   20

                                         1 Supt
  4 88    I1UDDERSFIELD       7,950      1 2 16 113                9,099.69 Bank Holiday                          1   1     2   16 11 1          1   2     9   69                J L
  4 88    BIRMINGHAM          4,949                11   79         3,544.49    1    1       2        13      23   1   1     2   24 10,     1     1   2     8   61                11
                                         1 Ch Supt                                                                1 Ch Supt
                                         1 Supt                                                                                                C h Supt

                            13.210       1 IQ 32 274           29,509.95 Dank Holiday                             1   1 10      32 274           1   5    20 163       1     3   23
                                         1 Ch Supt     156,24650 2 Ch Supti:                                      3 Ch Supts               3 Ch Supt
                                         3 Supt
TALS                        221,547     14 62 372 2514           26 12 23 107 720                                 29 26 85 479 3234 29          26 61 262 1821        10    64 4l)M


TAL MA'Jk,HES   27 (24 190 &/87)      AVERAGE GATE      - E ,205

IAL GAT15S      221,547

IAL GAtIi 5 1906/07 - 151 ,281        AVERAGE GATE       19E 6/87 - 6, 303
   *

 RE/>r                    70 266      II (CREASE             fl>         1,   902
                                                              ROTHERHAM UNITED 1987/00 ~ LEAGUE DIVISION 3


                                                                   COST OF                                                                          OFFICERS
                                               OFFICERS ON         OVERTIME   OFFICE!RS IN         OFFICERS ON               OFFICERS DEPLOYED      PAID FOR              'IT)       (

\’CE        FDtWUR                 GATE        OVERTIME            PAYMENTS   DUTY TIME            DUTY IN ALL               INSIDE GROUND                                tiXC
                                                                                                                                                    BY CLUB
                                               Cl  I PS PC                    S Cl    I PS    PC   S Cl I PS         PC      S Cl   1 PS PC         Cl I PS     PC


   8 87     bit ;   (Co Cm>)         948                 5    42   1,576.05   1   1       1        1   1        6    4   2   1   1        c)   35          1     '>

            (Littlewoods Cu >)
   8 87     HUDDERSFIELD       3.351                     4    26   1,540.86   1   1   1   3   17   1   1    1    7   41      1   1   I   5     30          2    11           .".(I

   8 87     BURY                   2,997                 5    32     753.80       1   1   1    3       1    1   6    3r>         1   I   6     33          1     8

   8 87 CHESTER                    2,551        1        6    39   2,524.83   Bank Holiday             1        6    3f>         1       6     35          1     H

   9 87 WALSALL                    3,325            1    6    30     939.28   1           1    6            1    7   3(.     1       1   7     32          2    11           I!”

   9 87     MANSFIELD              3,839            1    6    35   1,210.55   1                6   1        1   6    41      1       1   6     35          2    11           In

   9 87 GRIMSBY                    3,375                 6    41   2,108.54   1   1           18   1   1        8    59      1   1       8     53          4.   11               l<i

            (Lit,1.Icwooc l'l Cu »)
 10 87      everton               11,442        1   2    13   89   3,961.18   1           1   10   1   1    2   14   9(>     1   1   2   13    89      1   3     2J L ^ '

 10 87      No r t h a m p t o n   5,244 ...        1    4    16   1,186.17   1   1       3   33   1   1    1    7   49      1   1   1    7    41          2     14              '•l>

       (Fi eiql vl: Rover)
 10 87 SCARJJOROUGI1               2,161                 3    17     847.80   1   1       3   14   1   1         6   31      1   1        6    27          1         B

 10 87      BRISTOL CITY           3,397                 5    25   1,258.36   1   1       1   14   1   1         6   3'»     1   1        6    34          2     11              IV


 11 87      NOTTS COUNTY           4,157        1         3   27   1,604.59   1           4   17   1   1         7   4-1     1   1        6    39          2     11              r.i •


            (LittlewoodM Cu »)
  11 87     DRI'C              4,530                     6    37   2,063.28   1   1       4   24   1   1        10   61      1   1        8    49          2     11

  11 87     FULHAM                 3,427                  S   29     918.74   1   1       1    4   1   1         6   31      J   1        6    29                11              111;




  12 87 GILLINGHAM                 2,557                  5   27     930.43   1   1       1    4   1   1         6   31      1   1        6    27          1          H

                                                1 Supt                                             1 SupL

< 12
       “
            DRFC
           i------
                                   5,840            2     0   52* *4,007.17   Bank Holiday         1        f    8   511     ]       2    8    52          2     14       -.1    '
                                                                 RGmiKUKAM UNITED 1907/00 ~ LUAGUK DIVISION 3


                                                                      COST OF                                                                                 OFFICERS          CIIAl
                                                  OFFICERS ON         OVERTIME       OFFICERS IN            OFFICERS ON                 OFFICERS DEPLOYED     PAID FOR          •It) <
TTE          FIXIURE               GATE           OVERTIME            PAYMENTS       DUTY TIME              DUTY IN ALL                 INSIDE GROUND         BY CLUB           IO(C
                                                  Cl  I PS PC                        S Cl I PS         PC   S Cl I PS             PC    5 Cl   I PS PC        Cl I PS     l>C



                                                  1 Supt
1    1 88    port vale             3,913              2 12.      45   3,642.69       Bank Holiday                        2   12   4'*   1        1   6   35          2    11

>    1 88 PRESTON                  3,991                  5      24   1,238.24       1        1    I   17   1            1    6   41    1        1   6   35          2    11      Mi ■


1    2 88 BRENTFORD                2,572                  3      22   1,127.38       1        1    3   13   1            1    6   3*j   1        1   6   32          1     a           1'
>    2 88 BRISTOL ROVERS           2,966                  5      22   1,049.18       1        1    1   16   1            1    6   311   1        1   6   34          1     a      V-


I    2 88    CHESTERFIELD          3,440                     7   39   1,349.51       1        1    I   16   1            1    8   5S    J        1   8   49          2    11      M' ’

                                   2,531                     5   32   1,092.97       1        1    I    4   1            1    6   31.   1        1   6   32          1     a      S')
">   3 88 SOUTHEND

> 3 88 BRianxjN                    2,562              1      6   34   2,408.03       1                  4   1            1    6   38    ].       I   6   34          1     8      C I
                                                                                                                                                                                       )•


> 3 88 WIGAN                        3,288                    7   37   2,963.14       1        1    I   14   1            1    8   51    J        1   8   47          2    11      K"


                                    3,001                    6   34       945.83     1        1         4   1            1    6   38    1        1   6   34          2    11      H"
' 4 88 BLACKIKJOL

                                    2,942             1      6   34   1,412.24       1                  4   1            1    6   311   1        1   6   34           1     a      i    1

S 4 88 YORK
                                                                                                                                                                                   ; . »

>    4 88 ALDERSHOT                 2,818             1      5   23       743.44     1             1   14   1            1    6 '3/     1        1   6   33           I     M


                                    9,374             2   17 142      9,181.91       1    1   1    4   24   1    1       3   21 166     ]    1   3   19 154      1    3   20
f    5 88 SUNDERLAND

1    5 88 SWANSEA(Play of )5,568                      1      4   50   2,108.86       1             5   18   1            1    9   68    1        1   8   61           2    14     •iB


                                                   2 Supts
                                  112,107          3 15 178 1102 56,775.05 25 1.1 10              44   318 27   14 25 222 1420 2 /           14 24 206 1254      2   49   313 23, '
rrALS


/i’AL MA’OHS      29 (28 191 6/87)            A /ERAGE GATE - 3 865
                                                                                     i




rfAL GA' 13S      112,107
   r
         \
                                                                                                                     •
11AL    w.' T S 1986/87 - 01, 333         .   A /ERAGE GATE 1 ^ 1/87 - 2,9( 4
                            » A   nn a        *                       1            n ,1
                                                 D0ICA5TKR ICM>JRS 1987/80 - LKAGIJE DIVISION 3

                                                     COST OF
                                    OFFICERS ON      OVERTIME                                                                               OFFICERS           Cl IAIv
                                                                OFFICERS IN          OFFICERS ON
           FIXTURE          GATE    OVERTIME                                                                       OFFICERS DEPLOYED        PAID TOR           m cl
                                                     PAYMENTS   DUTY TIME            DUTY IN ALL                   IflSlDE GROUND
                                    Cl I PS PC                                                                                              BY CLUB            l\XC •
                                                                S Cl I PS      PC    S Cl I PS                PC   S Cl I PS PC             Cl I PS    PC
       (friendly)
  8 87 MILLWALL              200            1    6    1,540.19 1       1             1            1      1     6   1       ]       1    6          1    t         -I'M
 8 87 GRIMSBY              2,182            4   21     417.37 1        1   4   30    1            1      B    59   1       1       5   50         ]     H
      (Li 1.1Jewoocta Ciij>)
 8 87 SCARIJOROUGH          2,370           6   34   1,293.87 1        1   1   15    1           1       7    49   1       1   7       45
 8 87 SUNDERLAND           2,740            4   21   6,511.87          2   2   29                2       6    50               5       39         1     H        t1 1
 9 87 NORTIIAMPTQN         1,873            8   62   2,240.41 1            3   28   1                 11      90   1       1   4       30         i              /I\ t
 9 87 BLACKPOOL            1,558    1 1 5       29   1,273.27              1   16            1   1       6    45       1   1   s       30         1          _j]J4
 I 87 CHESTERFIELD       1,992      1 1 4       20   1,451.36              1    7            1   1       5    27       1   1   4       20         1              ■1 M
      (Littiewoods Cii|•)
 9 87 ARSENAL            5,649              5   36   1,709.70 1        1   6   47   1            1    11      B3   1       1   6       45         1    1.1
10 87 GILLINGHAM         .M 4 7             2    7     525.29      1   1   2   19            1   1       4    26       1   1   4       22         I
                                                                                                                                                  1     f.       \   M
                                                                                    —’   1
      (Freight Rover)
10 87 MANSFIELD           1,280     1 1 2       13     403.90              2   16            1   1       4    29       1 1     1       20         1    f,       A    M
10 87 NOTTS 00            2,649             2    9     167.12      1   1   2   26            1   1       4    35       i   1   4       20         1
10 87 WALSALL             1,387             1    9     528.96      1   1   1   22            1   1       2    31       1   1   2       18         1    (j       .1 M
      HYDE PK KNIGHTS
      V
10 87 BROOKSIDE           1,200             1    5     113.26 1        2   1   15   1            2       2    20   1       1   ?       20         1    1        •1M .
10 87 BURY                1/403             2   8      405.50      1   1   2   19            1   1       4   27        1   1   1       20         1    (y    __ •!3.1 .
11 87 i*orrr v al e       1.369             2   17     292.72 i        1   2   17   J            1       4    34   1       1   3       20         1            ■1 :-l
       (FA Cup)
>1.    RUFC               3,359             7   52                 1   1   6   69            1   1 # 3       121       1   1   1       60         2    11      Mu:',.
      1-
                                                  D0NCAS1ER ROVERS 1907/08 - LEAGUE DIVISION 3



                                    OFFICERS ON                  .OFFICERS IN                                        OFFICERS
                                                                                 OFFICERS ON     OFFICERS DEPLOYED
                                    OVERTIME                      DUTY TIME                                          PAID FDR
                                                                                 DUTY IN ALL     INSIDE GROUND       BY CLUB
                                                                                                                                o   k   :

                            1.360                      267.70

12 87| BRISTOL CITY         1,819                      236.19

12 87    YORK               2,409
                                                                 Bank Holiday
 1 881 WIGAN                2,464                     284.26

                            1,827   Nil                45.52
 1 88| ALDERSHOT            1,908                      81.92
 2 88    RUPC               2,700


                              724                      08.60

3 88| MANSFIELD            1,987                      293.46

      (Youth Cup)
3 881 MAN CITY             2,310                      201.72

3 88    CHESTER            1,482

3 88    BRISTOL HOVERS |   1 f311                     417.59

        (Youth Cup)
3 88    TOTTENHAM          5,210                     205.50

4 88    PRESTON            2,167                                Bank Holiclay

4 88    BmarioN            1,683                     344.77

        (Youth Cup)

        AIISENAL           6,463
                                                     0 0 0 5 * ™ HOVERS 1970/88 - UiAGUE DIVISION 3


                                                         COST OF                                                                 OFFICERS       CllAI*
                                      OFFICERS ON        OVERTIME     OFFICERS IN         OFFICERS ON        OFFICERS DEPLOYED   PAID FOR       'IX) (.•!
IE       nX TU llE          GATE      OVERTIME           PAYMENTS     DUTY TIME           DUTY IN ALL        IIJSIDE GROUND      BY CLUB        MXC
                                      Cl  I PS PC                     S Cl   I PS    I€   S Cl I PS     PC   S Cl I PS PC        Cl  I PS   K
 5 88    SOUTHEND           1,306      1   1    4   20       2,102.62 Bank Holiday           1 1    4   20       1 1    4   20          1   b



                           71,219      7 12    00 574    35,103.92 14 12 26 119 6110 L4     19 38 207 1254   14 16 33 106 807          37 241     7,HI
TALS


TAL MA 1X1IES   33 (32 19 »6/87)    A\ERAGE GATE! - 2, 158

TAL GATK S      71,219

TAL Gfl H5S 1906/07 - 66 309        A\ft2RAGE GATE 190^/07 - 2,072

CREASE                   4 910      INCREASE                        <16




                                                         t
                             '^2 ..
                                  ..           /             A   fax?



      /:              J v ^ h ^ L .        '~ h J 'f ° z ^




                             J'   : /O      <=i A 3 — 7 ^
                                       /
J >
                                                   / 7 c




           < u ? 1/    e J
                         AJjC?       '^ S ^ J h



jn   'Q   r~ ^

jM   * /^— 7         v                            ^ -c / ^   - ^
fc*rzs~*~-y      t—» v t t >   > r
c




    /;




         X ^ -y ^ ~ o   T     cT^x   /^ ~ q

            *^ £ -7 7 / ^ r
                               'Tv*y-




 ■* * > ///                         LL 4L^^~

 J l AZr    ^ >                                                         /c

        / / ' y^~'>                                      ■?




           c A is *~~?

                              p o   s /4      *~ o                                      ^    t/




                         Z /        Xf'

/ ^ 7                 -^r                          (T i ^ n

           A ^?       C ^ ^ c X ^ y iZ y ^               < rj




                                                         A ? e '~ ) {        //*

/o      < ? ~ z -e ^ t/\jtA         / " u '-5-4?              (T T    ~ z * -K

                                          s X ji,^ U r S L s i/y 2 -^              £ -^ /r /f..

            rz ? <6?     /^     t^    fc ^         r r i^     -




                                                              J      //-
                                          ^        ^ >            x'f^ l/? c s u )

                                              yy



l2Ar£^4<4 ■•£ /H -&                                      y^Wc£->
         i
                                                           LICE
                                                                      REF:    OPS GRM/SM
   FROM:     CH SUPT BROOMHEAD    OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION              STATION/DEPT.:   OPERATIONS
   TO:       SEE DISTRIBUTION:                                        DATE-            24 August 1989

               SUBJECT:       MAJOR INCIDENT ROOM




               You will recall that at the "End of Season Football Conference1 on
               4 July 1989 it was agreed that the above room should be opened on all
               football days.

               This has now been put into operation and the room is open from 12 noon
               on Saturdays and 6 pm for evening matches and will be manned by either
               PC 808 Rosevear,                                 This will be monitored
               and it is envisaged that for high category matches earlier starts will
               be necessary, 10 am on Saturdays and 5 pm in mid-week, and an officer
               of Inspector or above will be in attendance.

               The function of the Major Incident Room is not merely to be available
               in the event of a major incident but to double as a 'Match Day
               Information Desk1. It is to some degree a prelude to the 'Football
               National Intelligence Unit1 which is due to open at Scotland Yard early
               in 1990. It is not intended to usurp divisional control of a football
               match in any way but to provide a support facility.

               It is anticipated that the staff in the Major Incident Room will maintain
               liaison with the British Transport Police and other agencies and provide
               up to date intelligence on the movement of fans, not only in relation
               to those visiting South Yorkshire but also for any that may be passing
               through. Lists of manpower availability will be maintained along with
               details of Casualtu Bureau officers.

               The Major Incident Room was in operation on 19 August and a copy of the
               log from that day is attached in order to give you an idea of the
               functions it fulfils. No doubt these will increase as the season
               develops thereby providing a better service.




               Chief Superintendent

               Distribution

               Deputy 'Chief •Constable1'                    '2ri /
               Ch Supts       A Division                      '^
                              B Division
                              C Division
                              D Division
                              E Division
                              F Division
               Ch Insps      Edmundson          Force Operations Room
                              Bettison          Career Development
                              Waring            Operations Division
               PCs           808 Rosevear
                              1001 Caro
                              3235 Baker

GEN/2
2*108/89 09:49 HAF HA1001
LP sHAl                                              HAF H A 1001
Rec Bys  0      Serial; 378      Ident:HA1001      1021      19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    97                      Ras Ref sHA00/00/00     INFO     t     Sub DivsHA
Sources  PC           'PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR P C E X T   3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                     CL




IP                               INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE 1 OF 1
1039 H A 1001 PLEASE USE Ttffs INCIDENT FOR ANY UPDATE/INFORMATION IN RESPECT
              OF FOOTBALL MATCHES AFFECTING SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE.

             THE FOLLOWING MATCHES, ARE BEING PLAYED AT HOME^fN THIS FORCE
            .t o d a y I -           "•                          '
             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY        V  NORWICH.            K.Q 1500
             ROTHERHAM UNITED.          V  PRESTON NORTH END. K.O 1500.
1045 C1RADF MAsNOTED Cl
1045 HA1001 MR             OF THE HOWARD HOTEL.SHEFFIELD,UPDTED RE-TRAIN
             SERVICES INTO SHEFFIELD MIDLAND.
23/08/09 09:49 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                                HAF H A 1001
Ret By: G       Serials 378       IdentsHA1001      1021      19/08/89
Phone:
Location:OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    97 __________            Ras Ref :HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DivsHA
Source;  PC            /PC 80S ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Detail:     FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
            THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC |    EXT 3273
            AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                      CL




                                     INCIDENT LOS                        PAGE 2 OF 14
1046   E l 1553   MA/NOTED
1047   Cl864      MA:PRINTED FOR L/T AT Cl.               ’           *v-/
1102   D1435      MA:NOTED D1
1106   H A 1001   SHEFFFIELD WEDNESDAY V NORWICH
                  NORWICH TEAM STAYING AT MOATHOUSE.ROTHERHAM.
                  NORWICH SUPPORTERS: 4 COACHES BY AMBASSADOR AND 1 BY SIMMONS.
                  TRAIN ARRIVAL TIMES AT SHEFFIELD MIDLAND STATION:1045/1145/1243
                  1345. (1419 ROTHERHAM O N L Y )
                  DEPART SHEFFIELD MIDLAND STATION:1813/1926. (1730 ROTHEHAM ON L Y )
                  SUPPORTERS DUE TO ARRIVE J 34 Ml. 1330-1400.
23/08/89 09*50 HAF HA1001
LP:HAJ                                             HAF HA1001
Rec B y : O     Serials 378     Ident:HA1001     1021    19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types     97                    Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO            Sub DivsHA
          PC          PC 808 ROSEVEAR«WORKIN6 10X6PM.

Detail 5   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
           THE “MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC       [EXT 3273
           AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.                            -----

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                    CL




•                                INCIDENT LOG                       PAGE 3 OF
              FANS WELL BEHAVED.
1114 H A 1001 ROTHERHAM UNITED V PRESTON.
              PRESTON POLICE SPOTTERS TRAVELLING WITH THE FANS.
              ANTICIPATED GATE: 6000.
              PRESTON FANS     :1500-2000.
              PRESTON TEAM STAYING AT THE MOATHOUSE.ROTHERHAM.
              PRESTON SUPPORTERS COACHES:1 FISHWICKS/1 MAYPOLE/1 MERSEYBUS/
              1 RIBBLE VALLEY/2 MERCERS/ +3 OTHERS.
              ARRIVING Ml JUNCT 34 1330-1400.
1116 H A 1001 CORRECTION TO ENTRY:NORWICH SUPPORTER DUE TO ARRIVE AT Ml JUNCT
23/08/89 09:50 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                             HAF HA 1.001
Rec By * 0      Serial: 378     Ident SHA1001    1821     19/08/89
Phone:
Location:OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    97                     Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO          Sub DivsHA
Source;  PC           PC 808 ROSEVEAR,WORKING 10X6PM.

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON-     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE ONTACTED IN
          THE -MATCH INCIDENT DESK” BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC    .EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                  CL




•                             INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE 4 OF
            36 (NOT 34) 1330-1400.
1121 D22142 MA:NOTED D2
1121 HA1001 CONT- ROTHERHAM V PRESTON.
            TRAINS ALL VIA SHEFFIELD MIDLAND EVERY 20 MIN.FROM 1134.
            DEPART 1746/1943.
            FANS HAVE A POOR REPUTAION.
            INFORMATION:THAT 3 COACHES HIRED FROM OUT OF TOWN,COMING TO
            SORT ROTHERHAM OUT.TRANSIT VANS PARK WELL AWAY FROM THE GROUND
            EARLY AND ATTACK HOME FANS.
1123 HA1001 INFO FROM D.S.CHARLSWORTH:APPROX 25 NORWICH FANS TRAVELLING BY
•x
23/08/89 09:51 HAF HA1001
LFsHAl                                                 HAF HA1001
Rec By: O         Serial: 378      Ident:HA1001      1021    19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    9 7 ----------            Ras Ref :HA00/00/00     INFO         Sub DivsHA
Sources  PC             'PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE                IN
          THE -MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC               3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253,

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                     CL




•                               INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE      5 OF 14
              TRAIN TO SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY HATCH.
1127 H A 1001 WEST BROM   V SHEFFIELD UNITED (AWAY)
              POLICE SPOTTERS TRAVELLING AWAY.
              ANTICIPATED FANS FROM SHEFFIELD 2000-3000 +
              COACHES: 1 MAYFIELD/2 MOORE/2 YORKS TRACTION/2 COACH LINE/
              2 COOPERS/1 BAGSHAW/2 ABBET TAXI.
1129 HA 1001 IPSWICH    V    BARNSLEY (AW A Y )
              ANTICIPATED TRAVELLING FROM BARNSLEY 300-400.
              COACHES: 1 CASTLE/3 PRIDE OF THE ROAD.
1131 H A 1001 EXETER V    DONCASTER (AWAY)
23/68/89 09:51 HAF H A 1001
LPsHAl                                                HAF HA i©01
Rec B y : O      Serial: 378                        1021     1.9/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type:     97                       Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DivsHA
Source:   PC _________ I/PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM,

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ*TEL EXT FOR PC     LEXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                      CL




                                 INCIDENT LOG                       PAGE 6 OF 14
              ANTICIPATED FANS FROM DONCASTER 50-70.
              COACHES*1 LEONS.
1144 H A 1001 MATCHES PLAYED ELSWARE:IE-FANS PASSING THROUGH SOUTH YORKSHIRE.
              ARSENAL          V MANCHESTER UNITED.
              LEICESTER CITY V HULL.
              WOLVERHAMPTON    V MIDDLESBRO.
              SUNDERLAND       V SWINDON.
              SWANSEA          V HUDDERSFIELD.
              COLCHESTER       V CHESTERFIELD.
1146 HA1001 INFO FROM BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE:
 •
23/08/89 09s52 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                                HAF H A 1001
Rec By: O         Serial: 378      Ident:HA1001     1021      19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type-    9 7 ___________ i         Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DivsHA
Source:  PC              PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM,

Detail:   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK1* BASED AT HQ. TEL EXT FOR PC I I.EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                      CL




                              INCIDENT LOG                           PAGE 7 OF 14
            APP 2© SHEFFIELD BASED,LIVERPOOL FANS,LEFT MIDLAND STATION FOR
            LIVERPOOL AND APP SAME NUMBER SHEFFIELD BASED MANCHESTER UNITED
            FANS LEFT FOR MANCHESTER.THIS IS REGULAR WHEN THEIR TEAMS ARE AT
            HOME.
1151 HA1001 MESSAGE VIA C/INSP PRICE. H Q . :“I WAS AT HMP LINDOHLME,FRIDAY 18
            AUG 89,AND WAS INFORMED THAT A MAN,WHO HAD BEEN RELEASED THAT
            DAY,WHO IS A ARDENT MANCHESTER CITY SUPPORTER INTIMATED THAT THE
            MANCHESTER CITY HOOLIGAN ELEMENT INTEND TO INVADE THE LIVERPOOL
            PITCH AT TODAYS MATCH.( PASSED TO INSP CLOW AT LIVERPOOL)
1156 Cl864 MESSAGE FROM BT POLICE. 15 PRESTON FANS ON 1134 TRAIN FROM PREST
23/08/89 09s53 HAF H A 1001
LPsHAl                                               HAF H A 1001
Rec By: O         Serials 378     Ident:HA1001     1©21      19/08/89
Phone;
Locat ion sOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types      97                     Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub Div;HA
Source:    PC          /PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM,

Detai1:   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE COMTArTED IN
          THE “MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC      EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                     CL




                                 INCIDENT LOG                       PAGE 8 OF 14
              ON ARRIVING ROTHERHAM APPROX 1345. MESSAGE PASSED TO PS FRANCE
              Cl FOOTBALL LIAISON.
1158 HA1001 CORRECTION TO MY ENTRY TIME 1144.
              SHOULD READ:
              MANCHESTER UNITED/MIDDLESBRO/SWINDON/HUDDERSFIELD/CHESTERFIELD,
              ALL AT HOME MATCHES.
1205 H A 1001 TELEPHONE CONTACT MADE WITH PC         AT ROTHERHAM UNITED
              POLICE GROUND CONTROL (72-2207>
              RADIO CHANNELS,CHI CH2,CH3 CH4 NOW BEING MONITORED.
1211 HA1001 FROM BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE:
 •
23/08/89 09:53 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                               HAF H A 1001
Rec By; O       Serials 378      IdentsHA1001      1021      19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    97 ----------           Ras Ref :HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DivsHA
Sources  PC            PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE “MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EX T FOR PC    IEXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                     CL




•                               INCIDENT LOG                         PAGE 9 OF 14
              THERE WERE 6 FANS ON THE 0934 ARRIVAL AND 14 ON THE 1134,
              ALL TRAVELLED THROUGH TO ROTHERHAM.
1231 H A 1001 TELEPHONE CONTACT MADE WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY POLICE GROUND
              CONTROL 76-3279 PC RYAN.(C/INSP BEAL I/C CONTROL ROOM)
1354 HA 1001 CHECK CALL FROM PC        h<-ROTHERHAM GROUND CONTROL:
              NO PROBLEMS/INCIDENTS TO REPORT CPS FRANCE I/C GROUND CONTROL)
1428 HA1001 FROM WFSlsNO NORWICH SUPPORTERS COACHES HAVE YET ARRIVED AT
              Ml JUNCT 36.
              CONFIRMED BY HILLSBRO GROUND CONTROL THAT THESE COACHES HAVE
              NOT ARRIVED AT THE GROUND (PASSED TO WF S 1 ).
**END O F MESSAGE**




21TO8/89 09:53 HAF H A 1001
LPsHAl                                               NAF H A 1001
Rec Bys O       Serials 378       Ident:HA1001      1021     19/08/89
Phones
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type;    97                       Ras RefsHA00/00/00     INFO              Sub DivsHA
Sources  PC I         I/PC 808 ROSEVEAR. WORKING 10X6PM.

Details   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK* BASED AT HQ. TEL EXT FOR Pc|    EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                        CL




W                                  INCIDENT LOS                             PAGE 10 OF 14
1431 H A 10 0 1 FROM WFSlsTHE COACHES HAVE NOW ARRIVED AT JUNCT 36 AND UNDER
                ESCORT TO HILLSBRO.
                HILLSBRO GROUND CONTROL INFORMED.
1506 HA1001 SHEFFIELD WEDNEDAY K.O. ON TIME. (SCORE 1-0 TO NORWICH)
                ROTHERHAM UNITED.   K.O. ON TIME. C NO SCORE).
1510 HA1001 FOR INFORMATIONsCH4 VHF ON CONSOLE 13 (MAJOR INCIDENT ROOM) IS
                NOT TRANMITTING OR RECEIVING.THIS PROBLEM WILL BE REPORTED TO
                H.O.W.D ON MONDAY MORNING !1 AUG 89 BY PC     r ^ W I T H A VIEW TO
                BEING FULLY OPERATIONAL ON CH4 FOR FOOTBALL TRAFFIC ON TUESDAY
                22 AUG 89.
23/08/89 09!! 55 HAF HA 1001
LPsHAl                                                 HAF H A1001
Rec Bys  O        Serials 378      Iden t :H A 1001  1021     19/08/89
Phones
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Types    9 7 __________            Ras Ref :HA00/00/00     INFO          Sub DivsHA
Sources  PC             'PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Detai1 s   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
           THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ. TEL EXT FOR PC I  I.EXT 3273
           AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                      CL




•                                 INCIDENT LOG                          PAGE 11 OF 1
1513 HA1001     FROM ROTJERHAM GROUND CONTROLS ROTHERHAM 1 - PRESTON 0.
1554 H A 1001   NO REPORTED PROBLEMS AT HALF—TIME s—
                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY OR ROTHERHAM UNITED.
1618 H A 1001   COACH ESCORT MOBILES NOW OPERATING ON VHF CH3 FROM
                “MATCH INCIDENT DESK" .
1620 HA1001     WD21.
1639 HA1001     INFORMATIONSARSENAL TRAVELLING FANS,BACK FROM MANCHESTER.
                3000-3500 FANS.MANY BY TRAIN,FEW COACHES,MAINLY PRIVATE
                TRANSPORT.NO FURTHER DETAILS.
                LEICESTER CITY TRAVELLING BACK FROM HULL.
23/08/89 09:55 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                             HAF H A 1001
Rec Byt  O      Serial; 3       I den t :HA 1001 1021      19/08/89
Phone:
LocationsOPERATIONS ROOM »SHEFFIELD
Types    97                     Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DivsHA
Source:  PC           PC 80S ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Detai1:   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE "MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC     [EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                   CL




•                               INCIDENT LOG                         PAGE 12 OF 14
              2000 TOTAL.6 COACHES C 1 BAYLISS/1 BLANDS/2 KINCH/2 OTHERS)
              KEEP LOOK OUT FOR A WHITE TRANSIT F411TBC AND FIAT UNO
              A594 MAC BOTH CONTAINING TROUBLESOME ELEMENT,SUS TROUBLE
              IN HULL CUTY CENTRE PRIOR TO MATCH.
1643 H A 1001 WOLVERHAMTON FANS RETURNING FROM MIDDLESBRO:3000, 20 COACHES.
              < HAPPY DAYS/CRANTOCK/PATH-FINDER/HILLS/CLASSIC/R.S ,R ROADLINER/
                STATION ROAD/MASONS/STREETLEY/WHITTLE*S )
              SUNDERLAND FANS RETURNING FROM SWINDON:1500;11 COACHES.
              (BROWNS/VOYAGER/SILVERSIDE/MOORDALE/MARTINDALE/H.E)
              THE FIRST 3 ARE TOLD TO CONTAIN TROUBLESOME ELEMENTS.
  23708/89 09s55 HAF HA1001
  LPsHAl                                                  HAF H A 1001
  Rec Bys      O      Serials 378      Ident;HA1001     1021      19/08/89
  Phones
  Loca t io n :OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
  Types        97 _________ ,          Ras Ref:HA00/00/00     INFO           Sub DiviHA
  Source:      PC           'PC 808 ROSEVEAR,WORKING 10X6PM.

  Detail:   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
            THE “MATCH INCIDENT DESK" BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC.    I.FXT 3273
            AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

  POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                        CL




                                    INCIDENT LOG                        PAGE 13 OF
  1645 H A 1001   SWANSEA FANS RETURNING FROM HUDDERSFIELDs200-300e3 COACHES,
                  <MORRISONS/G.COACHES/UNITED WELSH)
                  COLCHESTER FANS RETURNING FROM CHESTERFIELD:100:1 OSBORNE COACH.
  1649 H A 1001   UPDATE FROM ROTHERHAM:- TOTAL GATE 5972. 1030 AWAY FANS.
                  NO ARRESTS MADE.
  1652 H A 1001   UPDATE FROM SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY:TOTAL GATE 19142: 748 AWAY FANS.
                  2 ARRESTED <D/D AND DRUGS) + 11 EJECTED.
  1721 H A 1001   NO REPORTED INCIDENTS TO NOTE.
                  INCIDENT CLOSED.
[ 1722 HA1001     RC:97s 126
23708/89 09:56 HAF HA1001
LPsHAl                                                HAF HA1001
Rec By:  O        Serial: 378     Ident:H A 1001    1021    19/08/89
Phone:
Location;OPERATIONS ROOM ,SHEFFIELD
Type:    9 7 __________           Ras Ref SHA00/00/00     INFO          Sub D i v :HA
Source:  PC             PC 808 ROSEVEAR.WORKING 10X6PM.

Detail:   FOOTBALL LIAISON.     THE ABOVE TWO OFFICERS CAN BE CONTACTED IN
          THE “MATCH INCIDENT DESK” BASED AT HQ.TEL EXT FOR PC      EXT 3273
          AND PC ROSEVEAR EXT 3253.

POSSIBLE DUPLICATES                                                     CL




                                INCIDENT LOG                           PAGE 14 OF
1722 H A 1001 IC
                                                          DCC/JEL
                                                          25 August 1989

Mr S Walker
Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley S70 2PQ




Dear

CHARGES FOR POLICE SERVICES AT FOOTBALL EVENTS

On Thursday 24 August 1989 I aet with the Secretaries and Directors from all
the football clubs In South Yorkshire to discuss our joint reaction to the
recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report following
the Hillsborough disaster.

As part of this discussion I told them of the Increased levels of policing at
football grounds which will result through implementing the Taylor
recommendations. Also that I Intend bringing the details of this to the
notice of the Police Authority at an early date. The significance of this
being that the Authority at that time may wish to re-consider the existing
contractual charging arrangements by which they recover part of the costs of
policing Inside football grounds.

In the interim I asked, and they agreed, that from the start of the current
football season-in terms of their payment for police services we operate on
the basis of the existing contract amended as necessary to take account of the
last police pay award.

I will, as soon as I have the Information available, give you details of the
manpower Implications as above to be put before the Police Authority.

I would appreciate it if you would now formally agree a contract with the
football clubs on the basis of the informal agreement referred to above. At
the same time it should be made cleat that these arrangements are possibly
subject to review and changes In the charges levied may be made during the
period of the current football season.

Yours sincerely
                                S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E POLICE

                                                                    REF:

    FROM   Chief Inspector EDMUNDSON                                S T A T IO N /D E P T   :Operations Roan
    TO:    Chief Superintendent Operations & Traffic                DATE:        4th September 1989

             SUBJECT:    Football Match Days - Force Major Incident Rocm

             The above room at Force Headquarters will be open on football match
             days to provide the following services to Divisions in support of
             their match controls
             Sheffield United,Sheffield Wednesday,Rotherham United.
             These three match controls can be monitored at Force Headquarters
             via the multi-channel UHF radio installed. This provides a direct link
             with the Incident Room and Match Controls should use the facility
             when requesting any service or information.

             By monitoring the radio traffic of Ground Controls the Incident Rocm
             staff will be in a position to respond inmediately to any request
             made and on occasions may be able to anticipate what may be requested.

             The services that can be offered are listed
             1. Any request for Ambulances;
             2. Any request for the Fire service;                                ;
             3. Any PNC or CIS check that is required;
             4. Updates on traffic movement, congestion,etc.;
             ficpajiy contact'with neighbouring forces regarding traffic,weather,etc. ;
             6. Collation and dissemination of football intelligence;
             7. Prompt response to any immediate request for manpower;
             8. Any other service at present given by Force Operations Rocm.

             It should be pointed out that the room is open in support of the
             Ground Controls and it is not intended that they will interfere in
             any way with the control of thepolice operation.

             By mnotoring and having an overview of the police control it may be
             possible to highlight any problems concerning control and communications
             so that they may be resolved on future occasions.

             Barnsley F.C. and Doncaster Rovers.
             At the present tine these two match controls cannot be monitored
             by the Major Incident -Room. In respect of Barnsley, a report has
             been submutted with suggestions on how this can be achieved.

             However, all the above servicesmay be provided to Barnsley and
             Doncaster Ground Controls provided that the contacts and requests
             are made by telephone.
              This report is respectfully S
                                          submitted
                                           UDTTU-Ltea rfor
                                                        o i your
                                                            yuut information.                              . (   .




              P.S.                 Tor
              Chief Inspector
              Operations Room



GEN'2
  SOUTH Y ORKSHIRE     P O L IC E   -   M IN U T E   SHEET




    FILE   REFERENCE                                         MINUTE   SHEET   NO



    SUBJECT




              j .            fL                        , j


                                        0<k M                            ‘- ,:u


              ^                                                 ^ c' f        ,    u   W   '<-


                    a<s
              4>
                     ___




GEN/I
’ 89 0 3 /1 5 1 1:56        © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                     S. Y-, J.




                           DATED                                                1989




                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


                                                      -and -


                  THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                      "and"                             '               IW

                                                                 "                               M -V - ie - C ^




                                                                                                /VoO                            .

                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                   y q k < ^ . (*f}                 ^
                                          A GREEMENT


                       f o r p r o v i s i o n of S pe ci al P o l i c e S e r v i c e s
                             a t A s s o c i a t i o n F o o t b a l l Matches




                                                                                   LvjjoJ-'v                                1*<Xas\. %JU*~


                                                                                                  ^       ‘A •                      ^

                                                                               Wjl - ^vifsad^— '~*Lo^,                               k



                                                     R. C. J o hn st on        ^ JJi,       ^         Jb>jUo^UjLot                  Uv(o
                                                     Clerk and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r -jlvcSU                          i^ j LL^c L*.

                                                     South Y ork s hi re P o l i c e A u t h o n t y
                                                     Regent S t r e e t        I rvJO^ 0 U i A                                  C<— |»<*k
                                                     BARNSLEY,                 K
                                                     South Y o rk s h ir e .
                                                     DOC776                                     ) k \ D^^oCf|K)


                                                                       >>iv_Xx-r^ ’
                                                     >CU^.                         cpTr-^.       /A -t^y           r


                                                                                                    /        7 ~ ? f f r - tf
THIS AGREEMENT i s made th e                                      day of                       One thousand
n i n e hundred and e i g h t y nine BETWEEN                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY of
Regent S t r e e t B ar nsl e y ( t h e A u t h o r i t y ) of t h e f i r s t p a r t PETER WRIGHT th e
C hie f C o ns ta bl e of South Y or ks h ire P o l i c e {the Chief C o n st a b le ) o f th e
second p a r t and                                                                          ( t h e Club) of th e
third part


WHEREAS


(1)   The Club has made a r e q u e s t to t h e C hie f C onst a bl e f o r t h e p r o v i s i o n
      o f s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t a l l a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches ( o t h e r
       than t h e t y p e s --of associatiQft^foja t b a l l matches specif-i-e-d in Appendi x
       ‘-fr1—           t o be h e ld a t the C l u b ' s stadium a t
       ( t h e stadium} d u r in g t h e 1989/90 footb all- season and th e C hief
      C onsta bl e i s w i l l i n g to provid e such s e r v i c e s and d i s c u s s i o n s have
      ta k e n p la c e w it h t h e Club c on ce rn in g t h e number of o f f i c e r s t o be
      pro vi de d a t such f o o t b a l l matches


(2)                                                                                        --luJjupfosHnent
      recommendations made by Lord J u s t i c e J ^ y ^ trf^ rT h T ^ ln te rim Report
      i n t o th e H i l l s b o r o u g h Stadium^trTsaster, t h e le v e ls of p o l i c i n g a t the
      s a i d f o o tb a l I j n a i e h ^ s w i l 1 have to be g r e a t e r tha n th o s e deployed
                                                                The C hie f C o n st a b le i n t e n d s to
      submit a r e p o r t t o the A u t h o r i t y on t h e l e v e l s of p o l i c i n g he
      c o n s i d e r s a p p r o p r i a t e f o r th e s a i d f o o t b a l l matches    The Club have
      been a dvis e d t h a t t h e A u th o r it y may wish t o review t h ^ f e ^ t i i i - H ^ e d
                                                  to be made f o r the p r o v i s i o n o f s p ec ia l
      p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t th e s a i d matches*in consequence o f the Chief
      C o n s t a b l e ' s proposal to i n c r e a s e the l e v e l of p o l i c i n g         Pending a
      d e c i s i o n by th e A u t h o r i t y in t h i s r e s p e c t ^ i t has been agre ed with t h e
      Club t h a t t h l ^ o r m u l a    i n c o r p o r a t e d i n t o t h e Agreement e n t e r e d    into
      with the Club f o r th e            provision of special police serv ice s a t
      a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches held during th e 1988/89 f o o t b a l l season
      w i l l apply s u b j e c t t o an i n c r e a s e to t a k e acco unt o f t h e P o l i c e Pay
      Award made on t h e 1 s t September, 1989




                          c.ko.;m i              tWe c
 19 0 9 /1 5 13:57             © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                     S. Y.   J. S.____________                                     BlOO^




  (3)     The p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l ^ p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t the type of a s s o c i a t i o n
          f o o t b a l l matches s ^ e i f i e d in Appendix 'A' h e r e t o i s i n te n d e d t o be                      cU -kt^.
          th e s u b j e c t o f > « p a r a t e agreements between th e p a r t i e s h e r e t o and th e  )
          terms of th^-sAgreement do not a pply                                                          ^ ^


 NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED as f o l l o w s : -


 1.      SUBJECT to th e payment o f t h e c h a r g e s s p e c i f i e d in t h i s Agreement the
 C hief C ons ta ble a g r e e s to provide s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t a s s o c i a t i o n
 f o o t b a l l matches h e ld a t t h e stadium d u r in g t h e 1989/50 f o o t b a l l s e a s o n . i # -
 accor da nco w it h t h e - t e rms and p r ov i s i o r^-of-Jth4s.^gjieeme-nt-


 2.      (i)       The l o c a l C hi e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t {the S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ) f o r the a r e a
         1n which t h e s ta di um 1s l o c a t e d s h a l l * in h i s a b s o l u t e d i s c r e t i o n ,
         de termine th e number of o f f i c e r s to be pro vided a t any match having
         re ga rd to a l l r e l e v a n t f a c t o r s i n c l u d i n g t h e l i k e l y a t t e n d a n c e as
         e s t i m a t e d by t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t


         (ii)      Without p r e j u d i c e to the d i s c r e t i o n of th e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t under
         the p r e c e e d in g s u b - c l a u s e               n   k   tn   iiliin?af 5 and ft th e Chief
        Constable has ag re ed w it h th e Club h m agreed t h a t g e n e r a l l y the
        minimum number of o f f i c e r s pro vi de d a t any match w i l l be in accordance
        with A p p e n d i x , # ^


3.      THE Club s h a l l n o t i f y in w r i t i n g t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t o f t h e d a t e of
each a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l match to be he ld a t t h e stadium not l e s s than
f o r t y e i g h t hours b e f o r e i t i s due to t a k e p la c e PROVIDED THAT t h i s
o b l i g a t i o n w i l l be deemed met in t h e c a s e of normal league matches by
p r o v i d i n g a l i s t o f t h e seasons home f i x t u r e s


        THE C hie f C o n s ta b le s h a l l have a b s o l u t e o p e r a t i o n a l c o n t r o l over a l l
t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r s deployed w it h in t h e stadium


5*               I H I i c ',ub a g r e e s to pay f o r t h e s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s o u t l i n e d
        in t h i s agreement in accordance with t h e s c a l e of ch ar ge s based on
        crowd a t t e n d a n c e s e t ou t in A p p e n d i x ^ ^ t o t h i s agreement
         (ii)     I t is acknowledged by the Club t h a t th e le ve l of p o l i c i n g a t the
        f o o t b a l l matches covered by t h i s Agreement and the c ha r ges made a r e to
        be the s u b j e c t of review as s t a t e d in th e r e c i t a l s h e r e t o and i t i s
        agreed between th e p a r t i e s t h a t f u r t h e r d i s c u s s i o n s w il l tke p la c e to
        a g re e any amendments r e q u i r e d to t h i s Agreement f o ll o w i n g th e s aid
        review


        (iii)     In t h e e v e n t of f a i l u r e t o a g r e e any amendments r e q u i r e d as
        r e f e r r e d to in sub pa>'agi»a p h -(4 -) al»0¥0 t h e A u t h o r i t y o r the Chief
        C on st a bl e s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y to de te rm in e t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n
        days n o t i c e in w r i t i n g w it h o u t p r e j u d i c e to rec ov ery o f monies owing
        a t t h e d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n


6.      PAYMENT s h a l l be made no l a t e r th a n twenty e i g h t days a f t e r the
r e l e v a n t match d a t e and i f unpaid a t t h e end o f t h a t p e r i o d i n t e r e s t s h a l l
then be payable a c c r u i n g on a day to day b a s i s a t 3% above base r a t e from
time to time of N ational Westminster Bank PLC


7.      WHERE a match i s e i t h e r : -


        (a )     C an c e ll e d o r postponed l e s s than fo u r hours b e f o r e i t i s
        scheduled to commence or


        (b)      abandoned a f t e r i t has commenced


        t h e Club hereby a g re es t h a t t h e A u t h o r i t y s h a l l be p a id as i f th e
       match had ta k e n p l a c e and been com ple ted.                     In th e ca s e of a c a n c e l l e d
       or postponed match t h e charg es s h a l l be based upon t h e crowd e s t i m a t e d
       by the S u p e r i n t e n d e n t in c o n s u l t a t i o n w it h t h e Club as i f t h e match
       had been play ed


8.     THE C hi ef C o n st a b le s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y t o d e c l i n e to p ro vi d e s pec ia l
p o l i c e s e r v i c e s f o r any a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l match o r matches held a t the
C l u b ' s stadium i f       in h i s o pi nio n        c i r c u m s t a n c e s a r i s e which re n d e r i t
n e c e s s a r y to deploy h i s o f f i c e r s e lse w he re
                               ©0226-730442                            S. Y- J. S.




  9.      (1)       IjJ th e e v e n t t h a t a t any time payment f o r t h r e e o r more matches
                    i s o u t s t a n d i n g more than twenty e i g h t days from t h e due d a te
                    then e i t h e r th e       A u t h o r i t y o r th e Chief C o ns ta b le s h a l l be a t
                    l i b e r t y to de te rm in e t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n days n o t i c e in
                   w r i t i n g w i t h o u t p r e j u d i c e to re c over y o f monies owing a t t h e
                   d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n PROVIDED t h a t the n o t i c e o f t e r m i n a t i o n
                   w i l l be withdrawn i n the e v e n t t h a t t h e Club makes f u l l payment
                   1n accorda nce with th e n o t i c e b e f o r e i t s e x p i r y da te

                                                                                       /


          (2)      i f t h e Club s h a l l c a l l a meeting of or e n t e r i n t o any
                   co mp osi tio n with i t s c r e d i t o r s o r s u f f e r any d i s t r e s s o r
                   e x e c u t i o n t o be l e v i e d on t h e goods of t h e Club o r s h a l l e n t e r
                   i n t o l i q u i d a t i o n whether compulsory o r v o l u n t a r y ( n o t being
                   merely a v o l u n t a r y l i q u i d a t i o n f o r purposes of amalgamation or
                   r e c o n s t r u c t i o n ) t h e A u t h o r i t y and t h e C hief C on sta ble o r e i t h e r
                   of them s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y to dete rmin e t h i s c o n t r a c t f o r t h w i t h
                   by n o t i c e in w r i t i n g


         (3)       Any n o t i c e s erved p u r s u a n t t o t h i s c l a u s e s h a l l be deemed
                   p r o p e r l y s er ved i f d e l i v e r e d by hand o r p os te d by f i r s t c l a s s
                   p o s t t o th e r e g i s t e r e d o f f i c e o f the Club and i f po s te d s h a l l be
                   deemed r e c e i v e d t h e f i r s t working day a f t e r p o s t i n g



        AS WITNESS th e hands of


SIGNED by                                                     )
on b e h a l f of t h e Club                                 )




SIGNED by ROBERT CAMPBELL JOHNSTON                                )
on b e h a l f o f t h e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y            )




SIGNED by PETER WRIGHT                                        )
Ch ie f C on st a ble                                         )
89 0 9 /1 5 13:59    © 02 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                       S. Y.   J- S-




                                                            A
                                                 APPENDIX 'iB*


 Crowd              Superin-        Chief
 A tte nda nce      tendents         Inspectors           Inspectors             Sergeants   Constabl


  2000 o r below                                                                         1           6
  2001 -    3000                                                                         1           8
  3001 -    5000                                                                         2       11
  5001 -    7000                                                                         2       14
  7001 -    9000                                                                 .       2       17
 9001 - 11000                                                    1                   3           20
11001 - 13000                                            _       1                   3           23
13001 - 15000                                                1                       3           26
15001 - 17000                                                1                       4           29
17001 - 19000                                                1                       4           32
19000 - 21000                                                ]                       4          35
21001 - 23000                                                2                       5          38
23001 - 25000                                                2                       5          41
25001 - 27000                                                2                       5          44
27001 - 29000                                                2                       6          47
29001 - 31000                                                2                       6          50
31001 - 33000                                                Z                       6          53
33001 - 35000                                                2                       7          56
35001 - 37000                                1               2                       7          59
37001 - 39000                            1                   2                       7          62
39001 - 41000                            1                   2                       8          65
41001 - 43000                            1                   2                       8          6 8 -.
43001 - 45000                            1                   2                       8          71
45001 - 47000                            1                   3                       9          74
470Q1 - 49000                            1                   3                       9          77
49001 - 51000        1                   1                   3                       9          80
CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SERVICES - FOOTBALL CLUBS                                    AHFB90
1989/90 SEASON
         CHAR6E PER FOUR HOURS:-                               NORHAL        BANK HOL
                  SUPERINTENDENT                                   158.10        206.70
                  CHIEF INSPECTOR                                  116.10        153.80
                  INSPECTOR                                        103.80        137.80
                  SERGEANT                                          91.50        120.80
                  CONSTABLE                                         76.50        101.00

                                                               CHARGES (EXCL VAT!
SATE                   SUPT     C/I      INSP   S6T   CONST    NORMAL        BANK HOL
2000 or   below                                   1        6        550.50        726.80
 2001 -    3000                                   1        8        703.50        928.80
 3001 -    5000                                   2       11      1,024.50     1,352.60
 5001 -    7000                                   2      14      1,254.00      1,655.60
 7001 -    9000                                   2       17      1,483.50     1,958.60
 9001 -   11000                             1     3      20      1,908.30      2,520.20
11001 -   13000                             1     3      23      2,137.80      2,823.20
13001 -   15000                             1     3      26      2,367.30      3,126.20
15001 -   17000                                   4      29      2,688.30      3,550.00
17001 -   19000                            1      4      32      2,917.80      3,853.00
19001 -   21000                            1      4      35      3,147.30      4,156.00
21001 -   23000                            2      5      38      3,572.10      4,717.60
23001 -   25000                            2      5      41      3,801.60      5,020.60
25001 -   27000                            2      5      44      4,031.10      5,323.60
27001 -   29000                            2      6      47      4,352.10      5,747.40
29001 -   31000                            2      6      50      4,581.60      6,050.40
31001 -   33000                            2      6      53      4,811.10      6,353.40
33001 -   35000                            2      7      56      5,132.10      6,777.20
35001 -   37000                            2      7      59      5,477.70      7,234.00
37001 -   39000                            2      7      62      5,707.20      7,537.00
39001 -   41000                            2      8      65      6,028.20      7,960.80
41001 -   43000                            2      8      68      6,257.70      8,263.80
43001 -   45000                            2      8      71      6,487.20      8,566.80
45001 -   47000                            3      9      74      6,912.00      9,128.40
47001 -   49000                            3      9      77      7,141.50      9,431.40
49001 -   51000           1                3      9      80      7,529.10      9,941.10




FIN/FEP
  9/15/89
                     ■               Tj
   ' 8 9 ^ / 0 6 09 31                ©0226-730442                            S. Y. J. S.                                                $001




                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                      JOINT SECRETARIAT
F IR E A N D C IV IL D E F E N C E                               P O L IC E            :    PASSENGER TRAN SPO RT
                                                                                                                         P O B o x 37
R .C . Johnston B .A .. l.P .F .A ,
                                                                                                                      R eg en t Street
Clerk to the Secretariat
                                                                                                                            Barnsley
                                                                                                         South Y orkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                                            T e le p h o n e Barnsley (0226) 733222

                                                                                                     Dale;
O u t Kef:                                           Your Ref:

                                                                                                    T e le p h o n e fX l:
This mutter is being dealt with by




                                             F ACS I MI L E              TRANS MI S S I ON


             TQ

                                     h Q * . .

                                     .....



             FROM:               fr*!; £         7           .                    .;




             Date    ; .(a,...?.:.'?'.?!.
             No. of Pages ( i n c . t h i s page)                  10.

             Our Fax Number               0226/730442


             In the event of bad r e c e i p t please co n t act 0226/73222? E x t :
             89 0 9 /0 6 0 9:3 1                 © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                  S. Y.   J. S.                                                           $002



                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                 POLICE AUTHORITY
    R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                                                                              P ,Q . B o x 37
    Clerk and Financial Officer                                                                                                              R eg e n t Street
                                                                                                                                                   Barnsley
                                                                                                                     South Y ork shire S 70 2 P Q
                                                                                                         T e le p h o n e Barnsley (t)22fi) 7332 2 2


    ou,Rtf        Mv0/JW/p0L                                     YourHcf       DCC/3EL                           Daw'              6th September, 1989
    7'/iw m atter is being dealt   w tlh   b y         M iS S    M.V.     OSCiGS                                 T H C {>h o m >   t> x i:   315




                  Dear Mr. Hayes,

                  CHARGES FOR POLICE SERVICES AT FOOTBALL EVENTS

                  I r e f e r t o your l e t t e r o f t h e 25th August, 1989 and e n c l o s e f o r your
                  c o n s i d e r a t i o n an amended agreement which I propose t o send t o each of
                  th e f o o t b a l l c l u b s , s u b j e c t t o any comment from y o u r s e l f . I should
                  be g r a t e f u l i f you would confirm t h a t th e agreement r e f l e c t s your
                  d i s c u s s i o n s with t h e f o o t b a l l c l u b s .

                  Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




                  S. Walker,
                  S olicitor,
\



    t



                  Deputy Chief C onst a ble ,
                  South Y ork sh ire P o l i c e ,
                  P o l i c e H e ad q u a rt e rs ,
                  Snig H i l l ,
                  SHEFFIELD.
        L-        S3 8LY
    89 0 9 /0 6 0 9:31      © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                   S. Y.     J. S.                     $003




                            DATED                                              1989




                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


                                                     -an d-


                     THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                     -and -




I




                                            AGREEMENT


                         f o r p r o v i s i o n o f Spec ial P o l i c e S e r v i c e s
                               a t A s s o c i a t i o n F o o t b a l l Matches




t
                                                     R. C. J o hn st on
                                                     Clerk and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r
                                                     South Y ork s hi re P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y
                                                     Regent S t r e e t
                                                     BARNSLEY,
                                                     South Y o rk s h ir e .
                                                     D0C733
      S9 09/we 0 9 :3 2                    © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                     S. Y.   J. S.                                         $004




    THIS AGREEMENT i s made t h e                                           day o f                      One thousand
    n in e hundred and e i g h t y n in e BETWEEN                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY of
    Regent S t r e e t B ar nsl e y ( t h e A u t h o r i t y ) o f t h e f i r s t p a r t PETER WRIGHT th e
    C hie f C o n st a b le of South Y ork sh ire P o l i c e ( t h e C hie f C o n st a b le ) of th e
    second p a r t and                                                                                 ( t h e Club) o f t h e
    th ird part

                                                                                                                                      ft*
    WHEREAS:-


    (1)    The Club has made a r e q u e s t to t h e Chief C on sta bl e f o r t h e p r o v i s i o n
           of s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t a l l a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches ( o t h e r
           than the ty p e s o f a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches s p e c i f i e d in Appendix
           ‘A1 h e r e t o ' t o be h e l d a t t h e C l u b ' s st adium a t
           ( t h e stadium) d u ri n g t h e 1989/90 f o o t b a l l season and t h e C hie f
I                               ,L                                                                                           ^ r
           C onst a ble i s w i l l i n g to provid e such s e r v i c e s and d i s c u s s i o n s have
           take n p l a c e with t h e Club c once rn in g t h e number of o f f i c e r s to be
           tie|rhoyed a t such f o o t b a l l matches
           y    i A   s   C   t r   tf r                                          ^


    (2)    The C hie f C o n s ta b le i s of t h e o p in io n t h a t in o r d e r t o implement
           recommendations ( i n s e r t nos ) made by Lord J u s t i c e Ta y lo r in h i s
           I n t e r i m Report i n t o t h e H il ls bo ro ug h Stadium D i s a s t e r , t h e l e v e l o f
           p o l i c i n g a t t h e s a i d f o o t b a l l matches w i l l have to be g r e a t e r than
                                            du ri n g t h e 1988/89      f o o t b a l l season » TheC hie f         C onst a ble
           intends              t o submit ar e p o r t to          t h e A u t h o r i t y on the l e v e l s   of p o l i c i n g
           he c o n s i d e r s a p p r o p r i a t e f o r t h e s a i d f o o t b a l l matches . The Club have
           been a d vi se d t h a t t h e A u t h o r i t y may wish to review t h e formula used
           f o r c a l c u l a t i n g t h e char ge to be made f o r th e p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l
           p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t t h e s a i d matches in consequence o f t h e C hief
           C onstable's p r o p o ^                    to increase the level of p o licin g * P en d in g a
           d e c i s i o n by t h e A u t h o r i t y i n t h i s r e s p e c t 1 t has been (a^reecj) wi t h i b e
           Club t h a t t f f ^ n u m b e r ^ f ~ o f f T c e r ^ ^ 6 ^ & 4 > t th e s a T d T o o t b a T T m a t c h e s
           s h a l l be in acc ord an ce with th o s e s e t o u t i n Appendix B of t h e
           Agreement e n t e r e d I n t o with th e Club f o r th e p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l
           p o l i c e s e r v i c e s d u ri n g t h e 1988/89 f o o t b a l l season and t h a t th e s c a l e
           of c har ge s s p e c i f i e d in t h a t Agreement s h a l l apply s u b j e c t to an
               I n c r e a s e to t a k e acco unt of t h e P o l i c e Pay award made on t h e 11th
               September 1989 y                                ^              ^
    89 0 9 /0 6 0 9 :3 3         © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                     S. Y.   J. S.                                           $005




    (3)    The p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t th e type of a s s o c i a t i o n
           f o o t b a l l matches s p e c i f i e d in Appendix 'A' h e r e t o i s in te n d e d to be
           t h e s u b j e c t o f s e p a r a t e agreements between t h e p a r t i e s h e r e t o and the
            terms of t h i s Agreement do not apply h e r e t o


    NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED as f o l l o w s : -


    1.     SUBJECT t o t h e payment and o t h e r p r o v i s i o n s of t h i s agreement the
    C hi e f C onst a ble a g r e e s to pr ovide s p e c ia l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s f o r a s s o c i a t i o n
    f o o t b a l l matches on t h e fo ll o wi n g b a s i s
                                                                      ?         9 *
            (a)       The b a s i c number of o f f i c e r s ’T ^ j t o s d ^ w i t h i n t h e stadium w i l l be
            one s e r g e a n t and s i x c o n s t a b l e s f o r a crowd a t t e n d a n c e of two thousand
            o r l e s s and t h e r e a f t e r in acc ord an ce with t h e Table s e t o ut in
«
            Appendix B
                            p                                                                       T'                       S
            {b)      Deployment w i l l be based upon th e l i k e l y a t t e n d a n c e ^ e s t i m a t e d
            by th e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t whose d e c i s i o n s h a l l be f i n a l whether o r no t
            as s e ss m e n t proves t o be a c c u r a t e


            (c)      W hil st i n general t h e l e v e l of p r o v i s i o n of s e r v i c e s w il l be in
            accordance with su b -p a ra g r ap h s (a) - (b) above t h e s e may be i n c r e a s e d
            reduced o r v a r i e d (whether in r e l a t i o n t o numbers or rank o f o f f i c e r s )
            a t t h e a b s o l u t e d i s c r e t i o n o f t h e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t (a s d e f i n e d in c l a u s e
            2 below) w i t h o u t a f f e c t i n g t h e s c a l e of c har ge s r e f e r r e d t o in Clause


t           4 of t h i s Agreement


            (d)       I t i s acknowledged by t h e Club t h a t t h e le ve l of p o l i c i n g a t th e
            f o o t b a l l matches covered by t h i s Agreement and t h e c har ge s made a re to ^
            be t h e s u b j e c t of review as s t a t e d in th e r e c i t a l s h e r e t o and i t i s
            agreed between th e p a r t i e s t h a t f u r t h e r d i s c u s s i o n s w i l l t k e p la c e to
            a g re e any amendments r e q u i r e d to t h i s Agreement fo ll o wi n g t h e s a id
            review


            (e)       In t h e e v e n t of f a i l u r e t o a g re e any amendments r e q u i r e d as
            r e f e r r e d t o in s ub-p a ra gr ap h (d) above th e A u t h o r i t y o r the Chief
            C onst a ble s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y to dete rmin e t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n
            days n o t i c e in w r i t i n g w i t h o u t p r e j u d i c e to re c ov er y o f monies owing
            a t t h e d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n
    ’ 89 0 9 /0 6 0 9 133         © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                   S. Y.    J. S.                                    $006




    2.     THE Club s h a l l n o t i f y In w r i t i n g t h e l o c a l c h i e f s u p e r i n t e n d e n t ( t h e
    s u p e r i n t e n d e n t ) f o r t h e a r e a in which t h e st adium i s l o c a t e d o f t h e d a t e
    of each a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l match to be h e l d a t t h e stadium no t l e s s than
    f o r t y e i g h t hours b e f o r e i t i s due to ta k e p l a c e PROVIDED THAT t h i s
    o b l i g a t i o n w i l l be deemed met in t h e ca se of normal leag ue matches by
    p r o v i d i n g a l i s t of t h e sea sons home f i x t u r e s


    3.     THE Chief C o n s ta b le s h a l l have a b s o l u t e o p e r a t i o n a l c o n t r o l over a l l
    t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r s deployed w i t h i n t h e stadium


    4.      THE Club a g re e s t o pay f o r t h e s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s o u t l i n e d in
    this    agreement in accorda nc e with t h e s c a l e                     of ch ar ge s based oncrowd
^ ^ a t t e n d a n c e s e t ou t i n Appendix C t o t h i s agreement


    5*      PAYMENT s h a l l be made no l a t e r than twenty e i g h t days a f t e r t h e
    r e l e v a n t match d a te and i f unpaid a t t h e end of t h a t p e r i o d i n t e r e s t s h a l l
    then be payable a c c r u i n g on a day to day b a s i s a t 3% above base r a t e from
    time    t o time of National Westminster Bank PLC


    6.      WHERE a match i s e i t h e r : -


            (a)      C an c e lle d o r postponed l e s s th a n f o u r hours b e f o r e I t i s
            s ch ed ule d to commence o r


            (b)      abandoned a f t e r i t has commenced


            t h e Club hereby a g r e e s t h a t th e A u t h o r i t y s h a l l be p a id as i f t h e
           match had ta ke n p l a c e and been co mplete d.                       In t h e c a s e of a c a n c e l l e d
            o r postponed match t h e c har ge s s h a l l be based upon t h e crowd e s t i m a t e d
            by t h e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t in c o n s u l t a t i o n w it h th e Club as i f t h e match
            had been played


    7.     THE C hie f C onst a bl e s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y t o d e c l i n e t o pr ovi de s p e c i a l
    p o l i c e s e r v i c e s f o r any a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l match o r matches held a t the
    C l u b ' s stadium 1f        1n h i s o p in io n     c i r c u m s ta n c e s a r i s e which r e n d e r i t
    n e c e s s a r y t o deploy h i s o f f i c e r s elsew he re
          The Ch lef Const a b l e s h a l 1 be a t l i b e r t y to d e c l i n e t o p ro v i d e s p eci al
          p o l i c e s e r v i c e s f o r any a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l match o r matches h el d a t
          t h e C lu b ' s stadium i f , in h i s o p i n i o n , ci rc u m s t an c es a r i s e which
          r e n de r i t ne c e s sa ry to deploy h i s o f f i c e r s el s ew h e re.


         (   1)      — t ^ie e ve n t ^ a t: a t any time payment f o r - t h r e e o r more matches
                     i s o u t s t a n d i n g more than twenty e i g h t days from t h e due d at e
                     then e i t h e r th e       A u th o r i t y o r t h e C hi ef C o n s t ab l e s h a l l be a t
                     1i b e r t y to de te rmine t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n days n o t i c e in
                     w r i t i n g w ith out p r e j u d i c e to reco v ery o f monies owing a t t h e
                     d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n PROVIDED t h a t t h e n o t i c e o f t e r m i n a t i o n


                                                                                                      ite           iri       JrCfc   ifj

         (2 )       I f th e Club s h a l l c a l l a meeting o f o r e n t e r i n t o any
                    composition with i t s c r e d i t o r s o r s u f f e r any d i s t r e s s o r
                    e xe c u tio n to be l e v i e d on t h e goods o f t h e Club o r s h a l l e n t e r
                    i n t o 1i q u i d a t i o n whether compulsory o r v o l u n t a r y (n o t being
                    merely a v o lu n ta r y l i q u i d a t i o n f o r purposes o f amalgamation or
                    r e c o n s t r u c t i o n ) th e A u t h o r i t y and t h e C hi ef C o n s t ab l e o r e i t h e r
                    of them s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y t o determi ne t h i s c o n t r a c t fo rt h w i t h
                    by n o t i c e /in w r i t i n g


        (3)
                  Any n o t i c e served p u rs u a n t t o t h i s c l a u s e s h a l l be deemed
                  pr op e r !y served i f d e l i v e r e d by hand o r p o s t ed by f i r s t c l a s s
                  p o s t to th e r e g i s t e r e d o f f i c e o f t h e Club and i f p os t ed s h a l l be
                  deemed r e c e iv e d th e f i r s t working day a f t e r p o s t i n g


       AS WITNESS th e hands of
              ~:£     „ >?*>, •                              '1
                                    >
SIGNED by                          zrot**/ GA/ a / k ^
0n b e h a l f of t h e Club




         by ROBERT CAMPBELL JOHNSTON
0n beh a l f of th e P o l i c e A u th or it y
    8 9 '-09 /06 0 9 :3 4        © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                   S. Y.   J. S.




8.       (1)       tM t h e e v e n t t h a t a t any time payment f o r t h r e e or more matches
                   i s o u t s t a n d i n g more th a n twenty e i g h t days from t h e due d a t e
                   th e n e i t h e r t h e     A u t h o r i t y o f t h e Chief C o n st a bl e s h a l l be a t
                   l i b e r t y t o d ete rmine t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n days n o t i c e In
                   w r i t i n g w i t h o u t p r e j u d i c e t o r e co ve r y o f monies owing a t t h e
                   d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n


         (2)       I f t h e Club s h a l l c a l l a meet in g of o r e n t e r I n t o any
                   c o mpo si t ion with i t s c r e d i t o r s o r s u f f e r any d i s t r e s s o r
                   e x e c u t i o n t o be l e v i e d on t h e goods of t h e Club o r s h a l l i n t e r
                   I n t o l i q u i d a t i o n whether compulsory o r v o l u n t a ry ( n o t being
                   merely a v o l u n t a r y l i q u i d a t i o n f o r purposes o f araslgamatlon or
                   r e c o n s t r u c t i o n ) t h e A u t h o r i t y and t h e Chi ef C o n st a b l e or e i t h e r

t                  of them s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y t o de te rmine t h i s c o n t r a c t f o r t h w i t h
                   by n o t i c e in w r i t i n g


          (3)      Any n o t i c e served p u r s u a n t t o t h i s c l a u s e s h a l l be deemed
                   p r o p e r l y s er ved i f d e l i v e r e d by hand o r p o s t e d by f i r s t c l a s s
                   p o s t to th e r e g i s t e r e d o f f i c e of t h e Club and i f p o s t ed s h a l l be
                   deemed r e c e iv e d t h e f i r s t working day a f t e r p o s t i n g




         AS WITNESS t h e hands of


SIGNED by
on b e h a l f of t h e Club




SIGNED                                         OHNSTON
on b e h a l f of t h e P o l i c e A u t h o ri t y             )




SIGHED by PETER WRIGHT                                           )
Chief C o n st a bl e                                            )
 89 0 9 /0 6 0 9 :3 4       ® 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                S. Y.   J. S.

   *




                                                 APPENDIX "A"


Type of a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches not covered by t h i s Agreement


       1.     R e p r e s e n t a t i v e matches n o t In v o lv i n g t h e Club   .

                                                                                     ?
       2.    F.A, Cup matches n ot i n v o l v i n g t h e Club


       3.    F r i e n d l y matches


       4.     Test im oni al matches


       5.     Reserve matches ( a l s o known as Central League Matches)


       6.     Youth team matches
      89 0 9 /0 6 0 9 :3 5             ® 0 2 2 6 -7 3 0 4 4 2                  S. Y.   J. S.                             1^3009




                                                            APPENDIX MB“


     I l l u s t r a t i o n o f C r i t e r i a f o r Levying Charges f o r P o l i c e S e r v i c e r e f e r r e d
     t o in Clause 1


    Crowd                    S u p e r in -
    A tte nda nce            tendents              Inspectors       Inspectors             Sergeants    Co ns ta ble s


     2000 or below                                                                             1                6
     2001    -    3000                                                                         1                8
     3001    -    5000                                                                         2              11
     5001    -    7000                                                                         2              14
     7001    -    9000                                                                         2              17
     9001        11000                                                     1                   3              20
«            -


    11001    -   13000                                                     1                   3              23
    13001    -   15000                                                     1                   3              26
    15001    -   17000                                                     1                   4              29
    17001    -   19000                                                     1                   4              32
    19000    -   21000                                                     1                   4              35
    21001    -   23000                                                     2                   5              38
    23001    -   25000                                                     2                   5              41
    25001    -   27000                                                     2                   5              44
    27001    -   29000                                                     2                   6              47
    29001    -   31000                                                     Z                   6              50
    31001    -   33000                                                     2                   6              53
    33001    -   35000                                                     2                   7              56
    35001    -   37000                                                     2                   7              59
    37001    -   39000                                                     2                   7              62
    39001    -   41000                                                     1                   8              65
    41001    -   43000                                                     1                   a              68
    43001    -   45000                                                     2                   3              71
    45001    -   47000                                                     3                   9              74
    47001    -   49000                                                     3                   9              77
    49001    -   51000             1                                       3                   9              80


    These ch ar ge s w i l l be a t t h e s p e c i a l s e r v i c e s r a t e a p p l i c a b l e a t t h e tim e.
                               1_
    'S9 W / W 0«:3b   QW22b-/3W442                 S. Y. J. S.




                       APPENDIX "C" - S c a le of Charges




    Crowd                      Normal Rate                       P u b l i c Holidays
    Atte ndan ce                (VAT no t                        Charge (VAT n o t
                                i n c lu d e d )                 in c lu d e d )
                                       £                                     £


     2000 or below                  573.60                              747.60

     2001 -    3000                 732,80                             954.80

     3001 -    5000             1,067.60                            1,391.60

     5001 -    7000             1,306.40                            1,702.40

    , 7001 -   9000             1,545.20                            2,013.20


I    9001 - 11000
    11001 - 13000
                                1,987.60
                                2,226.40
                                                                    2,592.00
                                                                    2,9u2.80

    13001 - 15000               2,465.20                            3,213.60

    15001 - 17000               2,800.00                            3,650.40

    17001 - 19000               3,038.80                            3,961.20

    19000 - 21000               3,277.60                            4,272.00

    21001 - 23000               3,720.00                            4,850.80

    23001 - 25000               3,958.80                            5,161.60

    25001 - 27000               4,197.60                            5,472.40

    27001 - 29000               4,532.40                            5,909.20

    29001 - 31000               4,771.20                            6,220.00
    31001 - 33000               5,010.00                            6,530.80

    33001 - 35000               5,344.80                            6,967.60

    35001 - 37000               5,704.00                            7,437.20

    37001 - 39000               5,942.80                            7,748.00

    39001 - 41000               6,277.60                            8,184.80
    41001 - 43000               6,516.40                            8,495.60

    43001 - 45000               6,755.20                            8,806.40
    45001 - 47000               7,197.60                            9,385.20

    47001 - 49000               7,436.40                            9,696.00

    49001 - 51000               7,839.20                           10,220.40
Hiss M V Oadea                                          - DCC/BHK
South t©rl»Myit                                           13 September 19S9
PO Box 37, /

Bataalay '
S70 2PQ




Dear Haureen

DRAFT AGREEMENT FOE CHARGES FOR POLICE SERVICES AX FOOTBALL MATCHES

.1 **t m £o the faxed copies of the above agreement which I received on 6
/September 1989, and having bow bad the opportunity to consider the document I
 would sake the following observationst~

a      In the preamble to the agreement in paragraph I, the beginning of the last
       iiae I would prefer to see 'provided at* substituted for the word
       'deployed1.

b     In paragraph 2 lime 13, instead ©f the wotd ‘deployed* I would prefer to
           *charged for * substituted,

c      At the end of paragaph 2 it mentioned the pay award made on 11 September
     > ^1989, in fact, that pay award la effective from I September 1989.

4     In the agreement itself, paragraph 1(a), first line, instead of the word
       ’deployed* substitute ‘charged for’.

«.    In paragraph 1(b), on the first line after 'likely attendance' - 'and other
      :factor#* should be added,

f     At paragraph §.i la the oli agreement there followed the' word
       determination ’PROVIDED that the notice of termination will be withdrawn ia
       the event that tike Slab makes fall, payment in accordance with the notice
     . before ita expiry

5 " Appendix 'A' needs some thought. I would agree that reserve matches and
     youth team Batches should not be covered by this agreement purely because :^
     of the low numbers of spectators  expected to attend but item® I - 4 on
     Appendix 'A' can aad do attract large a a H w ra of apeetators aad for each ••..
     there aeeds to be a police presence and a charge for the club.
                                    - 2 -


h   111® third coluan at Appendix 'B* should read ’Chief Inspectors’ as opposed
     to ''Inspectors’,*

Yours sincerely




Deputy Chief Constable
NOTE FOR FILE                                              ACC(OPS)/TFB/HMW
                                                           8 September 1989

To:    Mr Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable




DRAFT AGREEMENT FOR CHARGES FOR POLICE SERVICES AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

The agreement which Maureen Oades has sent is basically in the same terminology
and content to our agreement with the Clubs for the 1988/89 season.

In the preamble to the agreement the alterations/additions are as follows

a     In paragraph (1) line 6, the 2 words   'is willing' replaces 'as agreed'.

b     I would suggest that the first 2 words of the last line of that first
       paragraph should be 'supplied for' rather than 'deployed at'.

c     Paragraph 2 is a completely new condition. You have highlighted one
       sentence you are not happy with, but perhaps if a similar alteration is
       made to that sentence in line with my previous observations, ie: instead of
       saying 'the number of officers deployed', it says 'the number of officers
       charged for' that may well fit the bill, and finally in respect of
       this paragraph the police pay award is effective from 1 September not 11
       September.

d     In the body of the agreement itself, at 1(a) the word 'deployed' could
       again be substituted by the phrase 'charged for'.

e     At paragraph 1(b) in the agreement instead of using the word 'deployment' I
       would substitute 'number of officers employed' and then it follows 'will be
       based on likely attendance' - and then I would add 'and other contributory
       factors as judged by the Superintendent etc'.

f     paragraphs 1(d) and 1(e) in the agreement are new.

g     At paragraph 8(1) where that present paragraph finishes in the new draft,
       in the old agreement it followed 'PROVIDED that the notice of termination
       will be withdrawn in the event that the Club makes full payment in
       accordance with the notice before its expiry date'.

h     Appendix 'A' needs some thought.   I would agree that reserve matches and
       youth team matches should not be covered by this agreement purely because
       of the low numbers of spectators expected to attend butitems 1 - 4 on
      Appendix A can and do attract large numbers of spectators and for each
       there needs to be a police presence and a charge on the club.
     89 09/21 11:57                   00226-730442                                                                                    @001




                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                       m i j i             s-    - \ r - M i o t ’- 1 ,

R .C , Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                                                        P.O. Box 37
Cicrk and Financial O fficer                                                                                         R egent Street
                                                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                                                       South Yorkshire 570 2PQ
                                                                                              Telephone Barnsley ( 0226 ) 733222

Our kef:                                             Wwr

This mfttirr j> hemg tfraU with by

                                                     m ,


                                                     2- -jC-sv^oOl                    /7^—f ><S~i
                                       F AC! S I M I L E            I R A N S M I S S 1 0


        it:         A^c.c,                                      .....




        ■ROM:

                             S . ^ v




       No. of Pages ( I n c , t h i s page)

       Our Fax Number                0226/730442


       I n the even t of bad r e c e i p t p l e a s e c o n t a c t 022 6/ 733222 Ext                 • , X    .   H

                      c .              -|o|yOsi .

                        j'a^              «<.w ^ -                         ( H -                 / W

                                     be                ©C C W ^                                      (a » L i                     (% iAC,


                           U^vcx^w                                 kju-cSUuA *-
                                                                                       4_,f

                                                                                                                    f4«»f    h   3(€>oo.
                                                      {^O oO bo         3.10-0 *} I                 K-8xus<f
             it)'     vL JW  -^ »
                          'ri -**x*fft          e/

                                                                                                  A'l JrOo tof>iJ 2J '£?i .
89 09/21 11:58      © 0 2 2 6 -7 3 6 4 4 2                                       @002




                   DATED        .....                                     1989




                      SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLI CE                   MIH.0RIII

                                             -and-


             THE CH! EF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YOl


                                             -and'-




                                    A £, B t E H E li 7


                 f o r p r o v i s i o n of Sp ec ia l Pol
                       a t A s s o c i a t i o n F o o t b a l l Matches




                                             R, .   C.   J o h n s to n

                                             Cl erk
                                             South
                                             Regent S t r e e t
                                             BARNSLEY,
                                             South Y o rk s h ir e .
                                             DOC/76
  89 0 9 /2 1 11:58            00226 -7 3 0 4 4 2                                                                                            @003




THIS AGREEMENT i s made t h e                                         day o f
n ine hundred and e i g h t y n in e BETWEEN
Regent S t r e e t Bar nsley {the A u th o r i t y )
Chief Co ns ta b le of South Y o r ks h ir e P o l i c e {
second p a r t and                                                                              ( t h e Club) of t h e
t h i r d part


WHEREAS:-


11}    The Club has made                a r e q u e s t t o t h e Chief C o n st a bl e f o r t h e p ro v i s l o i
       of s p e c i a l p o l i c e     s e r v i c e s a t a l l assoc
       t h a n t h e t y pe s of        association football
       “A* h e r e t o ) t o be         h e l d a t t h e C l u b ' s s t adi um a t
       {the stadium) d u ri n g t h e 1989/90 footbalI season

                                                                                                                                      Pa /?a . KJvtr
12}    The             Con st a bl e i s w i l l i n g t o        <
       d i s c u s s i o n s have ta ke n p l a c e wi th t he                                                                £>• ifioiir & i^
       arrangement s f o r such s e r v i c e s and the number of
       pro vi de d a t such f o o t b a l l matches


(3)    The Chief C o nst ab le i n t e n d s to s ubmit a
       i s ^ e l s of p o l i c i n g    t h a t he c o n s i d e r s                                                    1
       matches and t h e Clyb have been advi sed
       review the c h ar g i n g arra ngement s made
       p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t t h e s a i d matches
       A u t h o r i t y 1n t h i s r e s p e c t which may                                                                     CHf\r.iCcr       (! H Qt'A&gl

       l e v e l o f p o l i c e c h ar g es d u r i n g t h e c u r r e n t                                                    6^     5. •£•C•f
       with t he Club t h a t            t h e formula in cerpo ratecf i n t o                                           :•
       I n t o with t h e Club           f o r th e p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l p o l i c e s e r v i c e s a t
       a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches h e l d dti
       wil         ‘V s u b j e c t t o an I n c r e a s e t o t a k e          .    -
       Award made on t h e 1 s t September, 1989


(4)    The p r o v i s i o n of s p e c i a l p o l i c e s erv                                                               (■"Orit I t (hi

       f o o t b a l l matches s p e c i f i e d in Appendix ‘A* Heret o i s                                                                 '           ‘4 ‘
       t he s y b j e c t of s e p a r a t e agreements between t he p a r t i e s h e r e t o and t h e till-
       terms of t h i s Agreement do not apply                                                                            4 ^ x 3 k,
                                                                                                                          o? TSt„ ' k k a w
89 09/21 I I                ©0228-730442




                    IEBY AGREED as f o l l o w s * -


 1»     SUBJECT t o t h e payment arid o t h e r
 Chi ef Co ns ta b le a g r e e s t o p rovi de s;
 f o o t b a l l matches h el d a t t h e stadi um d u ri ng t h e


 2,     (1)       The local C hief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ( t h e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ) f o r t he a r e a
        i n which t he stadium i s l o c a t e d s h a l l , in h i s a b s o l u t e d i s c r e t i o n ,
        de t er mi ne th e number of o f f i c e r s t o be pro vi de d a t any match having
        r e g a r d to a l l    r e l e v a n t f a c t o r s i n c l u d i n g t h e l i k e l y a t t e n d a n c e as
        e s t i m a t e d by t h e S u p e r in t e n d e n t


        (11)     Without p r e j u d i c e t o t h e dl
        t h e pro ce edi ng s u b - c l a u s e t h e Chief Con
        t h a t g e n e r a l l y t h e minimum number
        wi l l be i n acc orda nc e with Appendir '}s


 3,      THE Club s h a l l n o t i f y in w r i t i n g t he
                    r ,n f o o t b a l l match to be K                         -                     -             in
 f o r t y a hint hours b e f o r e i t i s clue to '
 o b m o t i o n wi ll be deemed met in t h e c ase                                                                by
 p r o v i d i n g a l i s t of t h e s ea so ns home f i x t u r e s a n d >any r e v i s
 they oc cur           %                     ^ c x ci.ct.vgf,


 4,     THE Chief Con st a bl e s h a l l have ab:                                                                         1
 t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r s deployed w i t h i n t h e stadi um


 5.     ft)       THE Club a g r e es t o pay f o r t he
        In t h i s agreement In a cc orda nc e with t he
        crowd a t t e n d a n c e s e t o u t in Appendix C
        any r e v i s e d c h ar g es t h a t may become
        amendment t o t h i s Agreement agreed between
        review r e f e r r e d to in t h e f o l l o w i n g s u b - c l a u s e


        (11)      I t i s acknowledged by t h e Club
        t h e f o o t b a l l matches covered by t h i s Agree
        a r e to be t h e s u b j e c t o f review as
        I t is     agreed between t h e p a r t i e s t h a t f u r t h e r d i s c u s s i o n s w il l ta ke
  89 09--'21 11:59            ©0226-730442




       p l a c e t o a g r e e any amendments r e q u i r e d to
       s a i d review


       Iili'I    In t h e e v e n t o f f a i l u r e t o agre e
       r e f e r r e d to In t h e proc eed in g s u b - c l a u s e t h e                        ef
       Con s tab le s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y t o determine
       days n o t i c e i n w r i t i n g w it h o u t pr
       a t t h e d a t e of d e t e r m i n a t i o n


6.     PAYMENT s h a l l - b e made no l a t e r than
r e l e v a n t match d a t e and i f unpaid a t t h e end                                               1
t he n be payable a c c r u i n g on a day t o day
time t o time of National Westmlnster Bart; Pic


7,     WHERE a match I s e i t h e r ; -


       { a)      C a n ce l le d o r postponed l e s s t han
       s c h e du le d to commence or


       (b)       abandoned after* i t has commenced


       th e Club hereby a gr e es t h a t t h e A
       match had taken p l a c e and been comp leted,
       o r pos tponed match t h e ch a r ges s h a l l
       by th e S u p e r i n t e n d e n t In c o n s u l t a t i o n with trie Club as i f the match
       had been played


8.     THE Chief Co ns ta b le s h a l l be a t 11 be
p o l i c e s e r v i c e s f o r any ass
C l u b ' s s tadium i f      In h i s opinion          <
n e - e s s a r y to deploy h i s o f f i c e r s e l s ew h er e


9,     UJ        IN t h e e v e n t t h a t a t any time
                 I s o u t s t a n d i n g more th a n twenty e
                 then e i t h e r the        A ut ho ri t y o r
                 l i b e r t y to de te rmine t h i s Agreement by f o u r t e e n days n o t i c e In
                 w r i t i n g w i t h o u t p r e j u d i c e t o recc
                 da te o f d e t e r m i n a t i o n PROVIDED t h a t
  89 09/21 12:00                ©0226-730442                                   S. V.   J. S-




                 wi l l be withdrawn in t h e e v e n t
                 in a cc ord an ce with t h e n o t i c e


        12)      I f t h e Club s h a l l c a l l a me
                 composition with i t s c r e d i t o r s o r s u f f e r any d i s t r e s s o r
                 e x e c u t i o n t o be "levied on t h e goods of
                 i n t o l i q u i d a t i o n whether compulsory o r
                 merely a v o l u n t a r y l i q u i d a t i o n f o r r,
                 r e c o n s t r u c t i o n ) t h e A u t h o r i t y i ‘"'      *             ■?
                 of them s h a l l be a t l i b e r t y to de te rmi ne t h i s c o n t r a c t f o r t h w i t h
                 by n o ti ce i si wri t i ng


        (3)     Any n o t i c e s er v ed pursuant t o t h i s c
                 p r o p e r l y s er v ed I f d e l i v e r e d
                 p o s t to t h e r e g i s t e r e d                                                         be
                 deemed r e c e i v e d t h e ' f i r s t work




       AS WITNESS t h e hands of



SIGNED by                                                        I
on b e h a l f of t h e Club                                     )




SIGNED by ROBERT CAMPBELL JQHMSTQW
cm b e h a l f of t h e P o l i c e A ut h o ri t y




S I GNED by PETER WRIGHT
Chi ef C onsta ble                                                   }
’ 89 09/21 12:01          ©0226-730442                       S- Y. J. S.




                                           APPENDIX “ A“


Type of a s s o c i a t i o n f o o t b a l l matches n o t covered by this


      1,     R e p r e s e n t a t i v e matches not i nvo


      2,    F.A. Cup matches not in v o l v i n g the Club

      3,    F r i e n d l y matches


      4,     Testim onial matches


       5,    Reserve matches ( a l s o known as


       6,    Youth team matches
      89 09/21 12-01          00226-730442                                                @008




                                            APPENDIX K8 iS

    Crowd              Super!n-     Chief
    Atte nd anc e      tendents     Inspectors       Inspectors   Sergeants   lonsti


     2000 or below                                                    1             t>
     2001 -     3000                                                                8
     3001 ~     5000                                                              11
     5001 -     7000                                                              14
     7001 -     9000                                                  2           I?
     9001 - 11000                                        I            3           20

    11001 - 13000                                        1.           3          23



•
    13001 - 15000                                        1            3           2b

    15001 - 17000                                        1            4           29
    17001. - 19000                                       j            4           32
    190011 - 21000                                       1            4           11;
    21001 - 2.3000                                       2            5           20

    23001 - 25000                                        2            5          41
    25001 - 27000                                        1            6           44
    2700]    - 29000                                     2            6           47

     ^ _oi - 31000                                       2            6           50
    .-1001   - 33000                                     2            6          :;;iij

    33001 - 35000                                        2            7          $6
    35001 - 37000                                        2            7          m

    37001 - 39000                       1                ;i           /          is 2
     39001 - 41000                      1                t.          8           65
jlii
W    41001 - 43000                      1                2           8           SB
    43001 - 45000                       1                2           6           21

    45001 - 47000                       X                3           9            '4
    47001 - 49000                       1                3           0
    49001 - 51000         1             I                3           9           80
     »y tfy/zi i u i    W W ZTE ^TsW F Tl                                               «]H»y




                          APPENDIX “c** - Scale of C h a r g e s



    Crowd                           Mormal Rate                    Public HoII cays
    Attendance                      ! VAT not
                                     included'                     i
                                            £                                   I

     2000 or be"! ow                    550,. SO                          726,80
     2001 -     3000                    703 ,,50                          928 010
     3001 _      5000                1,024,50                          1,3352 . 60
     5001        7000                1 , 25 4 31)0                     1,655. .60
     7001 -     9000                 1,483.50                          1,958.60
A    3001       11000                1,908,30                          2 *520,2C
•           „   13000                2 f 137*30                        2,823.20
    13001       15000                2,367.30                          3,126,20
    16001   ■ 17000                  2,688,30                          3 t550,00
    17001       19000                £,917 ,80                         3 . 0 5 3 031
    1900(1 - 21000                   3,147.30                          4, 130013
    21001 _ 23000                    3,572.10                          4 0711 ,03
    23001       25000                3,801.60                          3,020,60
    25001 - 27000                    4,031.10                          5 , 3 2 0 ,.00
    27001 - 29000                    4,352.10                          5 07 3 7 4i,
    29001 - 31000                    4,581.60                          0 *050.40
    31001 - 33000                    4,811,10                          0 „353 ,,33
    33001 - 35000                    5,1.32,310                        6,77? .Zi'.
0 3 5 0 0 1 - 37000                  5,477.10                          7 ,234,007
    37002 „ 39000                    5,707.20                          7, S37,DC
    39001 - 41.000                   6,028,20                          7 3333,fcL
    41001 ... 43000                  6 ,257 ,70                        8 ,, In ; „.£\
    43001 ,, 45000                   6,487.20                          8 f5s>h,3v
    45001 - 47000                    6,912.00                          9. US. 40
    47001 _ 49000                    7,141.50                          9 ,43J ,10
    49001       51000                7,529.10                          3 374 I ,,23
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                              REF:                     DCC/JEL
    FROM:     D eputy C h ie f C o n s ta b le
                                                                                              STATION/DEPT.            H e a d q u a rte rs
    TO:       A c t in g A C C (O p e ra tio n s )                                            DATE:                     1 S e p te m b e r 1989

               SUBJECT:         SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT



               In v ie w o f th e d            i f f i c u l t i e s we may e x p e r i e n c e w i t h S h e f f i e l d C i t y
               C o u n c i l b a s e d on        t h e r e c e n t l e t t e r s t o o u r s e l v e s and S h e f f i e l d Wednesday
               F o o t b a ll C lu b , I         w a n t t o be p a r t i c u l a r l y w e l l p r e p a r e d b e f o r e o u r
               m e e tin g w i t h th e          l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s on t h i s s u b j e c t as f a r as S h e f f i e l d
               i s concerned.

               P le a s e a r r a n g e f o r C h ie f         In s p e c to r B e tt is o n i n l i a i s o n w it h C h ie f
               S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D e n to n t o      p r e p a r e a b r i e f as t o t h e s h o r t c o m in g s o f
               S h e ffie ld C it y C o u n c il i n             t h e p a s t as known f r o m o u r p e r s o n a l p r o b l e m s
               and as h i g h l i g h t e d i n t h e            T a y lo r R e p o rt.

               I t may be c o u r t e o u s i n t h e s h o r t t e r m t o / r e s p o n d t o t h e l e t t e r         fro m
               S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l t o o u r s e l v e s a l/r e a d y r e f e r r e d t o on t h e   grounds
               v e r y s i m p l y t h a t w h a t was p r o p o s e d is' i m p r a c t i c a b l e m a k in g t h e     fu rth e r
               p o i n t t h i s c o u l d be c o n s i d e r e d a t o i i r 18 S e p te m b e r m e e t i n g .     I   w o u ld
               a p p r e c i a t e i t i f yo u w o u l d d o <t h ^ 6 p l e a s e .            ^

                                                                     1/
                • "tiA.
               D eputy C h ie f C o n s ta b le




        2 ,   G - .              !>■                                            4-




                                           1     a
              £a » ,        *■ >M.r .           ***** I*"''
                                                                                                           Si                      ILICE'
              » ,'     A               ,                   .

                                                                                                                   4
                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                management
                                                                                                                   £EF“\’:C;!"S




GEN/2
1>£X-
CITY OF SHEFFIELD M E T R O P O L I T A N DISTRICT COUNCIL


FOOTBALL GROUND SAFETY CERTIFICATES


Briefing note prepared for the Deputy Chief Constable regarding sequence of
events and delays in revision of Football Ground Safety Certificates.



1     T h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for admini s t e r i n g the Safety Certification of
      Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Grounds passed to Sheffield City
      Council on 1 April 1986 on dissolution of the S.Y.C.C..                        The old
      certificates issued by S.Y.C.C. remained in force and the City Council
      took steps in May 1986 to review the certification.

      The next positive consideration by the City Council General Purposes
      Panel was appare n t l y sometime subsequent to September 1987.

                                           (See Copy C o r r espondenc e at Appendix A).
      Mainly, the Sheffield Council Officers were, up to that stage, concerned
      with the a d m inistrativ e a r r angements for discharging their certification
      function.

2     Meanwhile, on 7 July 1987, the City Council Officers forwarded, for SYP
    . comment, a first draft of their proposed r e v ised Safety Certificate
       Conditions.

                                           (See Appendix B).

3    Superin t e n d e n t Stuart, Operations Department, invited Divisional comment
      on the proposals and subsequently, on 4 A ugust 1987, our collated
      comments were forwarded in a letter signed by A C C ( M S ) , some 4 weeks after
     the request.

                                           (See Appendix C ) .

4    The next traceable c o r respondenc e on the matter is a letter, dated 30
     March 1989, received from the City Council and replying to our comments
                          t h e m some I f m o n t hs'earlie r. This letter was a c companied by
      a further draft of the Safety C e rtificate Conditions and you wi 11 see
      that any mention of Pol ice and their r e s p o n s i b i 1ities had been written
      out of the Certificate Conditions and confined to a s u p plementary "Note
     for G u i d a n c e " .

                                           (See Appendix D ) .

5     Immediately, the implications of that omission were discussed with Brian
      A l d e r m a n a t t h e J o i n t S e c r e t a r i a t , and his view was sought in
      correspondenc e dated 5 Apri 1 1989, w h i 1st Sheffield City Counci 1 were
      a l s o t o l d o f our concern.             Meanwhile, Operations Department were
      requested to comment on the newly proposed Certificate conditions and
      S uperin t e n d e n t Marsh reported on 17 May 1989.

                                          (See Appendix E ) .
                                              - 2 -


6    Meanwhile, the indication to the Town H a l l of our concern about no
     mention of police r esponsibilit ies in the proposed Certificate prompted a
     letter f r o m them on 4 May 1989 suggesting the w o rding of a condition
     which would refer to police r e s p o n s i b i 1ities. That letter was referred
     to Mr Alderman who suggested an a lternative wording for the condition
     which included rights of access for the police to the Stadium, This was
     forwarded to the Town Hall along with comments on other proposed
     conditions in a letter dated 7 June 1989.

                                            (See A p p endix F).
     This is the last correspondenc e on the matter, but 1 understand a meeting
     has since taken place between Operations D epartment and Town Hall staff
     where further consideration was d e f erred until the outcome of the Public
     Fnmn V t f   Intor i*m r e p o r t .




Ma n a g e m e n t Services
13 September 1989
1 Ptensam Esq PCIS » 1 M                                           GP/262/EMB
Solicitor                                                          OPS 1NS/SM
Aduinistrat ion and Legal Department
town Hall                                                   >      12 August
SHEFFIELD      SI 2HH

For the attention of Mr Bownes




tear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
FUTURE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COUNCIL'S CERTIFICATING FUNCTION

1 refer to your letter of 3 August 1987 and accompanying draft report.

The Administration and Legal Department are tbs 'licensing authority’
and the Police, as mentors of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 Advisory
       offer advioe which the council can of course either accept or reject.
Meetings of the Advisory Group are necessary as the ‘overlap of interest*
in some areas is recognised and acknowledged by the group.

I would still recommnd, as was pointed out atthe meeting on 3 August 1987,
that the meetings be properly minuted and then form the basis of the
pxjuj’t advice on which the council can act ifthey see fit. I do not
«ee the necessity for further written ccnroent following a neeting.

1 hope these conrnents will be of some assistance.

Yours faithfully




                                       fa *.

Chief Gomstable




                                            Si?* Stuart         3200
                                                                o ps   1WS/5M
CH SOFT rn m m n   om   & TRAFFIC division
                                                                         OPERATIONS
SEE DISTRIBUTION:                                                        5 August 1987

                S M E K OF SPORTS GROUNDS A O ’ 1975 -
                FUTURE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COUNCIL'S
                CERTIFICATING FUNCTION




 I refer to the attached copy correspondence dated 3 August 1937 from
 the City of Steffield Metropolitan District Council regarding the above,
 and in particular the meeting held at the Town Hall at 9.30 am on
 Thursday, 16 July 1987, which was attended by myself, Superintendent
 Marshal] and. Inspector Calvert..,

 You will note that Mr: Bownes is calling fox* oornments regarding the
 draft report and the only part that I would t a k e issue? with is
 at paragraph 3 of page 2. Unless 1 have nujsunder&feood this, it
 seems to me that Mr Bownes has again missed the point tliat we were
 trying to mate. *016 Administration and tegal,.,teimrtnent are the
 licensing authority~ond”we, the Police, are there to offer advice
 regarding our areas of responsibility which they either accept or
 reject. So far as I secs it, meetings of the now proposed 'Safety
 of Sports Grounds Advisory Group1, referred to in the above mentioned
 paragraph, should result in the publication of minutes following
 the meeting, taken and prepared by the licensing authority, and any
 subseouent action should then be taken by the licensing authority.
 1 fail to see. the need for detailed written advicc to the council
 from the Police or any otter marker of the advisory group following
 a meeting, providing the meeting is properly minuted. It still
 appears to me that the Administration and Legal Department are still
 seeking to delegate their responsibilities to nerabers of the 'advisory
 group*.

 1 would appreciate any comments you have by Monday, 10 August 1987,
 in order that I can reply by 14 August 1987, as requested. .




 Chief Superintendent
 Operations & Traffic Division


 Enc

                                             /'^ c*                $.g-~7
 Distribution                                         6r%~.       ‘
                                                                           i
                                                                                         ,. I
Ch Sipts           D Division
                   F Division
                                              - ■■ tf ■ '
                                              !" ‘l i } < " ?   c'
                                                                   i f‘ ' -     tA/*1

                                               Kt

                              /til****                                             / /


                         &***>                cm.€    f
City of Sheffield               M etro p o litan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                               Administration •m i Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                                  Town Hall,
                                                                                                  Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference
                       GP/262/DMB
Your reference

Date                   3rd A ugust, 1987


The C hief C onstable,
South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e ,
P o lic e H e a d q ua rte rs,
Snig H i l l ,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 SLY

For th e a t t e n t io n o f S u perintendent S tu a rt

Dear S ir ,

S a fe ty o f S ports Grounds Act 1975 - F u tu re A d m in is tra tio n o f the C o u n c il' s
C e r t if ic a t i n g F u n c tio n

1 r e f e r to p re vio u s correspondence and in p a r t ic u la r to th e m eeting which took
p la ce a t 9.30 a.m. on Thursday, 16th J u ly , in th e Town H a ll.

As promised I now enclose f o r your a tt e n tio n a copy o f a d r a f t re p o rt which I
have prepared f o r th e General Purposes Panel o f th e C ity C ouncil to c o n s id e r.
The re p o rt w i l l be subm itted to the Panel m eeting on 7 th September, 1987, and I
th e re fo re r e q u ir e to know   i f you have any comments to make on i t as soon as
p o s s ib le . I f you do have any comments to make please l e t me have them by
F rid a y , 14th A ugust, 1987, a t the l a t e s t . This w i l l enable me to p ro p e rly
co n sid e r any comments made and make a lt e r a t io n s to the re p o rt i f necessary. I
w ish to emphasise once again th a t t h is r e p o r t i s i n d r a f t and th a t I would
welcome your comments on i t .

I lo o k fo rw a rd to h e a rin g from you s h o r t ly .

Yours f a i t h f u l l y
                        _



Head o f Department

Enc.




BB/8



                                                                                                 734690 - M r. Bownes
                            For telephone   enquiries on th is matter please rin g ......................  (STD Code 0742)
                                                          Telax 64243 (Adm inistration f t Legal)
                                                               Vi
  REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAT
  PURPOSES PANEL                                       ^   ^                              ;---------------------- -------- — ~ -

  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - THE CURRENT S IT U A T ION                                        AND PROPOSALS FOR THE
  FUTURE A M l N I S T R A T I O N O T l r H E ~ C T U N m                                               r ^             -----------          1

  Introduction                                                                                                    \

  The    Panel w i l l r e c a l l t h a t on 1s t Ap ril 1986 t h e City Council i n h e r i t e d from t h e
 South Y ork sh ire County Council th e r o l e of c e r t i f i c a t i n g A u t h o r i t y under the
 1975 Act. The Act i t s e l f is b a s i c a l l y aimed a t en suring ad equate s t a n d a r d s of
 s a f e t y a t d e s i g n a t e d s t a d i a ; t h e r e are th re e of the se in S h e f f i e l d a t the moment1
 - S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club, S h e f f i e l d United F o o t b a l l Club, and the
 O w l e r t o n Sports Stadium.               A d e t a i l e d r e p o r t on th e A c t and i t s a p p l i c a t i o n in
 S h e f f i e l d was s u b m i t t e d t o t h e P a n e l on 6 t h May 1 9 8 6 .

 The C u r r e n t S i t u a t i o n

 The Panel at l t s meeting in Hay 1986 i d e n t i f i e d s e v e r a l main a r e a s f o r f u r t h e r
 investigation.

 F i r s t l y i t was a c c e p t e d a t t h e t i m e t h a t t h e b ro a d o u t l i n e s o f t h e
 a d m i n i s t r a t i v e s y s te m o r g a n i s e d by t h e C o u n ty C o u n c i l s h o u l d be c o n t i n u e d           fo r
 t h e tim e be ing.             T h i s s v s te m has now been r e v i e w e d and t h e p r o p o s e d
 re o rg a n is a tio n is d e ta ile d l a t e r in th is r e p o rt.

The P a n e l a l s o a s k e d t h a t t h e H e a l t h and S a f e t y E x e c u t i v e he k e p t i n f o r m e d o f
a l l m a t t e r s r e l a t i n g t o s p o r t s g r o u n d s a f e t y and t h a t t h e A s s o c i a t i o n o f
M e tr o p o li ta n A u t h o r i t i e s a l s o be asked about th e HSE's involveme nt. As f a r as
keeping the HSE informed' of s a f e t y developments at the s t a d i a t h e Executive made
i t f a i r l y p l a i n t h a t thev would not make any comments. The p r a c t i c e was
therefore discontinued.                     The involvement of th e AMA in the HSE                                   has beer,
somewhat f o r e s t a i l e d b y a c t i o n a t c e n t r a l Governm ent l e v e l to r e v i e w the HSE's
r e l a t i o n s h i p w i t h l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s ; t h i s review was announced in the
Government's r e p l v t o t h e P o p p l e w e l l R e p o r t b u t no r e s u l t s o f t h a t review have
ye t been r e c e i v e d . F o r t u n a t e l y , however, the C o u n c i l ’ s D i r e c t o r of He alth and
Consumer S e r v ic e s has p e r m i t t e d h i s O f f i c e r ' s to provide p r o f e s s i o n a l h e a l t h and
s a f e t y in p ut i n t o the d e c i s i o n making process in r e l a t i o n to s a f e t y of
s p o r t s grounds. The problem i s , t h e r e f o r e , at l e a s t t e m p o r a r i l v r e s o l v e d .

The P a n e l a l s o made r e f e r e n c e t o c o n s u l t a t i o n on t h e s a f e t y o f s p o r t s g r o u n d s
p o l i c v w i t h t h e o t h e r D i s t r i c t Councils in S o u th Y o rk s h ir e . U n f o r t u n a t e l y ,
a t t e m p t s a t a r r a n g i n g c o n s u l t a t i o n m e e t i n g s have been u n s u c c e s s f u l t o d ate." I t
i s proposed to t r y again to o r g a n i s e some c o n s u l t a t i o n s i n the f a i r l v near
f u t u r e , perhaps when the C e r t i f i c a t i o n system has s e t t l e d down i n each a r e a .

The d r a f t i n g   o f new s a f e t v    c e rtific a te      c o n d itio n s   in     c o n s u lta tio n       w ith   th e
C o u n c i l’s a d v i s e r s has been p r o g r e s s i n g s t e a d i l y and new d r a f t c o n d i t i o n s are
c u r r e n t l y under c o n s i d e r a t i o n by th o s e a d v i s e r s . I t i s hoped t h a t the new
c o n d i t i o n s w i l l be s u b m i t t e d t o t h e P a n e l a t i t s m e e t i n g i n O c t o b e r f o r f i n a l
ap pr oval .

As to the q u e s t i o n of ch arging fee s under the 1975 l e g i s l a t i o n , i t should be
be made c l e a r t h a t such fees are only payable on the grant of a C e r t i f i c a t e .
I t i s a n t i c i p a t e d t h a t i f the Panel approves the new C e r t i f i c a t e c o n d i t i o n s a
C e r t i f i c a t e w i l l then be i s s u e d t o S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d and a t t h a t t i m e i t i s
proposed to deal with the q u e s t i o n of f e e s .
*'




                                                                                 -     2 -

        iu tH £ £ -A d m in is t r a t io n o f          th e C o u n c i l 's       C e rtific a tin g         F u n c tio n

           F o l l o w i n g a t h o r o u g h r e v i e w o f t h e l e g i s l a t i o n i t has become c l e a r t h a t a
           d e t a i l e d a d m i n i s t r a t i v e s y s te m needs t o be e s t a b l i s h e d i n c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e
           fn r            s C e r tific a tin g fu n c tio n .       D i s c u s s i o n s on t h i s m a t t e r have been u n d e r w a y
           f o r some t i m e w i t h t h e P o l i c e , t h e F i r e S e r v i c e , t h e C o u n c i l ’ s B u i l d i n g U n d 6 r " a y

        o f r I u c h r a s5stt em .D i r e C t ° r       °f               ^         Consuffier S e r v i c e s          on t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t


        A c c e p t i n g t h a t t h e C o u n c i l as t h e C e r t i f i c a t i n g A u t h o r i t y w i l l               a c t on t h e b a s i s     *
        o f a d v i c e from e x p e r t s ( s u c h as t h e F i r e S e r v i c e ) t h e q u e s t i o n                      a r i s e s as t o how
        L     o ff3        V      h 1*    « eSt f o n n u l a t e d *     I n th e p a s t * th e C ounty C o u n c il o rg a n is e d
              O f f i c e r W o r k in g P a r t y w h i c h was a p p a r e n t l y u se d as a f o r u m f o r d i s c u s s i o n
        b e t w e e n O f f i c e r s p r i o r t o t h e f i n a l f o r m u l a t i o n o f a d v i c e t o t h e Council
        p a r t i c u l a r w o r k i n g p a r t y a l s o a p p e a re d t o have some d e c i s i o n m a k in g p o w e r s .

       As i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t m e e t i n g s t a k e p l a c e due t o t h e p o t e n t i a l o v e r l a p o f
       r e q u i r e m e n t s ! n many a r e a s , a l l t h e A u t h o r i t i e s and O f f i c e r s have now a g r e e d
       o e rfo rm ^               • 5* aPp r o Pr l a t e t o e s t a b l i s h a r e v i s e d fo r m o f t h e w o r k i n g p a r t y to*
       "S a fe t-v         % mi           u n c t ^ on f o r t h e C i t y C o u n c i l .    I t i s recommended t h a t t h e
         S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds A d v i s o r y G r o u p " ( w h i c h w o u l d c o n s i s t o f
       r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s fro m t h e P o l i c e , t h e F i r e S e r v i c e , t h e B u i l d i n g S u r v e v o r ’ s
       D i v i s i o n and t h e D e p a r tm e n t o f H e a l t h and Consumer S e r v i c e s ) , w o u ld f u n c t i o n as
       th e ° d is r       •     f SS1° n             ° f f l c e r S ; l t s most r e g u l a r u s e w o u ld p r o b a b l v be
       t h e d is c u s s io n o f ite m s o f a d v ic e t o th e C o u n c il b e f o r e th e y a re f i n a l l v         '
       fo r m u la te d by^the a p p r o p r ia te A u t h o r i t y .    M e e t i n g s o f the G roup w o u ld be h e l d a t
       t e . r e q u e s t or one o r more A u t h o r i t i e s and on r e c e i p t o f a r e q u e s t t h e Hea-i o^
      t„               ^ ,    ,      ,,                   '                             wii-uu6c *
                                                                                        ™        G meeting and
                                                                                                           ana a es pa tch
                                                                                                               desna   ten
       o f I t e m s t o be d i s c u s s e d . A t t h e c o n c l u s i o n o f t h e m e e t i n g a f u r t h e r l i s t o f
         terns w o u ld be p r e p a r e d and t h e d e t a i l s o f a c t i o n a g re e d t o be t . £ h e a S
        ! f Lr i ? L r ^ ld±              1Jn0LedL _ ! L i S , then ?n.t l c i p a t ed t h a t d e t a i l e d w r i t t e n advice


                                     Head °! A dm ln lS tr a tl o n and Legal Department w i l l keep copies of
      G roup!                     correspondence   w h i c h w i l l be a v a i l a b l e t o a l l p a r t i c i p a n t s i n the


      Under t h e o l d C o u n ty Council a d m i n i s t r a t i v e s t r u c t u r e t h e d i f f e r e n t A u t h o r i t i e s
      I T o t t Z T
      to operate.            Although i t can LbeS r seen
                                                     t y h0d
                                                            t h a t the re i s some* m      * -
                                                                                               eri t «inU t,h‘ i sw idea
                                                                                                                    U M ^ S h
                                                                                                                             *-be
      t o o r t c ' ° a P ° T tlal °Verl8p; o f r e s p o n s i b i l i t y are o u i t e e x t e n s i v e in d e a l i n g "with
                 f t' roun s *    owever i t appears t h a t the v a ri o u s A u t h o r i t i e s ; and O f f i c e r s
                f0 r    som       d e fin itio n    of ro le s      and t h e          fo llo w in g   have been a g r e e d

     A u th o rity
                                                                                              A re a o f P e s p o n s i b i l i t v

     The B u ild in g Surveyor                                                 A11 m atters r e la t ln g to the s tr u c tu r c o f
                                                                               s ta d ia in c lu d in g          crash      b a rrie rs , w a lls ,
                                                                               e tc .

     S o u th Y o r k s h ir e      C o u n ty F i r e    S e rv ic e          F ire     p re c a u tio n s ,     fire      a la rm s ,   means o f
                                                                               e sc a pe , emergency l i g h t i n g , stadium
                                                                               capacity.
     S outh Y o r k s h ir e        P o lic e
                                                                               S ta d iu m p o l i c i n g , e v a c u a t i o n      p ro ce d u re s,
                                                                               a c c e s s o f e m e rg e n c y v e h i c l e s       and
                                                                            emergency p la nn in g.
   It is anticipated that the H e a lth and Consumer Services Department would have an
   input on (a) aspects of general safety; (b) the general safety manage,rent of
   stadia;  c) various special items such as first aid requirements.           i e
                                 " ar” S« 0f resPo n s ^^ility are not exhaustive but                               it is
   anticipated           that any areas of doubt will be dealt with by discussions                                 at
  a d v i s o r y group m ee tin gs.                                                     y                  ons    at

  Inspections

  Moving on to a m a t t e r of more g e n e r a l p o l i c y i t has been sug ges te d t h a t one
  l a r g e s c a l e i n s p e c t i o n per stadium should be c a r r i e d out by t h e Group backed uo
    yA                      lns>*ctl°"s       "“ I take place actually during f o o t b a n                                     P
                        his Pr0P°sal is In line with both the Popplewell Report and with
  l i c e n s i n g p r a c t i c e in o t h e r a r e a s ,                                           ,

  D e le ga tio ns

            a lr ! fUI th e r q" e s tlo n t0 be d e > lt w ith a t th is stage and th a t re la te s
  System
  System.^ VAt t the
                  h emoment
                      ^ S T  d e cYis iof n1” 8 5?q u lre
                                              making      d fo r rethe
                                                        powers      s t w ith the Panel C e r ttifh ic
                                                                                        but          is a tisio na
         V     T    ^ Harral,geme" ; *'M c h " eeds             reviewed u r g e n tly .     I t seems
 indt     as           measure a l l r o u t i n e m a tte rs could be d e l e f t - m
                 an i n t e n m
                               D epart" e” t                  » > tte rs re g a in in g a t the
 d i r e tio n of the Panel. I t is proposed th a t when the C e r t if ic a t e of C onditions
 are in fo rce then the d e le g a tio n w i l l be much more c lo s e ly d e fin e d .
 C o n d itio n s ^       **“     ^    " ° t P° S slM e «      tbe           «ith th e 'c u rr e n t       C e r t if ic a t e of

 R e c om m endations

 The p a n e l     is    recommended t o : -

 (a)     N o te t h e     cu rre n t   s itu a tio n ;


 (b )    Approve the r e v i s e d a d m i n i s t r a t i v e system d e t a i l e d in t h i s r e p o r t in c l u d i n g
         the e s ta b li s h m e n t of the " S a fe ty of Sports Grounds A d v i s o r y Group” .

 (c)     D e le g a te t o t h e Head of A d m i n i s t r a t o n and Legal Department a u t h o r i t y to
                   Wlth a11 r o u t l n e m a t t e rs in connection with the A d m i n i s t r a t i v e ’ System,




                                                                                        Roger Pens am,
                                                                                        Head of Administration
                                                                                        and Legal Department
Town Ha ll
Sheffield
SI 2HH

September 8?


CS/8    DMB217
 City of Sheffield            M etro p o litan District

 Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                         Administration and Legal Department
 Head of Department
                                                                                             Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH

 Our reference        GP/262/DMB

 Your reference

 Date
                      7th July, 1987




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig H i l l ,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 SLY

For the attention of Superintendent Stuart

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Future Administration of the Council *s
Certificating F u n c t i o n ______

Please note that I have arranged a meeting for all interested parties on
Thursday 16th July, 1987 at 9.30 a.m. in the Town Hall to discuss the above
matter further. 1 hope that the meeting will produce a consensus view on future
administrative procedures which will form the basis of a report to the General
Purposes Panel of the City Council. I should emphasise that no decisions have
yet been made on this subject and any comments or suggestions which you have
will be most welcome. I intend that my report to the Panel will be near
completion by the end of July and it is, therefore, important that the maximum
advantage is taken of the meeting on 16th July.

This meeting may also provide a useful opportunity to discuss dates for
inspections of the stadia prior to the beginning of the 1987/88 football season.

Should the need arise please do not hesitate to contact                                            my Chief         Licensing
Officer, M r . Bownes on the number given below.

Yours faithfully,
   \




Head of Department




PB/16                                                                                      734690 - Mr. Bownes
                        For telephone enquiries on this matter please r in g . . .. . ...............
                                                                                        ............................(STD Code 0742)
                                                       Telex   54243   (Adm inistration B Legal)
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                                                                     REF:    OPS 1WS/



                                                       l (- / >7    /     /      ?
                                              /6/&M           <OVC —                        /■RJl

                                         <Fa' y -                       * ■ ..
                           ^ * >l' /hSlSl ts/*r:.~y                        *_ y-

    Mr R Pensam PCIS HBIM
    Solicitor                                                      ACC(OPS)/HMW
    Head of Administration and                                     'Soj 1^ .
    tega 2. Department
    Town Hall
    Sheffield SI 2HH



    ®ear Sir

    safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975  »..
    U * CouncU's Certificating F^ t i;„Future " * » i « r « t i o n of



 £        r:^                    -                          e ^                  nth7 -»
 As you rightly point out, there «„ a
 the matters you outllne [n ^       « overlap of interest in
«     would be helpful to have a                               therefore I feel
                     Bay 1,8           by « S m n i Z         S°°n as possiWe
      nS a final decision                                ' L I Z * ™ * b"fore


Please do not ^ s i t l Z ^ T c Z i m T Z ^ Ptl°T t0 the meeting,
lours faithfully



                                                                                     /

          « U * q u f Constable




         ^        “i h e S o ^ e w r i c J S ^ o u r t 9^    18    ln te n d ^   to te o p e n e r '
         “    —        «     -
         Moving onto the q u estio n                4                                               i

         a t the m eeting on 10th March.                           ° f s ta d la » th is point:
         lim ite d in s p e c tio n s is no lon g e r a l n ^ *? th a t the l i s t i n g »
        Per year should be c a rrie d out L L 7                            1 f e e l th a t o n e '
        areas and i n s t a lla t io n s w it h in t L                 lum WMch sh o uld ii
        ln s p e c t i ° n t h e r e ghould w it h in ^ t he scope o f the l e g i s la t io n .
                    ? th ln k th a t th e r e T s 1                       38 p e rfo » ^ c e « I t
        performance in s p e c tio n s as t h e v 2 !                a«re e ®ent in r e l a t i o l
        system a t each s t a d i a w J L                          M «h l i ^   the p e rfo r m ?
     City of Sheffield            M etro p o litan D istrict

     Roger Pensam, FCiS, MBIM, Solicitor
     Head of Department                                                                    Administration and Legal Department
                                                                                           Town Hall,
                                                                                           Sheffield S1   2HH
     Our reference      GP/262/DMB
     Your reference

     Date
                        14th May, 1987


  The C h ie f C onstable,
  South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e ,                                                                         -n r
  P o lic e H .Q .,                                                                  S''
                                                                                                    —             < J'JSF
  Snig H i l l ,
  SHEFFIELD . S3 SLY


 l ° r the a tt e n tio n o f S uperintendent S tu a rt                                     fS MAY 1987


 Dear S ir ,

  S a fe ty o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
                            o f the C o u n c il*s C e r t if ic a t i n g F unction


 the^above                       ^                   ^       ^         1              ^     SO" e f"rther thou®ht

 Many points were raised at the meeting but I think that the general feeling was
 that the roles of each Authority involved in the system should be defined
 perhaps along the lin e s adopted by the South Y o rk s h ire County C o u n c il.

1 thaV® no o b je c tio n in p r in c ip a l to ro le s being d e fin e d in th is way but I should
make i t c le a r th a t i f i t is agreed th a t p a r t ic u la r A u th o r itie s adopt p L t i c u l a f
    es then they w i l l be under a duty to c o n s u lt w ith o th e r in te re s te d p a r tie s
where th e re is an o ve rla p o f i n t e r e s t . As I see i t the A u th o r ity which c a rrie s
 C e r t if ic a t im r A ^ h              hf r the re s P ° ^ i b i l i t y o f a d v is in g the C ou n cil as
 C e r t if ic a t i n g A u th o r ity on a l l m a tte rs f a l l i n g w it h in th a t Lead A u th o r ity r o le .

I have drawn up a d r a f t Schedule which attem pts to d e fin e Lead A u th o r ity r o le s
would°U^ P°,l n t ° UV hat the d r a f t 18 lntended t0       °Pen ^    d is c u s s io n and I
would th e re fo re welcome your comments on i t .   Would you please a ls o l e t me know
   th e re are any o th e r m atters which should be in c lu d e d in the Schedule.

Moving onto the q u e stio n of in s p e c tio n s of s ta d ia , t h is p o in t was a ls o discussed
limited f e t i n g on 10th March.             My view is th a t the e x is tin g system o f b i annual
n            e                 r             g8r a p p r° p r la t e ’ 1 fe e l th a t one m ajor in s p e c tio n
p e r year should be c a rrie d out on each                    stadium which should in c lu d e a l l the
in T 8       i n s t a lla t io n s w it h in the scope o f the l e g i s la t io n . To back up t h is
S ? c e rfn t                  * 3 n u m b e r ° f " d u r l n « perform ance” i n s p e c t i o n s ^
   ic e r s . I th in k th a t th e re is g e ne ra l agreement in r e la t io n to "d u rin g
                  i rU,f e Z 1 ° aSu X th6y W° Uld h lSh l l gh t the performance o f the s a fe ty
system a t      each  stadium w h ils t i t is in o p e ra tio n .
                                                                                                Cont. . .

                                                                                       734690 - Mr. Bownes
                         For telephone     enquiries on this matter please   ring.                      (STD Code 0742)
                                                      Tmlex 84243   (Adm inistration & Legal)
Perhaps "d u rin g perform ance" in s p e c tio n s could be arranged so th a t each
A u th o r it y c a r rie s out such in s p e c tio n s ind e p en d e ntly w ith a degree of c e n tra l
c o - o r d in a tio n to prevent two in s p e c tio n s ta k in g place s im u lta n e o u s ly . As the
f i r s t step towards the development of a programme o f in s p e c tio n s i t m ight be
a p p ro p ria te f o r me to arrange a j o i n t in s p e c tio n in v o lv in g re p re s e n ta tiv e s from
a l l th e a u th o r itie s in o rd e r to p ro vid e an in s ig h t in t o problems which may be
encountered.

Moving on to the "w orking p a r ty " s tr u c tu r e I th in k i t is c le a r from the meeting
o f 10th March th a t some c l a r i f i c a t i o n of i t s s ta tu s i s re q u ire d . I t is
re aso n a bly c le a r from the County C o u n c il’ s records th a t the w orking p a rty as
such was a c tu a lly a d e c is io n making body presumably a c tin g under delegated
powers. However, the normal C ity C ouncil p ra c tic e is th a t the p r in c ip a l powers
rem ain w ith a Committee o r Sub-Commi11ee ( i n th is case th e General Purposes
P a n e l) w it h ro u tin e m a tte rs being delegated to a C hief O f f ic e r ( i n t h is case
m y s e lf) . I would th e re fo re propose to ask the Panel to accept the w orking p a rty
as a forum f o r d is c u s s io n .

I take a view th a t the Lead A u th o r it y w i l l be able to use the Working P a rty as
a u s e fu l forum f o r d is c u s s io n p r io r to drawing up th a t A u th o r it ie s fo rm a l view
to be subm itted to the C e r t if ic a t i n g A u th o r ity .      I propose th a t when an
A u th o r ity fe e ls th a t a m eeting would be a p p ro p ria te c o n ta c t should be made w ith
my C hief L ic e n s in g O f f ic e r , Mr. Bownes, who w i l l then make arrangements f o r the
m eeting to take p la c e . An agenda w i l l be prepared and c ir c u la te d p r io r to the
m eeting and a t the c o n clu sio n of the meeting Mr. Bownes w i l l prepare a l i s t
showing the su b je c ts discussed and the a c tio n to be taken by each Lead
A u th o r it y . This l i s t w i l l be c ir c u la te d as w e ll.

Would you please co n sid e r the p o in ts I have ra is e d and l e t me have your comments
on them in due course; i t w i l l be necessary f o r me to fo rm u la te a re p o rt to the
General Purposes Panel on the adm ini s t r a t io n of the C e r t if ic a t i o n system.

Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




Head of Department
* » ■'




                          S h e ffie ld C i t y C ouncil S a f e t y o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


                              Division of R e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s b e tw e e n A u t h o r i t i e s


  The fo llo w in g Schedule shows which A u th o r ity is to be re s p o n s ib le f o r advice to
  the C ouncil in respect of the a r e a s shown. In each case the re s p o n s ib le
  A u th o r ity w i l l in a p p ro p ria te i n s t a n c e s have to c o n s u lt w ith o th e r in v o lv e d
  a u th o r itie s before a r r iv in g at i t s f i n a l advice to the C o u n c il.                                               m
   A u th o rity                                                   Area o f R e s p o n s i b i l i t y
                                                                                                                                      ■




   The B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r ( D e p a r t m e n t       A l l m a t t e r s r e l a t i n g t o t h e structure o f
   o f Land and P l a n n i n g , S h e f f i e l d                s ta d ia in c lu d in g crush b a r r i e r s , w a l l s ,
   C it y C o u n c il)                                            e tc .



   F ire    S e rv ic e                                             F i r e p r e c a u t i o n s , f i r e a l a r m s , means o f
                                                                    e s c a p e , e m e rg e n cy l i g h t i n g , s t a d i u m
                                                                    c a p a c ity .



    P o lic e                                                       Stadium policing,                                     ,
                                                                  f e v a c u a tio n p ro c e d u re s , access of
                                                                    em e rg e n c y v e h i c l e s and emergency         •
                                                                    p la n n in g .



    D ire c to ro f E n v iro n m e n ta l H e a lth               Miscellaneous s a f e t y hazards suc h as
    and Consumer S e r v i c e s ( S h e f f i e l d                n o s in g s , t r i p h a z a rd s , f l o o r s u rfa c e s ,
    C ity C o u n c il)                                             d e f e c t i v e s e a t i n g etc; e l e c t r i c a l
                                                                    safety, f o o d _ s a f e t y and hy g i e n e . , toilet
                                                                    accommodation and o t h e r s a f e t y m a t t e r s
                                                                    n o t c o v e r e d by o t h e r A u t h o r i t i e s . j




    AF
*                                                                                                                                      kft   b


      City of Sheffield
            _____                      M etro p o litan D istrict
                                                                                                           €T
                                                                                                        wBBKBJ
      Roger P ensam , FC!S. M B IM . Solicitor
      H ead o f D e p a rtm e n t
                                                                                                        Administration and Legal Department
                                                                                                        Town Hall,
                                                                                                        Sheffield S1 2HH

      Our reference              DMB

     Your reference

     Date
                                 7th July,        1987




        The Chief Constable,
        South Yorkshire Police
        Police Headquarters,
        Saig Hill,


    •
        aci&r r j.j
        SHEFFIELD
        S3 8LY

        For the attention of Superintendent Stuart

        Dear Sir,

        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
        Draft revised Safety Certificate Conditions

        I enclose for your attention a copy of the new draft Certificate conditions
        which I have prepared.  Please bear in mind that these conditions are a first
        draft only and are in a basic form (i.e. they have not as yet been tailored to
        the needs of individual stadia).  I also enclose a first draft of the
        interpretation section of the Certificate which will help when reading the new
        conditions.

        I      would welcome your comments on the conditions, preferably in writing. If you
    ^ f e e i that it wouxd be helpful to discuss the conditions at a meeting then pleas-
    J^p o n t ac t Mr. Bownes on the telephone number given below who will make the
       appropriate arrangements.

    "Yours       faithfuilv




      Head of Department

     Encs.




     PB
                                                                                                        734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                          *   if s is R is t t c f p l s s s s n r .j            ..(S T D Code 0742)
                                                          Telex 54243 (Adm inistration & Legal)
                             Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions



1.      The Holder shall appoint in w r i ti n g at least one Safety O f f i ce r who has
        full authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
        implement and supervise safety measures.       A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
        charge of the Stadium and (b) be ia attendance at a central control point
        during a specified activity.

2.      The Holder (and the Safety officer(s)) shall take all necessary
        precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
        stadium and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in
        Se ction 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under
        that Act and this certificate.

3.      The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
        stadium at any ome time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule
              •

4.      Before the stadium is used on any occasion for a specified activity the
        Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable for the attendance
        of a sufficient number of police officers for the purpose of m aintaining
        lawful and orderly behaviour among persons attending the stadium.   The
        extent of the provision of police services is reserved for the
        determination of the Chief Constable.

5.      The Holder shall provide         for police use:-

        (a)       a central control room (together with appropriate ancillary
                  equipment);

        (b)       accommodation which may be utilised as a detention centre;

        (c)       accommodation which may be utilised       for administration purposes.

6.      No spectator shall be admitted         to the stadium in connection with a
        specified activity unless:-

        (a)       the methods   of admission and

        (b)       the methods to be used for_.the  segregation of spectators have been
                   approved by the Chief Constable.

<.      Where for reasons pf safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that
        the stadium or any section or sections of it must not be used for the.
        accommodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
        indicated to be used.

8   .   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of
        a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are specified
        in Schedule  "  .

9.      The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
        (a)  fit and capable to carry out their duties;

        (b)       properly   trained and instructed;

        (c)       readily identifiable by dress;

        (d)       provided with written instructions as      to their tasks/ duties.
The written instructions given to stewards must         include    the   following
tasks and duties.  Stewards must:

(a)    Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits          in various parts of
       the ground are complied with.

(b)    Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and
       other structures e.g. floodlight pylons, and from standing on seats.
       Where by virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to
       prevent this, they should immediately report the matt e r to the
       nearest police officer or, if no police officer is present, to the
       chief steward or the safety officer.

(c)   Ensure   that gangways and exits are kept clear.

(d)   Identify and in v estigate any incident or occurrence among spectators,
       reporting their findings to the police or to manage ment.

(e)   K n o w the location of and be able to operate effectively         the
       fire-fighting eq u ip m e n t at the ground.

(f)   K n o w the location of the first aid room and any first aid equipment
      kept elsewhere.

(g)    Be fully conversant w i t h any methods or signals used to alert staff
       that an emergency has arisen.

(h)    Be capable of r e cognising potential fire hazards and suspect
       packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest police
       officer or, if no police officer is in the immediate vicinity, the
       chief steward or the safety officer.

(i)Comply promptly with any instruction    given in an emergency by               a
      police officer, the chief steward or the safety officer.

(j)   Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless authorised or
      ordered to do o t h erwise by a police officer, the chief steward or the
      safety officer.

(k)   Report to the safety officer7'any damage or defect wh ic h is likely to
      pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

Training exercises relating to the duties of stewards shall be held at
least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that all doors,         gates and turnstiles throughout
the stadium are m a in t a i n e d in good working order at all times.      Particular
attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator
ingress and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates.             The Holder
shall not cause or permit atiy exit doors or gates to be altered in type,,
design or method of o p e r at i o n without the prior consent of the Council in
writing.

All   exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
and   emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by stewards in
accordance with schedule

The means of ingress and egress and        the gangways in   thestadiuz        shall at
all   times be kept unobstructed.
15.    A l l floor surfaces and steps throughout the stadium which are available
       for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces.    Adeq uate
       d r a i na g e shall also be provided where necessary.

16.    The number, size and situ ation of entrances to and exits from the stadium
       and the means of access to those entrances and exits shall be as specified
       in schedule

17.    The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the stadium to which
       spectators are admitted shall be illuminated to a sufficient standard             to
       enable such persons to enter or leave the stadium safely.

18.    T he Holder shall  provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
       emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
        lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.


19.    The Holder shall provide such signs or notices of such type, size and
       d esi g n as the Council may from time to time require for reasons of public
       safety.     The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
       clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.

2 0 . The Holder shall provide a public address system which shall be audible in
       all parts of the stadium to the satisfaction of the Council.  The Holder
       shall permit the Chief Constable unrestricted access to the public address
       system should the need arise for the preservation of public safety.

21.    The Holder shall    institute and m a i nt a i n a fire warning system   to the
       satisfaction of the Council.

22.    The Holder shall    provide and maintain such fire fighting equipment         in such
        locations as the   Council may from time to time specify.

23.    Except wi t h the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
       permit the storage in the stadium of any compressed gas or liquid except
       fire extinguishing apparatus.    The Holder shall comply with any conditions
       attached   to such a consent.

24.    Except with the prior wr i tten consent of the Council the Holder shall at
       all time6 maintain the stadium in a clean condition and shall not permit
       any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whatsoever.

25.    The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials              that
       are capable of being'used as missiles are accessible to spectators.

26.    W i t h o u t prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder
        shall not cause or permit the stadium or any of its installations to be
       altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
       way affect the safety of the stadium) in any manne r whatsoever without the
        prior written consent of the Council.       The Holder shall supply the Council
       w i t h copies of such plans and specifications as the Council m a y reasonably
        r equire to enable any application for such consent to be considered and
        shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent.. .

 27.   The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
        safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as
       may be specified in the notice.    The Holder shall comply with any
        co nditions specified in that notice.

 28.   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the stadium to the satisfaction
        of the Council a suitably equipped first aid room and shall arrange  or
        a ttendance of such numbers of qualified first aid attendants as the
                                                                                      <=ha ll be capable of being lit by
    Council - y                 require.              The «;•“               “ ^ ° £ ncy lighting and shall be easily
        both the general u *h * 1”? “                                       The Holder shall also        “    available
        identified by means of sig                                     *    ined by the Holder is immediately

        ^     n     d   ^       h   H   i     ^        aid roo» when r e t i r e d .


        Television cameras, cables ^               che'pr i o / w r i t ten consent                                       o£ the
        installed in the s t a d i u m except with

        C °U n C l 1 ’                                    •    «>,a ll be constructed and
        The electrical i ns t a l la t i on f o r the - m ^ s h ; ^    accordance with the
            •      • a in a safe and satisfactory            ui'etioH -hv the Institution of
        " “ l T t " dn s V r            B U c t r i c a l aInst: l U t lor t P u b U s h e d ih/ tion                     ^      ^

         Electrical Engineers.                                     consent of the Council.
         without the prior w n                                                                              ^    structural      safety

.           The Holder shall take all n e ^ ^ a ^ rS r c o m p e t e n t U S tructural engineer to
            of the stadium and shall a r r a n g f « . ^            ^        every u month..   The
            inspect the stadium in its ^                                           engineers       report   to the Council a
f           Holder shall - ^                      ^    H       n           advance of the date of the inspection.
            shall notify the                                                                ^            ^                           ^

    .       In the event of a sp e ctator b « i n *                                inju   , submit     to the Council a full
            (within 72 hours of the inJU1^                                        s of    the injury.       The Holder    shal
            7 i U » p r r . « r . S d * i t r . O T r ~ t ! »                                 as * . « - . « . «
                                                                                 of the Act or any regulations made
3'           'thereunder6 t h e ^ H o l d e r ' s h a l l ^ a i n t a i n written records shoving:-
             U)         the nu„her of sp ectato rs a d „ i „                                  to each part of the s t .d i u „ for

                        each specified activity,
                                         , addresses of thestewards employed                                     by tne   ho
              (b)       the     names and addresses


                                        . of the stewards on duty                             ateach specified     activity and
              (c)       the names or tne stew**,
                         details of their duties;

              U ,       details of the training                                                                 retorf shllfshow
                        :h“ r t U ^ r ^ : : r e d ” U hchC ^                              a     Se and the content of those

                         ex e r ci s e s.                          ✓                                                                         • .


                         c on d i t i o n s   34(b)            and 3 4 ( c ) .


        34. Where any conditi,»“                                                                            Tny^uthorised        person,
            ke pt such records shall be pr

    35.           The Holder shall ar r ange                                                        to'be sent'to^the-Council they

                                                       -       ; r         .“                  -                          - •            d
                                                                             •     , of the entire stadium both before and
                  (a)       general visualL                                      “   to ensure compliance with this
                            after a specified activity
                            certificate.


                  (b)       ^       i    ^        d        a       ^        i     ^                                                      and
                            when required by                       the Council.
(c)   without p r e judice to condition 34(b) within each period of 12 months
       a representative sample of 20% of    the crush barriers a n d handrails in
       all parts of the stadium shall be    tested in accordance with condition
       34(b);   the Council shall be notified in advance of the days and
       dates of testing and shall be informed in writing of the test
       results.   Components tested in accordance with this condition shall
       not be tested ag ain (unless specifically required by the Council)
       within 4i years after testing but shall be tested again within 5*
      years.

(d)   at least on ce every 12 months  theelectrical installation of the
       stadium shall be examined by a chartered electrical engineer and a
       copy of his report shall be forwarded to the Council.      The report
       shall:- briefly describe the installation; identify areas in which
       the i nstallation does not comply w i t h the current I.E.E.
       Regulations; identify works required to ensure compliance.

(e)   at least once every 12 months all fire appliances (including
      extinguishers, hydrants and water supplies) shall be tested by a
      competent person or persons.  A copy of the test reports shall be
       forwarded   to the Council.

(f)    twenty four hours before a specified activity     takes   place   the
       following installations shall be tested.-

       (i)    the public address system(s);
       (ii)    all other communication systems;
       (iii)    all fire warning and d e tection systems;
       (iv)    all lighting systems (including the emergency lighting);
       (v)    all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the stadium.
       A wr i tten record of the tests shall be kept by the Holder.

If a significant defect is discovered pursuant to any inspection or test
carried out under the terns of this certificate the Holder shall
immediately noti f y the C o u nc i l and take steps to correct the defect.




       RP2JS
       29.6.87
                                   SCHEDULE

                                  INTERPRETATION



The Act                   Means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or any
                          amendment thereof.

Authorised Person         Means a person authorised in accordance with Section
                          11 of the 1975 Act.

The Certificate           Means the written General Safety Certificate which
                          comprises:




The Chief Constable       Means the Chief Constable for  the time being of the
                          South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                          any Police Officer authorised by him for the purposes
                          of the Act or General Safety Certificate Conditions.

The Council           -   Means   the Sheffield City Council

                          Means the current E d i t i o n of the "Guide to Safety at
 Th <~   k U f■>ri        Sports Grounds*' published by H.M. Government or any
                          succeeding code or guidance produced by
                          H.M. Government.

The Holder            -   Means the person to whom the General Safety
                          Certificate has been issued.

Specified Activity    -   Means




Spectator                 Means any person occupying accommodation provided for
                          spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium           -   Means
                       • S O fc .




Mr R Pensam FCIS >©IM
Solicitor                                                        OPS TWS/SM
Administration and Legal Department
Tcwn Hall                                                        4 August 1987
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH




Dear Six

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS
                   /



I refer to your letter of 7 July 1987 and the new draft certificate and
would ccmrent as follows

1     I assume that no schedules are included as they are not as yet
      'ground specific'.

2     In Section 1 a form of words should be found which puts the role
      of the senior police officer in charge in the stadium and the role
      of the safety officer in context. The safety officer would be in
    - charge of the holder's enployees^but not police deployment although
      his views would be sought.

3    I suggest that consideration should be given to including in the
     safety certificate at paragraph 4:

     " H e holder shall notify the Chief Constable of specified
     activity at least 28 days before such an activity takes place
     (car such shorter time as the Chief Constable may recgrire).'

4    You may also wish to consider including the following in the
     safety certificate:                                      ‘

     •In the event of a fixture being arranged as a result of a draw in
     a football/rugby league or FA Cip ocrpetition, which would indicate
     the attendance of a club from a higher division, who by the nature
     of the club or by local interest would attract a crowd well in excess
     of the current ground capacity, or the forward information is such
     that a public order situation may arise, then in consultat ion with


                                          Supt Stuart         3200
 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
 Efcraft Revised Safety Certificate Condition*           4 August 1987


 the opposing club and the local police ccnsannder, one of the following
 alternatives must be agreed or otherwise irvst be inplamentod if the
 local police ccnroanclex so directs s

 a)   insisting the match is 'all ticket';

 b)   requiring the game to be played at an alternative venue;

 c)   controlling the day and time of kick off.'

 No vehicle other than emergency (ie police, fixe, mfaulanoe)
 shall be parked in any part of the stadium exoent as shown on any         X
 plan or as agreed with the Chief Constable or senior police officer.

 Under Section 10 (erergancy procedures) of the Safety at Sports
 Grounds Act 1975, a local authority is empowered, if it considers
 that due to any deficiency in safety procedures at a designated
 sports ground, to take certain steps to minimise the risk to
 spectators. The local authority nay apply to the courts for an                v
 order prohibiting or restricting a&nission to the whole or any part
 of the ground until such steps have been taken to reduce the risk
 to spectators.

If the court is 'satisfied, chi the explication of the local authority,
that the risk to spectators at a sports ground is so areat that, until
steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable level/their'admission
ought to be prohibited, or restricted, the court may order, prohibit
   rfftrict' to the extent they consider appropriate in the circumstances
ot the case, the acMssion of spectators to the whole or any part of
the ground, until such steps have been taken as, in the opinion of the
court, are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable level.

If spectators are admitted to a sports ground in contravention of
an order made under Section 10 of the Sports Grounds Act 1975, any
responsible person, and if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder
of the certificate shall be guilty of an offence.

H*3 ^ire' Safeti' ai^ Places of Sports Bill received Royal assent on
15 May 1987 and this amends the procedure under Section 10 of the 1975
Safety of Sports Grounds Act by allowing the local authority to place
an order of prohibit ion on sports ground management if in their opinion
the criteria at paragraph 6 above is satisfied, thus disposing of the
need to apply to a court for an appropriate order. The club managansnt
or holder of the safety certificate may appeal to the magistrates for
cancellation or modification of the order.

Section 11 should state who is responsible for organising the training,
notwithstanding the entry at 33(d).                                        y
As aminocr point I would draw attention to paragraph 33 (e) where I feel
it should read:

•In accordance with conditions 35 (b) and 35 <c)’ and not as indicated.
      Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
      Draft Ftavised Safety Certificate Conditions              4 August 1987


      I hope .that ttese Garments will be of some assistance.

      Yours faithfully




      Chief Constable




(-•
              City of Sheffield            M e tro p o lita n District
                                                                                                                @

              Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor
              Head of Department
                                                                                                         Administration and Legal Department
                                                                                                        Town Hall
                                                                                                        Sheffield S1 2HH
             Our reference       GP/262/DMB                                                             Telephone          0742-26444
                                                                                                        Facsimile          0742-735003
             Your reference                                                                             Telecom Gold       76:LMX 086
                                                                                                        Telex              54243 SHFLIBG
             Date                30th March,            1989                                                       or      265871 MONREF G (quote ref LMX 086)




           The Chief Constable,
           South Yorkshire Police,
           Police Headquarters,
           Snig Hill,
           SHEFFIELD.
           S3 8LY

           For the attention of Superintendent Stuart
           Headquarters Operations

           Dear Sir,

           Safety of Sports Grounds - Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions

           I refer to your letter of 4th August 1987 in connection with draft Safety
           Certificate Conditions.  1 now enclose for your attention a copy of the final
           draft of the new Certificate Conditions which take into account the observations
           made in your letter.

           You will however notice that there are no references as such to the Police
           within the Certificate.  I have carefully considered this matter and have come
           to the conclusion that Conditions which purport to delegate the Council's
           functions to outside bodies are unenforceable as they .are beyond the powers of
           the Council.  Therefore several Conditions which were included in the first
           draft (relating to for example discussions between Certificate holders and the
           Police) have been deleted or modified.

          I am, of course, conscious of the very important Police role in
          connection with the safety of spectators at sports grounds and I have therefore
          taken two steps to ensure that this role is properly recognised in the
          certification system.  Firstly the definition of "authorised officers" in the
          Conditions includes Police Officers.  Secondly there is also a new Condition
          which relates to guidance given by the Council on safety matters.  A draft of
          the proposed guidance is enclosed with the new Conditions and you will see that
          it refers largely to Police/Certificate holder relations.

          Would you please let me have your comments on the draft Conditions in due
          course.

          'Yours faithfully,                                                                                               "




          Head of Department

          Enc.

          P B /1 9                                                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes
R7503/1
                                Fortelephone enquiries on this matter please ring................................................ (STD Code 0742)
                             Sheffield City Council



Interpretation of General Safety Certificates- Issued by the-Council

Word/Phrase                                       Meaning


The Act                 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975:including any
                        modification or re-enactment thereoffgand any subordinate
                        legislation made thereunder.   -
                                                                  '■
Authorised Officer      Any police officer, any officer ofyj|he South Yorkshire
                        T i r e and Civil Defence Authority, 9 ^ any officer of the
                        Sheffield City Council who is authorised in writing.


The Certificate         The written General Safety Certificate issued by the
                        Council under the Act to the Holder^of wh ich this
                        interpretation document forms part.;?


The Council             The Sheffield City Council.

The Guide               The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at Sports
                        Grounds" published by HM Government or any succeeding
                        code or guidance produced by HM Government.


The Holder              The person to whom the general safety certificate has
                        been issued.

Specified Activity       Any sporting event (including football matches) and any
                         religious event and any public entertainment for which a
                         licence issued by the Council is in force.


'Spectator               Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.


The Stadium




BH19/DB303
                  Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions

General Safety                                                                   ^



The H older s h a ll a p p o in t in w r it in g a t le a s t one S a fe ty “O f f ic e r who has
f u l l a u th o r ity to (a ) take r e s p o n s ib ilit y f o r s a fe ty a t- th e ground and (b)
implement and su p e rv is e s a fe ty measures- A S a fe ty O f f ic e r s h a ll (a ) be in
charge o f th e Stadium and th e H old e rs Employees and (b ) Jbe in attendance
a t (o r in d ir e c t p e rso n a l com m unication w ith ) a c e n tr a lje o n tr o l p o in t
d u rin g a s p e c ifie d a c t i v i t y .
                                                                            '• jlSsK;''
                                                                            <-       :


                                                                            ._‘     '
The H older (and the S a fe ty o f f i c e r ( s ) ) s h a ll take a l l necessary
p re c a u tio n s f o r th e reasonable s a fe ty o f s p e c ta to rs a d m itte d to th e
stadium and s h a ll ensure th a t a l l re s p o n s ib le p e rso n s {as d e fin e d in
S e c tio n 12(2) o f th e A c t) are c o m p le te ly f a m ilia r w ith t h e i r d u tie s under
th a t A ct and t h is c e r t i f i c a t e .                                 ’


Where f o r reasons o f s a fe ty the C o u n c il g iv e s n o tic e to the H o ld e r th a t
th e stadium o r any s e c tio n o r s e c tio n s o f i t must n o t be used f o r the
accommodation o f s p e c ta to rs the H o ld e r s h a ll n o t p e rm it any areas so
in d ic a te d to be used.


The H older s h a ll p ro v id e such s ig n s o r n o tic e s o f such ty p e , s iz e and
design as th e C o u n c il may fro m tim e to tim e re q u ire f o r reasons o f p u b lic
s a fe ty . The H older s h a ll ensure th a t th e s ig n s o r n o tic e s so re q u ire d are
c le a r ly le g ib le so th a t th e y can e a s ily be read a t a l l tim e s .


The H older s h a ll ta ke a l l p o s s ib le ste p s to ensure th a t no m a te ria ls th a t
are capable o f b e in g used as m is s ile s are a c c e s s ib le to s p e c ta to rs .


W ith o u t p re ju d ic e to the p ro v is io n s o f S e c tio n 8 o f th e A c t th e H o ld e r
s h a ll n o t cause o r p e rm it th e stadium o r any o f i t s in s t a lla t io n s to be
a lte re d (w hich term s h a ll exclude m inor re m e d ia l works w hich do n o t in any
way a ff e c t th e s a fe ty o f th e sta d iu m ) in any manner w hatsoever w ith o u t the
p r io r w r it t e n consent o f the C o u n c il. The H o ld e r s h a ll su p p ly th e C o u n cil
w ith copies o f such plans and s p e c ific a tio n s as th e C o u n c il may reasonably
re q u ire to enable any a p p lic a tio n f o r such consent t o be co n sid e red and
s h a ll comply w ith any c o n d itio n s a tta c h e d to t h a t co n se n t.


The H older s h a ll p ro v id e and m a in ta in a t th e stadium to the s a tis fa c tio n
o f the C o u n c il a s u ita b ly equipped f i r s t a id room and s h a ll a rran g e f o r
attendance o f such number o f q u a lif ie d f i r s t a id a tte n d a n ts as the C o u n cil
may re q u ir e .    The a tte n d a n ts d u tie s s h a ll o n ly r e la te to th e a d m in is te rin g
o f f i r s t a id . The f i r s t a id room s h a ll be capable o f b e in g l i t by both
th e g e n e ra l lig h t in g and th e emergency lig h t in g and s h a ll he e a s ily
id e n t if ie d by means o f s ig n s . The H o ld e r s h a ll a ls o ensure th a t a t a l l
tim es a d o c to r is im m e d ia te ly a v a ila b le to a tte n d a t th e T l r s t a id room
when re q u ire d .


T e le v is io n cameras, cables and o th e r p o rta b le equipment s h a ll n o t be
in s t a lle d in the stadium except w ith th e p r io r w r it te n consent o f the
C o u n c il.
    In the event o f a s p e c ta to r b e in g in ju r e d in the stadium , th e H o ld e r s h a ll
    ( w ith in 72 hours o f th e in j u r y o c c u rin g ) subm it to th e C o u n c il a f u l l
    w r itte n r e p o r t on the circum stan ce s o f the in ju r y . The B o ld e r s h a ll
    a ls o su p p ly such a d d itio n a l in fo rm a tio n as th e C ou n cil may r e q u ir e .


10. The H older s h a ll arrange f o r th e a tten d a nce a t every s p e c ifie d a c t i v i t y o f
    a C h ie f S a fe ty Steward and such number o f S a fe ty Stew ards.as a re s p e c ifie d
    in Schedule 1.

                                                                                    '          '


11. The H older s h a ll ensure th a t th e S a fe ty Stewards a re : -
    (a ) f i t and capable to c a r r y o u t t h e i r d u tie s ;

     (b)    p ro p e rly tr a in e d and in s t r u c t e d ;                              ■

     (c )   r e a d ily id e n t if ia b le by d re s s ;

     (d )   p ro vid e d w ith w r it te n in s t r u c t io n s as to t h e ir ta s k s /d u tie s .


12. The w r itte n in s tr u c tio n s g iv e n to stew ards must in c lu d e th e fo llo w in g
    ta sks and d u tie s . Stewards m ust:

     (a )   Under the d ir e c tio n o f the S a fe ty O f fic e r o r the C h ie f Steward
            o r an A u th o ris e d O f fic e r p re v e n t overcrow ding by e n s u rin g
            the crowd lim i t s in v a rio u s p a rts o f th e ground are com plied w ith .

     (b )   P revent s p e c ta to rs , as f a r as p o s s ib le , from c lim b in g fe n ce s and
            o th e r s tru c tu re s e .g . f lo o d lig h t p y lo n s , and from s ta n d in g on s e a ts .
            Where by v ir t u e o f th e s c a le o f th e in c id e n t stew ards a re u nable            to
            p reve n t t h is , th e y must im m e d ia te ly r e p o r t the m a tte r to th e n e a re s t
            a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r o r to th e c h ie f stew ard o r th e s a fe ty o f f i c e r .

     (c )   Ensure th a t gangways and e x it s are "kept c le a r .

     (d )   I d e n t if y and in v e s tig a te any in c id e n t o r occurrence among s p e c ta to rs
             (w hich may a f f e c t s p e c ta to r s a fe ty ) * r e p o rtin g t h e i r fin d in g s to the
             C h ie f Steward o r th e S a fe ty O f f ic e r .

     (e)    Know th e lo c a tio n o f and be a b le to operate e f f e c t iv e ly the
            f i r e - f i g h t i n g equipment a t th e ground.

     (f)    Know th e lo c a tio n o f the i ’i r s t a id room and any f i r s t a id equipm ent
            ke p t elsew here.

     (g)    Be f u l l y conversant w ith any methods o r s ig n a ls used to a le r t s t a f f
            th a t an emergency has a ris e n .

     (h)    Be capable o f re c o g n is in g p o te n t ia l f i r e hazards and su sp ect
            packages, r e p o r tin g such fin d in g s im m e d iate ly to th e h e a re s t
            a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r o r the c h ie f stew ard o r the s a fe ty . . o f f ic e r .

     ( i)   Comply p ro m p tly w ith any in s t r u c t io n g iv e n in an emergency by an
            a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r , th e c h ie f stew ard o r the s a fe ty o f f i c e r .

     ( j)   Remain a t t h e i r a llo c a te d p o s ts as in s tr u c te d u n le ss a u th o ris e d o r
            in s tr u c te d to do o th e rw is e by an a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r , th e c h ie f
            stew ard o r th e s a fe ty o f f ic e r .

     (k )   Report to the s a fe ty o f f ic e r any damage o r d e fe c t w hich i s l i k e l y to
               pose a th r e a t to s p e c ta to r s a fe ty eg- a damaged crush b a r r ie r .

        (1 )   Open th e e x it d o o rs /g a te s and secure them in th e open p o s itio n on th e
               i n i t i a t i o n o f the emergency p ro c e u d re . or, when in s tr u c te d to do so by
               the s a fe ty o f f i c e r , th e C h ie f Steward o r an a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r .


  13. T ra in in g e x e rc is e s o rg a n ise d by th e S a fe ty O f f ic e r r e la t in g to the d u tie s
      o f stew ards s h a ll be h e ld a t le a s t once e v e r y "three m onths. A w r it te n
      re c o rd o f th e e x e rc is e s s h a ll be k e p t.                     .
                                                                                 '     -•
14.    A l l e x it doors and gates f o r use by s p e c ta to rs i n b o th o rd in a ry e v a c u a tio n
       and emergency e va cu a tio n s itu a tio n s s h a ll be manned by stew ards in
       accordance w ith schedule 2. The o th e r d u tie s d e ta ile d InTschedule 2
       s h a ll be c a rrie d o u t by stew ards.


        S p e c ta to r Areas                                                        ' itf'v

 15. The H older s h a ll ensure th a t a l l d o o rs, g a te s and t u r n s t ile s th ro u g h o u t
     th e stadium are m a in ta in e d in good w orkin g o rd e r a t a l l tim e s . P a r tic u la r
     a tte n tio n s h a ll be p a id to doors, gates and t u r n s t ile s in s p e c ta to r
     in g re s s and egress ro u te s and a ls o to p itc h p e rim e te r g a te s . The H older
     s h a ll n o t cause o r p e rm it any e x it doors o r g a te s to he a lte re d in ty p e ,
     d e sig n o r method o f o p e ra tio n w ith o u t the p r io r consent o f the C o u n c il in
     w r it in g .


16. The means         o f in g re s s and egress and the gangwaysin th e stadium                 s h a ll a t
     a l l tim es     be k e p t u n o b s tru c te d .


17.    A l l f l o o r su rfa ce s and s te p s th ro u g h o u t the sta d ium w hich are a v a ila b le
       f o r use by s p e c ta to rs s h a ll have even and n o n - s lip s u rfa c e s . Adequate
       d rain a ge s h a ll a ls o be p ro vid e d where ne cessa ry.


18.    The entrances to and e x it s from th e stadium and th e weana o f access to
       those entrances and e x its s h a ll be as s p e c ifie d in th e j> la n which forms
       p a rt o f t h is c e r t i f i c a t e .


       F ir e S a fe ty

19.    The H older s h a ll p ro v id e a p u b lic address system        w hich s h a ll be a u d ib le in
       a l l p a rts o f th e stadium to th e s a t is f a c t io n o f th e C o u n c il.


20.     The H older s h a ll i n s t it u t e and m a in ta in a f i r e w arn ing system to the
      * s a tis fa c tio n o f th e C o u n c il.


21.   The H older s h a ll p ro v id e and m a in ta in such f i r e f ig h t in g equipment         in such
       lo c a tio n s as th e C o u n c il may from tim e to tim e s p e c i f .


22.   Except w ith the consent o f the C o u n cil in w r it in g th e B o ld e r s h a ll, n o t
      p e rm it th e sto ra g e in th e stadium o f any flam m able, t o x ic o r c o rro s iv e
      liq u id o r compressed substance (e xcep t f i r e e x tin g u is h in g and d rin k s
      d is p e n s in g a p p a ra tu s ). The H older s h a ll com ply w ith any c o n d itio n s
      a tta c h e d to such a consent.
23*       Except w ith the p r io r w r it t e n consent o f the C o u n cil the H older s h a ll a t
          a l l tim e s m a in ta in th e sta d ium in a cle a n c o n d itio n and s h a ll n o t p e rm it
          any accum ulations o f ru b b is h o r any o th e r m a te ria ls w hether co m b u stib le o r
          n o t.                                   — •


          L ig h tin g and E le c t r ic a l I n s t a lla t io n s

24.       The H older s h a ll ensure th a t a l l p a rts o f th e stadium to ^w h ich
          s p e c ta to rs are a d m itte d are illu m in a te d to a s u f f ic ie n t sta n d ard to enable
          such'persons to e n te r o r le a v e th e stadium s a fe ly .                        ’
                                                                       ■ ■
                                                                                        ■
25        The H older s h a ll p ro v id e to th e s a tis fa c tio n o f the C o u n c il a system o f
          emergency l ig h t i n g w hich s h a ll, in th e event o f a f a ilu r e ^ o f th e g e n e ra l
          lig h t in g be s u f f ic ie n t to enable s p e c ta to rs to lea ve th e stadium s a fe ly .
          The emergency l ig h t i n g s h a ll {& ) be powered b y a source independent o f th e
          m ain* e l e c t r i c i t y s u p p ly and (b ) come in t o o p e ra tio n im m e d ia te ly on the
          f a ilu r e o f th e mains l ig h t in g and (c ) rem ain in o p e ra tio n f o r a t le a s t
          th re e co n secu tive h o u rs when a c tiv a te d -                           -


26.       The e le c t r ic a l in s t a ll a t i o n f o r th e prem ises s h a ll be c o n s tru c te d and
          m a in ta in ed in a s a fe and s a t is fa c to r y c o n d itio n . No a lt e r a t io n w hich
          s ig n if ic a n t ly a ff e c t s th e i n s t a ll a t i o n s h a ll ta ke p la c e w ith o u t th e p r io r
          w r it te n consent o f th e C o u n c il-


           C apacity

2P        The maximum number o f SDectators that may be admitted to each part of the
          stadium at any one time* shall n o t exceed the number specified in schedule
           3.


           In s p e c tio n s . Tests and Records

  28. Where any c o n d itio n in t h is c e r t i f i c a t e re q u ire s w r it te n re co rd s to be
      k e p t such re cord s s h a ll be produced on demand to any a u th o ris e d o f f ic e r .


  29. The C o u n cil may a t any tim e by n o tic e in w r it in g , f o r reasons o f p u b lic
      s a fe ty , re q u ire th e H o ld e r to c a rry o u t such works a n d /o r in s p e c tio n s as
      may be s p e c ifie d in th e n o tic e . The H old e r s h a ll comply w ith any
      c o n d itio n s s p e c ifie d in th a t n o tic e .


  30. I f a s ig n if ic a n t d e fe c t i s d isc o ve re d p u rs u a n t to any in s p e c tio n o r te s t
      c a rrie d o u t under th e term s o f t h i s c e r t i f i c a t e th e H older s h a ll
      im m e d iate ly n o t if y th e C o u n c il and ta ke ste p s to c o rr e c t the d e fe c t.


     31    The H older s h a ll arran g e f o r th e te s ts and in s p e c tio n s lis t e d in Schedule
           4   to be c a rrie d o u t and f o r re co rd s to be k e p t o r re p o rts to be s u p p lie d
           to th e C o u n cil in accordance w ith th e term s o f th e sch e du le. Where
           re p o rts are re q u ire d to be s u p p lie d to th e C o u n c il, th e y s h a ll be s u p p lie d
           as soon as p o s s ib le on co m p le tio n o f th e in s p e c tio n s /te s ts .


     32. W ith o u t p re ju d ic e to S e c tio n 6 o f th e Act o r any re g u la tio n s made
         th e re un d e r th e H older shall m a in ta in w r it te n re co rd s s h o w in g :-
    <a)                                                        t 0 ' 6a0h           °f ^ - ta d iu a    fo r

    (b )      the names and addresses o f the stew ards employed b y |h e h o ld e r ;

   (0)        d e t a S 'f ^ e S                       * *    »* • “ » = P e c i f i e S S t i v l t y and


           . stew ards in a L o r d S o e ^ i t r C O T d l t i J n ^ ^ ^ t h e th ° ^ ° ld e r f o r
             R e w a r d * . a t t e n d e d each e *e “ £         ’^ d ' t ^ S
                                                                                .   v.     -



  Guidance to H old e rs


 s a fe ty M a t t e l ! f ?he h       ^ e    * ^ p£ S” ; ' £ g £ j                        ^ ^ n o e !”
                                                                                          :•




RP2ABM/JS

2 9 .3 .8 9
                                                        9 *



                           SCHEDULE 1 - CONDITION N O . 10



 The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not be
 less than 69.


                           SCHEDULE 2 - CONDITION N O .14

 The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below:-


 No. of Stewards            Duties
                            Manning of Final Exit Gates

  1                            'A' (Shoreham Street)

 11                            'B' to ’L ' (John Street)

  2                         'M' and    'N'   (Bramall Lane)

  2                         '0' (Bramall Lane)

  2                         'R' and    'S'   (South Stand)

                           Control and Directions of Spectators

  6                        Bramall Lane Stand

  3                        "            "    Terrace

  9                        John Street Stand

  2                        John Street Terrace (Timber Section)

 ?
                                               "       (Concrete Section)

 4                         Spion Kop Main Area

 1                         "          ^ Disaaled/Childrens Area

                           South Stand

                           Patrolling the Standing and Dealing with Emergencies
                           etc.

                          John Street Stand

                           Bramall Lane Stand

                          South Stand

                          Manning Internal Gates

                          Pitch Perimeter Gates to
                          (Nos 1-4) John Street Terrace

                          Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace
                          (Nos 2-5)

                          Gate between the two parts of the John Street Timber
                          Stand and Terrace (No.9)

10/DB232/MS
                            SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27


The number of spectators, admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
44,009.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium,   listed below,
shall exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area          •                         Maximum No. of Spectators

South Stand       (Seats)               7,948

Bramall lane

   Seats                                2,958
   Terrace                              7,354

John Street

   Timber Section Seats                  1,200
   Concrete Section Seats                1,490
   Timber Section Terrace
     (right-hand section)               1,048
     (left-hand section)                  589
   Concrete Section Terrace             2,832

Spion Kop

   General Area                         18,250
   Disabled Section                        ±20

Childrens Section                         220


                                       44,009




10/DMB232/MS
                                                        c

my

                               SCHEDULE 1 - CONDITION NO.10'




     The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not be
     less than 66.

                               SCHEDULE 2 - CONDITION NO.14

     The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below:-


     No. of Stewards            Duties
                                Manning of Final Exit Gates

     26                         2 for each main exit

                                Control and Direction of Spectators

     12                         1 per vomitory in the South Stand

                                1   "    "       "     " West Stand

     18                         1   "    "       "    ” North Stand

                                Patrolling the Stadium and Dealing with Emergencies
                                etc.__________ '
                                               _________________________________ _________

                                Beneath South Stand




#




     10/DMB232/MS
                           SCHEDULE 3 -    CONDITION NO. 2 1


 The number of spectators^admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
 54,324.

 The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium,       listed below,
 shall exceed the maximum numbers shown.

 Area              •                      Maximum No. of Spectators

 <>P'‘ DrS   kOf                          21,000

 South Stand (Upper)                       5,567

 South Stand (Lower)                       3,310

 West Stand                                4,465

 West Terrace                              7,200

North West Terrace                         2,900

North Stand                                9,882



                                          54,324




10/DMB232/MS
                                       D R A F T


                                    SCHEDULE                    - ^ C oi n d-i t i o n No.m . ?/*
                                                               ,.




                            INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED     'vSjSSS
                                                               "ifssIT:.
GENERAL '                          INCIDENCE        WRITTEN              • WRITTEN REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                         RECORD                REQUIRED TO BE
                                                    REQUIRED               SUPPLIED TO
                                                                           COUNCIL




A competent person shall           At least         No.                    Y es.
inspect the structures which       once every
make up „the Stadium.              12 months.



A competent person shall          Before and        Yes.
carry out a general visual        after each
inspection of the Stadium         specified
to ensure compliance with         activity,
the Safety Certificate
Conditions.



A competent person shall          At least                                 Yes.
examine the. electrical           once every
installation of the Stadium.      12 months.



A competent person shall          At least                                 Yes.
test and inspect all fire         once every
appliances (including             12 months,
extinguishers, hydrants
and water supplies)



The emergency lighting aijd       At least                                 Yes.
fire warning (including           once every
the Public Address) systems       12 months,
shall be tested/inspected
by a competent person.



The emergency lighting            Not more          Yes.
system shall be tested by a       than three
competent person.                 hours prior
                                  to a
                                  specified
                                  activity
                                  taking place.
                                                     -2 -




GENERAL                                   INCIDENCE                WRITTEN                         WRITTEN REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                                        RECORD                          REQUIRED TO BE
                                                                   REQUIRED                      ' SUPPLIED TO
                                                                                                   COUNCIL

                                                                              ■ \           •-
                                                                               "£3>§gi£?-
A l l the f i r e w arning                Not more                 Yes.
d e te c tio n p u b lic address          than th re e
                                                                                         ■' -
and o th e r com m unication              hours p r io r                            ■   .*


systems s h a ll be te s te d             to a
by a competent person.                    s p e c ifie d
                                          a c t i v it y
                                          ta k in g p la c e .


A l l lig h t in g systems                Not more                 Yes.
(e x c lu d in g the emergency            than th re e
lig h t in g ) s h a ll be te s te d      hours p r io r
be a competent person.                    to a
                                          s p e c ifie d
                                          a c t i v it y
                                          ta k in g p la ce .


A l l d o ors, gates and                  Not more                 Yes.
t u r n s t ile s th ro u gh o u t th e   than th re e
Stadium s h a ll be te s te d             hours p r io r
by a competent person.                    to a
                                          s p e c ifie d
                                          a c t i v it y
                                          ta k in g p la ce .



A re p re s e n ta tiv e sam ple,         One 20% sample                                         Yes.
co m prising 20% o f the crush            in each^period
b a r r ie r s and h a n d ra ils in      o f 12 m onths.
th e Stadium s h a ll be te s te d        Once a sample
by a competent person in                  is te s te d th a t
accordance w ith the G uide.              sample s h a ll not
The C ou n cil s h a ll be                be te s te d again
n o t if ie d in advance o f the          (unless s p e c if ic ­
dates o f te s tin g .                    a ll y re q u ire d by
                                          the C o u n c il) w it h in
                                          fo u r and a h a lf years
                                          a ft e r f i r s t te s tin g ,
                                          but s h a ll be te s te d
                                          again w it h in f iv e
                                          and a h a lf years o f
                                          th a t d a te .




DMBLLL/5/JJJ
                     GUIDANCE FOR SAFETY CERTIFICATE HOLDERS



INTRODUCTION

This note has been prepared by the Sheffield City Council in order to inform
Certificate Holders as to the general background of the Safety Certificate
Conditions.  The Council in dealing with Safety Certificates takes advice from
the Chief Fire Officer, the Chief Constable, the Director of Health and Consumer
Services and the Council's Building Surveyor.  These Officers and the Council
itself is concerned to see as far as possible that the spectators at any
specified activities are reasonably safe.

GUIDANCE

Where advice is given to the holder by any of the four Officers mentioned it
should be acted upon in accjVdance with the time constraints given in the
advice.  The holder is reminded that failure to take steps to ensure the
reasonable safety of spectators could give rise to a prosecution.

The Chief Constable and his Officers have a particularly important role in
relation to "public order" situations the correct handling of which should
reduce any risk to spectator safety.

The Chief Constable must therefore be provided with appropriate facilities at
the stadium' for control, crowd surveillance, detention and administrative
purposes.   These facilities are essential if public order is to be maintained
and the risk to spectators minimised.

The Chief Constable must also be informed at the earliest possible moment of the
proposed date and content of all specified activities so that appropriate
planning can take place.

In addition there must be consultation and agreement between the holder and the
Chief Constable well in advance of specified activities about the proposed
methods of admission and the segregation of spectators. Consultation must also
take place if advance information is such that public order difficulties may
arise.  As a result of this consultation it is possible that the Chief Constable
may require, for reasons of preserving public order, that the specified activity
is "all ticket" or the specified activity should not be played at all at the
Stadium or the day and the time of the specified activity should be changed.

The Chief Constable should also be able to use whatever means are appropriate to
exercise control over spectators for reasons of safety and as part of this
control he and his Officers should be allowed full access to all areas of the
Stadium.




GP262/DMB

1/DB101/MS
South Yorkshire Police
                                                                 P O L IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                 S N IG H ILL
                                                                 S H E F F IE L D    S 3 8LY
                                                                 T E L E P H O N E (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                                 TELEX 547996




City of Sheffield Metropolitan District                          Your Ref:             GP/262/DMB
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall                                                        Our Ref:              MS/DD/CEC
SHEFFIELD         S1 2HH
                                                                 Date:                5 April 1989




Dear Sirs

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

Thank you for your letter dated 30 March 1989 and enclosures detailing your
proposed revision of Safety Certificate Conditions. I will consider the proposals and
reply in more detail in due course.

Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the conditions do not appear to require the
attendance of police officers at football matches, as provided by Section 2 of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987). I am forwarding a copy of your correspondence
to the Police Authority Legal Department for advice on the matter and will contact you
when that advice is available.

Yours faithfully




f
Chief Constable




The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Supt. Denton   Ext. 3435
     South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     P O L IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                     S N IG H ILL
                                                                     S H E F F IE L D    S 3 8L Y
                                                                     T E L E P H O N E (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                                     TELEX 547996




    The Clerk & Financial Officer                                    Your Ref:
    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
    PO Box 37                                                        Our Ref:              MS/DD/CEC
    Regent Street
    BARNSLEY       S70 2PQ                                           Date:                5 April 1989

    For the attention of Mr F B Alderman




    Dear Sir

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

    As discussed on the telephone with Mr Alderman, I enclose a copy of
    correspondence received from -the Administration and Legal Department of Sheffield
    City Council and relating to the Council’s proposed general conditions to attach to
    certificates under the above Act. I also enclose a copy of my immediate reply, from
    which you will see that I am concerned that the proposals do not take full account of
    the legislative provisions regarding the attendance of police at sporting events.

    I should be obliged if you would kindly advise me on the propriety of the Sheffield
    proposals.

    Yours faithfully




l   Chief Constable




    The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Supt. Denton   Ext. 3435
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                          '   REF:   OPS GRM/SM
    FROM:   SUPT MARSH OPERATIONS DIVISION                    STATION/DEPT.:  OPERATIONS
    TO:     CH SUPT NESBIT OPS & TRAFFIC DIVISION             DATE'          17 ^    19g9


              SUBJECT:    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975




              I refer to your report dated 9 May 1989 in respect of the above. You
              will recall that early in July 1987 we received a draft certificate
              from the council for consideration. We replied on 4 August 1987 and
              highlighted a number of matters that were considered worthy of
              consideration. Soms 18 months later we received an amended draft
              certificate from the council again for consideration. It was noted
              that all. reference to the Police had been removed from the amended
              certificate. This was pointed out to the council and on 4 May 1989
              they sent us further correspondence suggesting the inclusion of one
              additional paragraph which placed an obligation on the holder of the
              certificate to make arrangements with the Chief Constable for the
              policing of any event.
              I am asked to compare our letter of 4 August 1987 with the final draft
              certificate that has recently been received.
              Our letter consisted of 11 paragraphs and I corrrrent as follows

              1    The schedules are now included.

              2    The role of the safety officer has now been clarified.

              3    They have not included the suggestion that the Chief Constable
                    receive 28 days' notice of any activity.
              4    The suggestion that for major events the Police have the right
                    to insist on either the event being all ticket, an alternative
                    venue or time of commencement has been ignored.

              5    The council'have declined to include the suggestion that no
                    vehicle other than emergency vehicles should be parked in any
                    part of the stadium.
              6/9 No reference is made to Section 10 of the 1975 Safety of Sports
                   Grounds Act.
              10   This suggestion has been incorporated into the draft certificate.

              11   This matter has now been covered at paragraph 31 of the draft
                    certificate.




GEN/2
- 2 -


Albeit several of our suggestions have been omitted, the inclusion
of the paragrph contained in the letter dated 4 May 1989 does allow
a lot of scope in relation to the Police and I share the view of Chief
Superintendent Denton in that the certificate is now workable and
acceptable to the Police.

Submitted for your information and that of the Assistant Chief
Constable (Operations).

                             1
City of Sheffield                        M e tr o p o lita n D istric t


R o g e r P e n s a m , FCIS, M B IM , S o lic ito r                                                  Administration and Legal Department
H ead o f D e p a rtm e n t
                                                                                                      T o w n Hall
                                                                                                      S h effield S1 2H H
                                                                                                      T e le p h o n e       0 7 4 2 -2 6 4 4 4
O u r re fe re n c e     GP262/DMB                                                                    Facsim ile             0 7 4 2 -7 3 5 0 0 3
                                                                                                      T e le c o m G o ld    7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
Y o u r referen ce
                         MS/DD/CEC                                                                    T e le x               5 4 2 4 3 SH FLIB G
                                                                                                                        or   265871 M O N R E F G (q u o te ref L M X 08 6)
D ate
                         4 th May 1989


The C h ie f C onstable,
South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e ,
P o lic e H eadquarters,
Snig H i l l ,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LY


Dear S ir ,                                                                                       .

S a fe ty o f Sports Grounds - C e r t if ic a t e C o n d itio n s

Thank you fo r your l e t t e r o f 5 th A p r il, in re p ly to mine o f 30th March; I a ls o
r e f e r to C h ie f S up erin te n da n t D entons' subsequent telephone co n v e rsa tio n w ith my
C h ie f L ic e n s in g O f fic e r , Mr. Bownes.

I g a th e r th a t you would fin d i t h e lp fu l f o r a c o n d itio n to be in c lu d e d in the
C e r t if ic a t e which p rovid e d fo r the attendance o f p o lic e o ffic e r s a t fo o tb a ll
matches. I have no o b je c tio n to such a c o n d itio n being in s e rte d and I would
l ik e to subm itthe fo llo w in g d r a f t fo r your c o n s id e ra tio n :-

        "B e fo re the       stadium is used on any occasion f o r a s p e c ifie d a c t i v it y , the
        H older s h a ll make arrangements w ith the C h ie f C onstable of the South
        Y o rk s h ire P o lic e f o r the attendance o f a s u f f ic ie n t number of p o lic e o ffic e r s
        f o r the purpose o f m a in ta in in g la w fu l and o rd e rly behaviour amongst
        s p e c ta to rs .     The e x te n t o f the p ro v is io n o f p o lic e s e rv ice s is reserved fo r
        the d e te rm in a tio n of the C h ie f C on stab le".

I would a p p re c ia te your comments on the C e r t if ic a t e c o n d itio n s and the rem ainder
of the C e r t if ic a te C o n d itio n s which were enclosed w ith my l e t t e r of 30 th March.

I w ish to proceed w ith the issue of the S h e ffie ld U n ite d C e r tific a te s w ith in the
f a i r l y near fu tu r e , and I would th e re fo re lik e to hear your comments, i f
p o s s ib le , by 15 th May.

Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




A c tin g Head o f Department


19/DB35/MS                                                                                                   734690 - M r. Bownes




                               For te le p h o n e e n q u irie s on this m a tte r please ring                                 (S T D C ode 0 7 4 2 )
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522

                                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                              SNIG HILL
                                                                                  SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


T. WATSON, BA
A S S IS T A N T CH IEF CONSTABLE




The Administration & Legal Department                            Your fief:    GP262/DMB
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                        Our Ref:       MS/DD/JW
S2 2HH
                                                                 Date:         7 June 1989
For the attention of Mr M Webster



Dear Sir'

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

 I write with reference to your letter of 4 May last.

 I am pleased to note that you are now agreeable to the inclusion in the certificate of a
 condition requiring the provision of special police services on the occasion of a specified
 activity. With regard to the wording of the condition, may I suggest the following for your
 consideration:-

         “The holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
         Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on the occasion
         of a specified event at the stadium for the purposes of maintaining lawful and
         orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the extent of the provision of those
         services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
         shall be allowed full access to all parts of the stadium”.

As to the other matters contained in the final draft of the new certificate, I would refer you
to my letter dated 4 August 1987. In that letter I raised eleven points with regard to your
original proposals and I am pleased to note that you have incorporated points one, two,
ten and eleven in the draft. With regard to the other points I still consider that the
requirement for twenty eight days notice of a specified activity (point three); the power to
require activities to be “all ticket" etc (point four) and the restriction on the parking of
vehicles (point five) should be made conditions of the certificate and I ask that you give
further consideration to this.

 On a minor point I would draw your attention to the omission of the word “not” in the
 second paragraph on schedule thrfee of the draft.

 On the matter generally, you may feel it prudent to delay the issue of the certificates until
 after the recommendations of the current public inquiry are made known. You may feel
 that a meeting to discuss these matters would be beneficial and I shall be happy to make
 my officers available should you so wish.

 Yours faithfully



 Assistant Chief Constable
 Management Services
                                                           CHAPTER 8

                                       LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS                        '



  were in use were filled sequentially, but not otherwise.                                      W3S m USe or lf such Pens «

  S o m L e o ^ h L l J ^                                                                               ,he        " ™ s 3 =>"d   ^




  spacing o f ihe crush barriers had complied w ith the Green Guide. But they did not                         ^ ihe s,reneth and
 Departures from the Green Guide




 able ,o get in a „ ° d T u T a n f s t a t o                S         S         'f t ?   ffe c fo f^ " ^        F ,“ “    U
 X S ; S r" !•"**         3 2                                                                                             i££
 d t r m o r e ^ s 's M . f n r a S r a K r " '"       ^         “ D r E O T 0 0 d « » « * * ■» affect c a p a c t, , „ fact i,




M iS S l
    141. Capacity should also have taken account of two further departures from thp r,r^n r„vi                        xr




Safety Certificate                                 .                                                                                  J



x& SS& SsSSSSsxgs& rr
maxima with which the Club has to comply.                                                          e rtmamed as the onl>'

  144. Section 2(1) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 provides (so far as is relevant):


 :"ped,>s                                                                          ,o“ ' au,hon,y co,,s,d"                  »'■
 Section 2(2) provided (so far as is relevant):
  “Without prejudice to sub-section (1) above, a Safety Certificate-
.(a) shall specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the stadium:'
 (b) may specify the maximum number to be admitted to different parts of it:
 (c) shall include terms and conditions-
... (iii) as to the number, strength and situation ofany crush barriers."


                                                           24
 Section 2(2) was repealed by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, section 19, which
 gave power to the Secretary of State to lay down, by order, terms and conditions. No order has yet been
 made and guidance from the Home Office has recommended local authorities to approach their
 function under section 2(1) in accordance with the criteria in the repealed section 2(2). (See Home
 Office Circular 71/1987 dated 25 November 1987, Annex A, paragraph 6.)

    145. It is clear that when the certificate was first issued the South Yorkshire County Council went
 further than simply to fix the maximum numbers for the whole Stadium. They prescribed figures for
 each part of the ground not merely by the four points of the compass but by specified sections.

   146. Section 8(1) of the 1975 Act requires the holder of the certificate before carrying out any
proposals to alter or extend the stadium or any of its installations while a Safety Certificate is in
operation to give notice of those proposals to th,e local authority;. That obligation is specifically
repeated in Sheffield Wednesday’s certificate at Schedule 2 Paragraph 5(2). The Club complied with
the requirement. Having received notice of the alterations to the pens and the barriers, the local
authority ought, in my view, to have amended the Safety Certificate accordingly. T h i y l i d not do so.

■ Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?
   - 147. Although Dr Eastwood acknowledged that the various changes- to the layout would have had
  an effect on capacity, he did not take active steps to see that appropriate amendments were made. He
  says he mentioned from time to time that the alterations would have an effect on capacity and that he
  did not realise the Safety Certificate was not regularly updated. However, I find two memoranda in
  early 1987 highly significant. Dr Eastwood’s assistant Mr Strange was concerned with queries from
  the FA as to Hillsborough s capacity for a semi-final. Mr Strange recorded these questions in a
  memorandum:-

   “Has any account been taken for alterations done on Leppings Lane over the last few seasons? Is the 10,200
   or so figure still correct? I said that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better do it now than later.”

   148. Mr Strange’snext memo (a few days later) records as follows:-

 : “Dr Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it is, providing police have gates under West
   stand open so that people can distribute throughout the terrace evenly.”

Although he says the last nine words do not report him accurately, Dr Eastwood accepts the rest of that
message.

    149. In my view the provisions as to capacity in the Safety Certificate ought to have been reviewed and
altered. The unhappy situation is that the police believed even the overall figure oQOjlQOjtaJbe-too high as far
back as 1981. That was reported to the Club but apparHtlynoTtoDrEIstwood. Meanwhile, that global figure
had been rendered academic by the sub-division of the terrace which was not reflected in the Safety Certificate
at all. If proper maximum figures had been inserted.ia the certificate for each of the pens, the Club and the
police might well have been prompted to find Some means of limiting the numbers entering those petis'csther
tMn by visual monitoring. This could have been done by implementing one of Dr Eastwood’splans for totally
separate sections, turnstile to viewing area. It could have been done by insisting on sequential filling of pens at
all matches; alternatively, by counting fans into each viewing area.

The City Council
  150. That the Safety Certificate was not amended and individual capacities not reviewed cannot be laid
solely at Dr Eastwood’s door. He was, after all. consultant engineer to the Club and responsibility for the
certificate was that of the local authority. When the South Yorkshire County Council handed over to the
Sheffield City Council, the latter delegated all its powers and duties under the 1975 Act to its General Purposes
Panel. Apparently, therefore, the decision-making body on behalf of the Council was that Panel; although two
specific functions were delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal Department - the power to issue a
prohibition under section 10 of the 1975 Act and the power of entry and search under section 11 of the Act.

  151. In practice, Mr Bownes, the Council’s Chief Licensing Officer in the Administration and Legal
Department, bore the brunt of the Council’sduties under the Act.
    152. The Officer Working Party was superseded by a Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group. bu v^ H
 apart from the change of the name the system continued as before. Mr Bownes attended the inspections^            *
 and meetings of the Advisory Group together with the representatives of' the police, the fire service, the \ \ i
 department of health and consumer services, and the building engineer's division of the Council. The \
 latter was an engineer and ought therefore to have been alive to the same issues as Dr Eastwood.               \

   153. The Advisory Group seems to have worked in a very informal manner. A short passage from Mr
 Bownes' evidence gives the flavour of it:—

     “Q     Who was taking the lead in the working party as you understood it?

       A    That is a good question, sir. Leads were coming from several different directions really.
       Q    Who chaired it. if anyone?

      A     Nobody as such, sir. It was an inspection rather than a meeting as I understand it.
       Q    Who decided what should be inspected?

      A     Effectively the group itself, sir. it seemed to me. There was also some input from the Club
            representative as to. if you like, an element of direction as to what should be looked at.

      Q     Apart from the inspections the working party met, presumably, or did they onlv meet on
            inspections?

      A    No, sir, I have referred to three previous meetings.

      Q    Who took the chair when it met?

      A    I suppose it could be said that I did, to some extent.

      Q    There is no point in having inspections unless you form conclusions as a result of that inspection, is
            there?

      A    That is correct.

      Q     There must presumably have been some meet irig following the inspection at which you all sat down
            together and decided what, if anything, should be done.

      A    There was not, to my recollection, no.

      Q    How did you decide what should be done, if anything needed to be done?

      A    There were discussions on the site^articularlv in relation to barrier 144, which took place at the
           time.

      Q     Nothing more thpn that and no record anywhere of any decisions that were made?
      A    No. sir."'

The decision to remove barrier 144 was assented to on behalf of the City Council by Mr Bownes. It was not
referred to the General Purposes Panel. Whether Mr Bownes strictly had any power to assent to it is to say the
least very doubtful. But he himself admits that he was ill-equipped to do so. He knew verv little about football
grounds. He had read the file passed on from South Yorkshire County Council and assumed all had been run
satisfactorily by them.

  154. It was recorded, however, in a report which Mr Bownes drafted that “the conditions (in the Safety
Certificate) give some cause, for concern as they appear to be inadequate orinappropriate in some areas". The
mpm to the General Purposes Panel suggested that new Safety Certificate conditions should be drafted.
    155. The task of revising the Safety Certificate was begun in June 1986. In Julv 1987, a draft was sent to the
filffervice to which tKey replied in August. In September 1987, the Panel was informed that the redrafting was

                                                       26
“progressing steadily” and should be submitted to the Panel in October, The final draft was not circulated until
30 March 1989, 16 days before this disaster.
   156.    Meanwhile, the Safety Certificate has remained unamended since 1979. The enlargement of the Kop
in 1986 increased its capacity to 21,000, Although this was known and agreed by the Council it had not been
the subject of any change in the certificate which still showed the capacity of the Kop as 16,850. Mr Mackrell,
Sheffield Wednesday’sSecretary, raised the question of amendments to the Safety Certificate and in particular
with regard to the Kop in April 1987 with Eastwood and Partners but nothing resulted.

   157 Sheffield United Football Club was designated under the 1975 Act on 3 July 1984. A Safety Certificate
■fis about to be issued by South Yorkshire County Council at the time it handed over to the Sheffield City
Council on 1April 1986. Mo«           '     *1    .....
   158. The explanation given for these delays was pressure of work. Mr Bownes as Chief Licensing Officer
was responsible for 32 other licensing systems when this one was added to his burden. He had a staff of only
five. I fullv accept that the addition of further statutory- responsibilities to the already heavy workload of a local
authority with curbs on its expenditure creates problems. But it is clear that the attention given to this
important              fimrtinri     wnefnllv marienuate.

 Summary
    159 The Safetv Certificate contained no maximum figures for individual pens. There was therefore no
 sanction or provision focussing attention as to the need to limit entry to t^e pens by numbers. The layout at
 Leppings Lane as it evolved made electronic or mechanical control over numbers entering individual pens
 ^practicable if all pens were to be available. Given an important match and a capacity attendance, fans were
 likelv tocrowd into popular sections like pens 3 and 4. Those pens were likely to become overfull wellbefore
 warning came from the turnstiles that numbers were approaching the terrace maximum of 10,100. Control
tQver numbers and the avoidance of overcrowding therefore depended entirely on visual monitoring of the
crowd:




                                                          27
                                                    CHAPTER 19

                          T H E CITY COUNCIL AND T H E SAFETY CERTIFICATE

    ->q£,                             Citv Council of its duties in tvg2 rd to the Safety Certificate was inefficient and
d i l a m ^ 'l h e failure to revise or amend the certificate over the period of three yean preceding this disaster,
despite im portant cnanges in me layout oi m e grouna, was a senous oreacn oi aury. i nere were, as a result, no
r....aA __ **•=                         -'o—      tnni- r.c account of the 19?! zv.d >985 alterations fo the ground.

  287. A number of breaches of Green Guide standards were permitted and persisted eg the spacing of the
crush barriers, the width of perimeter gates and the gradient in the tunnel (1 in 6 as against the Green Guide
maximum of 1in 10).
  288. The Advisory Group lacked a proper structure: its procedure was casual and unbusinesslike. Its
accountafMty to the General Purposes Panel was ill-defined. Decisions were taken informally and too much
was left to Mr Bownes. In particular, the decision to remove barrier 144 was not referred to the Panel and ought
not to have been made.
                                                                                 Constabulary Headquarters
                     Derbyshire                                                  Butterley Hall
                                                                                 Ripley
                     Constabulary                                                Derbyshire     DE5 3 RS


                                                                                 Telephone 0773 (Riple
                                                                                 Telex 37667      Fax Ext. 2555
       The Chief Constable,                                                      Tel. Ext. 2013
       South Yorkshire Police,                                                   Ask for    Mr. P. Lord
       Police Headquarters,                                                      Our Ref
       Snig Hill,                                                                Your Ref    THQ/TFB/SJR
       SHEFFIELD.
       S3 SLY


                                                                                 11th September, 1989




         Dear Sir,

                              Re: Lord Justice Taylor1s Interim Report

                   Thank you very much             for your       letter         of 31st August,                1989,   with
         enclosure therein contained.

                   For what it is worth an enclosure copy of my initial draft, your is
         far more superior.

                                                               Yours faithfully,
                                                                     //)   „f _________




le t *     IU > .     *>*         *           ,                         Force Solicitor
                                                                for     Chief Constable




                                                                         U /v .;/                M   ill"



         PJL/MEB
         2MEB642
                                                                                       -■   ■■       :■ ■
                                                                                                            .   *




F.18                        All   correspondence   to b e   addressed   to the   Chief Constable
PL/SMW(PAR)                 P57-4                        RE-DRAFT                 17.8.89


THIS ACCORD IS MADE                 day   of    August     1989     BETWEEN   DERBY   COUNTY
FOOTBALL CLUB LTD. of The Baseball Ground, Derby (herein called "The Club”)
and THE DERBYSHIRE CONSTABULARY whose           Headquarters are at Butterley           Hall,
Ripley, Derbyshire (herein called "The Police"):


BACKGROUND


1. The Club is a member of the Football League and for many years, as                     part
of its aims and objects, has staged numerous Association Football                     Matches
from the Baseball Ground, Derby (herein called "the ground").


2. By virtue thereof    the Club has assumed         obligations and liabilities             in
law (herein    called "obligations")       to    its employees,        players,    servants,
staff and to the employees, staff, servants, directors and players of other
Football Clubs visiting the      ground, spectators and             members of the     public
and other invitees and licensees attending the ground.


3. Nothing in this accord shall affect the obligations of the Club.


4. The   obligations of    the   Club include       responsibility for         the    safety,
control and comfort of spectators and in particular, but not exclusively so
as to avoid overcrowding.


5. The purpose of -this    Accord is solely to set           out the nature, scope          and
extent of the duties      if any of the        Police to the Club       and vice versa       in
relation to the safety, control and comfort of spectators, any by reference
to overcrowding.


DUTIES OF THE POLICE


1. The   Police    shall appoint     a    senior officer      for     the time    being     the
Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) to liaise with the Club and a Ground
Commander who shall    be of the      rank of at      least Superintendent and          whose
identity shall be made known to the Club. The Ground Commander shall be the



PL/SMW(PAR)
P57-4:MS/139
senior officer                        in attendance                      at the          ground at       least two      hours        before,

during and ir»ediately after matches played.


2           The            Police shall                    ensure        that in         emergency        the Fire,      Ambul
additional Police forces may gain access to the ground and be deploye .


3. The Police shall .nan a Police                                               control point hatched yellow on the                        plan

on days when matches are played.

 4              The Police shall ensure that a Steward is positioned immediately before

 L i n g and M e d i a t e l y after matches at the
 M t e r receiving prior                                       instruction or order
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                     from .a
                                                                                                                                      fZ
                V of inspector or                              above, in emergency such                  as overcrowding or
    T           e    l t   spectactors to freely enter upon the perimeter track and the pitch.


                                             , „ „haV1 have                           the complete discretion                to order         the
        C       Thp Ground             Commander shall nave                           LU                                                       .
    ^ s t p o n l e n t of the kick off or _                                         n      t        of the match or at any                     to

        order the temporary termination of the match.


        e           The police         p   r e   s e   n   c   e   upon the         ground is primarily              to preserve law           and
            Ider           The       polio,            will         as5*        no    responsibility           for    the layout        of     the
        Oi.der»                  P                                                                                     n ot r e s p o n s i b l e
             *   its     m a i n t e n a n c e andsafetyand in  particularare not resp
        ground, xts m                               _          nd b spectators so as to avoid
        - „     fillinq of any section of tne ground.d Y                                ^
             ' ding Should in the discretion of the Ground Comander, he deem It
        overcrowding. Shoul                                 the Chief Steward, or any Steward,
        appropriate, he may direct or m s ru                 ^             in the interests of
                               ,   .«      +-he Ground                               Conuna.nder think.
                    +-aVpi such, action as une ^ uuuu                                                                                               ,


            »                                                       •r          “     . ;   r   r



            ss =—
    ■- ground or in any section of th.
                                                                   «=•              ground. Save,
                                                                                                         r r n r r .,: :
                                                                            ^              in the          qround shall         ce      ana
            obligations tospectators                                       andothers            in   the, g
            acknowledged               to have been those of the Club alone.



            pn'PTF.S OF THE CLUB




                PL/SMW(PAR)
                P57-4-.MS/139
1. Without limiting its obligations the             Club shall inter alia provide          and
maintain in good and workmanlike condition -


   (i) recording       equipment     to   contemporaneously      record    the    number    of
spectators entering the ground by reference to each entrance marked 1E ' on
the plan and to convey        electronically such information instantaneously               to
the Police Control Room and the ground control of the Club;


   (ii) an     adequate public       address     system which    can be    controlled      and
over-ridden, by the Ground Commander and which is capable of being heard                    in
the ground as a whole or in individual sections of the ground;


   (iii) crowd barrier perimeter           fences shown on the        plan which shall      be
periodically tested to ensure that they             conform with the standard set          out
in the green code;


   (iv) to     comply with     the    terms and     conditions   of the     Club's      Safety
Certificate.


2. Employ no fewer than              stewards. Such stewards shall be properly and
fully trained     as    to   their   duties and     all    stewards     shall    be    clearly
identifiable and shall be controlled and directed by the Chief Steward                     and
the Ground Commander. Such Stewards shall participate in a Training                     Scheme
to instruct     Stewards as     to their       duties in   which the    police and       other
emergency services shall provide Instructors.


3. During the course of any match to ensure that a steward is positioned at
the exit points marked 'C 1 on the plan.


4. To control and      monitor by steward and        by Club officials spectators           in
all parts of the       ground other than       those coloured blue      on the plan       and,
subject to the duty of the Police to detect and prevent crime and                     maintain
public order, the C lub shall have exclusive control over the areas coloured
red on the plan.




PL/SMW(PAR)
P57-4:MS/139
 5.   The   Club   shall   ensure       that   proper        signs   are   prominently    and
 unambiguously placed‘and maintained in good                order in the ground to    direct
 spectators to the accommodation         or part of the        ground to which they      have
paid for admission.


VARIATION OR DETERMINATION


      This accord may be varied or         amended in writing whether generally           or
for a specific occasion or occasions or           in any event may be determined          at
any time by either party.                               v



SIGNED on behalf of                 )
The Club by                         )

                                    )
in the presence of:                 )




SIGNED on behalf of                 ).
The Police by                       )
                                    )
in the presence of:                 )




PL/SMW(PAR)
P57-4:MS/139
                SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BRANCH
                        (Science    and   Technology G roup)

            Home Office
            W oodcock Hill Sandridge St Albans Hertfordshire AL4 9HQ
             Telex 267604           Fax 0727 50642          Telephone 0727 65051


Ch Supt T F Broomhead
South Yorkshire Police HQ                            Your Ref: THQ/TFB/SJR
Snigg Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY.




                                                                     18th September 1989.




Dear Sir

Thank you for your letter of 25th August asking for our assistance in implementing one of
the Taylor Report recommendations relating to the use of CCTV for safety purposes at
football grounds.

I also received a letter from Mr Anderton and I enclose my reply to him. From this you will
see that SRDB proposes to assist police forces via Mr Anderton’s committee in the way I
outlined to him.

I hope that in this way we can help you (and others) to implement the Taylor
recommendation.

                                     Yours sincerely




                                    DR P A YOUNG




cc:    F Smith, F8
       J Aldridge, SRDB
       A Ford, SRDB
       Ch Supt R Parker, PRSU.
                    SCIEN TIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BRANCH
                                   (S c ie n c e and T e c h n o l o g y G r o u p )

               Home Office
               Woodcock Hill Sandridge St Albans Hertfordshire AL4 9HQ
                Telex    267604                        Fax 0727 50642                Telephone 0727 650S1



Mr C I Anderton, QPM,
Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
PO Box 22 (S WestPDO)
Chester House
Boyer Street
Manchester M16 ORE.
                                                                                               8th September 1989


Dear Mr Anderton
Thank you for your letter of 1st September in which you asked for SRDB assistance, via
your proposed new Working Party, on the post-Hillsborough issue of CCTV to improve the
safety of the public at sporting events.

I am pleased that you value Andrew Ford’s contribution to the work of the ACPO Sub­
committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events on the use of CCTV and still photography; I
have passed your thanks on to him. Mr Ford has now completed his very extensive
involvement in the evaluation of CCTV systems at Football League grounds as our part of
the efforts to spend Football Trust money effectively. This has, of course, not only meant
committee work but also visits to football grounds and Mr Ford had to be released from his
work on a full-time basis for 12 months.


Ul     A T   J.V& |/W U H V   a m v tj   ▼ ▼ ■*•** f'-WVV             iwww. 'V»*                   ~        ------
                                                                                                                 -

feel that we may become involved in safety surveys of all the football grounds and in the
evaluation of tenders for ensuing CCTV safety systems.                             'r u   ~




Our view is that we would be happy to work with your new Working Party to develop
appropriate standards for safety systems in conjunction with the CCTV Industry (assuming
systems can be found that meet operational requirements). Mr J Aldridge, head of Optics
Group, SRDB, has very extensive CCTV experience and so I propose that both he and
Mr Ford attend the meeting on 20th September. No doubt many issues will be aired and we
can then better plan how we can take matters forward.

                                                            Yours sincerely




                                                            DR P A YOUNG

 cc:    F Smith, F8
        A Holt, SRDB
        J Aldridge, SRDB
        A Ford, SRDB
        Ch Supt R Parker, PRSU.
Barnsley Metropolitan Borough. Couucil

Ee-ndray Street
Barnslav S7(b 21it-




     'Dear Hr'Hutchinson

     I .have pleasure in iorwordiog two copier of toe aioattaj of the
     mooting .held at fdie South lor'dsaire Police Sports & Portal Club,
        'a -                       ■                      '         ■
                                                                    .■; o^o: be
     grateful if c a o y could bo passed to poor represtintafri ves, Messrs


     lo tents ai too dpydox cacotaiBandafcicaar 1 believe wo are Making        .
     excellent progress and this las been trade possible by the high
     degree of anderatanding and co o p e r a t i o n between oaraelves,

     Pernaps on my behalf pot would be kind enough to idtaal Hit -Harper
     and Hr Jackson tor attending tote meeting and for' thorx
     contribution.                          '

     If at any tiae you feel 1 can be of assistance,- please'do'not.
     hesitate to get in touch.

     Yours sincerely '      '                    •                         ;
Dear hr Morton

i nave yieeerre. re. t orisiareing two coytos ofc toe eeotottot et the
meet lag held at the dyertb Yorkshire Police Sport;; & Social Club,
Niagara R e a d , dheffleld5 ;;a b e e d e y to dootoeoet b M l , and would be
graceful if they could fee passed to ycerr representatives, Messrs
Crosby aod deloyo               ■

la tetee ^f t o day lor iecomt»fi«ati.»as 1 believe «o ore making
excellent progrete and this tCiS ol?,;n ciage yoeeibie by. the high
'degree of leioetoo oedrsg erei co-oyeration between ourselves,'

Perhays on ny oorelf roe world re bled enough te tdeek dr Crosby
and dr dairy for Attending tee seet: tag'and for their contribution.

       aay trite yoa teei. I car os at aasistaace» pxeasg do not


Yours sincerely             .
year Mr Webster

I bane pleasure in forwarding two copies of the electee of the
aeccinp held at tic Scats. yorK,p,ire v c . l i . c s pP,
                                                        G rts b Social Club,
Niagara Ibxnk Sccifieid, oc honday it] September 1131,.ami would be-
graters! if they cocit be s e e s to poos eop>nn.onfo2l ices * Messrs
hlnsi and Boimese

Jc terns oi the leyier recnreasodac.n:eis I believe tec ate Baking
ec.ee 1,lent oropseos and pels sac been aace possible op tie high
degree oi eaterscenting and co-operaLton becweoo os.rse.lves,

oeteeps on M y eeself you weald be sire.! emeigb oe tbenk. Hr Ward
and St Bonnes let attending tee aoetlng and lor their contribution.

It at see/ tree you ieet I. cac be ot sssisicnore» pieoee be not
hesitate to get in touch,
                                .


beets sincerely
1 have pleasure in fotrrmirna (nree copies of the-raiBitter of the
meeting bcsih at the forth Yorkshire Police Sports 1 Serial Club,
Niagara load, SSrf field,, on Monday Id September ISSS, and would be
grateful if. they could be passed to your re present a I:Ives, Messrs
Harvey, Paxton and Scdllnywrod,

in- berms of the Taylor rerrrmaaBdatb.4«is I 'bcrbierc we are taafcing
excellent. progress and this bar bten ssade possible by the high
            oc                             .,«!        „ . SCLW :,

Perhaps on sy behalf.you world be bind enough to thank the
geritlefflfitt for attending the meeting and for their rrrh;tibutirn.
'
If at any time you feel I can be of assistance, please do not
i i e s i t a t r 't o g e t i n t o u c h .

Yours sittcrrely
    City of Sheffield            M etropolitan District                                    w m t f            ■'
                                                                                                                7'       / 7        /   r
    Roger Pensam, FCiS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                   Administration and Legal Department
    Head of Department
                                                                                          Town Hall,
                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

    Our reference    AH/DG
    Your reference   DCC/JEL
    Date             28 September 1989




P Hayes Esq QPM LLBMA
Deputy C hief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 SLY

Dear Mr Hayes,

RE: MEETING - MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989

I thank you for your le tte r of the 21 September, concerning this topic, which I
received on the 27 September, and for the enclosed copy minutes.

I can confirm that I have passed on your thanks to both Mr Ward and Mr Bownes
and I would like to take this opportunity o f thanking you for the o ffer contained
in the final paragraph of your com m unication and you may rest assured that I will
take up that proposal if the opportunity should arise.

Y o u r s s i n c e r e l y , ____________________________




M W eb ster —       ~
A cting Head of Department




                             For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring...    .TMP.lfi. . . . . . . . . (STD   Code 0742)
                                                             Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
    DCC    D R A F T   MINUTES FOR APPROVAL» WfiASS


                                                      •' "               ^ > />£XA<^ J c ^
                      MINUTES OF MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES     "'J       ^A£*4*-v--/     -J'

                                RE. THE TAYLOR REPORT                   ” /
             HELD AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA
                         AT 2.00 PM, MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989

                                                                                 Zj ^ , / r(Tt~ XZ^4'


    Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
    Mr T F Broomhead, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
    Superintendent Sleath
    Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Hellewell and Warne
    Inspector Townend
    Mr Roger Harvey          )
    Mr Tony Paxton          ) representing Doncaster MBC
    Mr Stephen Collingwood   )
    Mr Robert Crosby       )
    Mr D M Daley           )   representing Rotherham MBC
    Mr Alec Harper           )
    Mr Ken Jackson           ) representing Barnsley MBC
    Mr Ward                )
    Mr David Bownes        )   representing Sheffield City




    The Chairman opened the meeting by explaining that whilst local authorities
    tend to act as a discrete organisation it is necessary for South Yorkshire
    Police officers to serve throughout the Force area which includes five
    football league clubs representing the four football league divisions. There
    is therefore the need for some area of commonality.

    The aim of this meeting therefore is two-fold. First, to discuss areas of
    common interest and, second to strengthen the relationship of the South
    Yorkshire Police with the four separate licensing authorities for football
    league grounds in the area.

    The Chairman then explained to the meeting the position of the South Yorkshire
    Police subsequent to the Taylor Inquiry. He highlighted the various inquiries


•
     and investigations that were taking place in relation to the incidents of
    15 April 1989.


    Police Facilitation Team

    The Chairman pointed out that he was nominated by the Chief Constable to
    oversee the implementation of the Taylor recommendations as far as the South
    Yorkshire Police was concerned. Of the 43 recommendations, 11 had to be in
    place before 19 August. The Chairman explained how the in-force
    implementation team was constituted and how it functioned. It was recorded
    that each of the 11 recommendations had in fact been implemented before the
    start of the football season and that written agreements with each of the five
    Clubs were in being.

    He explained that the centralised operation based on Headquarters, that was
    necessary at first, was now being increasingly delegated to the Divisional
    responsibility to implement the remaining recommendations of Lord Justice
    Taylor.
                                    -   2 -



The Chairman pointed out that so far our dealings with the various football
clubs in the area had been very positive and he invited comment from local
authority members on this fact.

Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) pointed out that at Barnsley most of the
recommendations are already covered. The Chairman pointed out that
computerised turnstiles are an objective of Barnsley Football Club. Mr Harper
agreed but pointed out that the Taylor recommendations allow for manual
monitoring and that the Barnsley stance - that they were complying with the
recommendations - was a sound one.

The Chairman emphasised the need for both ourselves and local authorities to
encourage Clubs to comply with safety requirements. Mr Harper agreed pointing
out that often Clubs devote their resources to the football team to the
detriment of their stadium. Mr Harper suggested however that a conciliatory
and co-operative approach to the football clubs is likely to reap greater
rewards.

Mr Paxton made the point that he would not wish to see a dilution of the
single contact arrangements that existed, with local authorities as that
single contact, before the Taylor Report. He pointed out that the South
Yorkshire Police had necessarily been active in pursuing implementation of the
Taylor recommendations and feared that the local authorities co-ordinating
position may be overlooked.

The Chairman thanked Mr Paxton for this point and agreed to discuss the
process for future implementation at a subsequent in-force implementation team
meeting when Mr Paxton's views would be taken into account.


Ground Safety Certificates

The Chairman asked whether the agreements reached with football clubs should
be included in the ground Safety Certificates. Mr Paxton stated that
Doncaster are now considering re-writing the Safety Certificate (in
conjunction with their Legal & Admin Department) to take account of matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

None of the other representatives offered a view about the status of Safety
Certificates.

Mr Paxton raised the question of 'advisory groups' and how they might
influence licensing and certification.  The Chairman took up the subject of
advisory groups and asked the various local authority representatives how they
foresaw the constitution of their group. Would it be an extension of the
existing officer working party or would it be something different, and in
addition to, that working party?

Mr Paxton and Mr Harper, representing Doncaster and Barnsley respectively, saw
the advisory group as an additional group outside of the officer working party
which would meet at infrequent but regular intervals under a neutral chairman
who would then convey that group's views to the officer working party.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that this matter amongst many
others was not resolved. He had submitted a report to members asking for
direction in certain areas. The nature of the advisory group was one of those
areas. Mr Ward’s personal view was that it may well be a two-tier structure
                                    - 3 -


along the lines envisaged by Barnsley and Doncaster and pointed out that it
would be unfortunate if technical officers were out-voted by Club and
supporter members of such an advisory group.

Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) said that the officer working group in Rotherham had
always included a representative of the Club who might not necessarily be
invited to meetings if the chairman of the working group felt it appropriate.

The position therefore is that Barnsley and Doncaster envisage the^advisory
group as separate from the officer working group, Rotherham envisage it as an
extension of the officer working group and, Sheffield have yet to resolve the
matter"                 c, A
Mr Harper asked if      Chairman could clear up the ambiguity with relation to^
the advisory group 1^ The Chairman pointed out that an ACPO Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is pursuing this question with the Treasury
Solicitors and the Chairman agreed to report back to the local authorities if
and when this wa’S^resolved.
                A

Delegation of Licensing Authority

The Chairman raised this matter by pointing out that Mr Webster of the
Sheffield City Council had written to say that no individual officer
representing the Council had any authority to act without full Council
approval.

Mr Harper, representing the Planning Department at Barnsley MBC, stated that
all matters were officially delegated to his Department by the members there.

Mr Paxton of the Planning Department at Doncaster MBC, pointed out that
technical matters are delegated to the Director of Planning and procedural
matters to the Director of Legal & Admin Department. He was hopeful that all
matters might become the responsibility of one Department.

Mr Crosby, representing the Environmental Health Department of Rotherham MBC,
pointed out that all powers are delegated to Environmental Health officers.

The Chairman's concern in this matter was that in the case of urgent need
there must be someone empowered to revoke or suspend the Safety Certificate as
required by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) stated that he had already appreciated the
need for genuine emergency powers and had flagged this need for members'
decision.

The representatives of Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham pointed out that
emergency powers are delegated to themselves.


Ambulance Dispute

The Chairman asked what action the licensing authorities intended to take in
the event of SYMAS being unable to provide an ambulance on stand-by at future
football matches. Mr Paxton (Doncaster MBC) stated that this was an agenda
item for a meeting of the Authority next week although he did not anticipate
many future matches where the crowd would reach 5,000.
Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested the ambulance position would not make a lot
of difference in his mind and he would advise allowing the game to go ahead.
He went on to express the view that this recommendation was one of several in
the Taylor Report that, in his view, were unnecessary.

The counter view was expressed by Mr Paxton who thought it a very necessary
recommendation.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that in Sheffield it would be a
decision for members of the Council but his personal view was that in such a
situation where an ambulance could not be provided the Safety Certificate
would be revoked.

Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) pointed out that the need at Rotherham is marginal
with crowds hovering around the 5,000 mark. He determined to look at each
individual match where this problem was likely to occur.


Concluding Remarks

The Chairman, in drawing the meeting to a close, thanked local authority
representatives for attending and asked if there was anything that the police
were doing that the local authorities would wish otherwise or anything that
the local authorities would like to see the police undertaking in relation to
the safety certification of football grounds. None of the members expressed
a view.

Mr Paxton thanked the Chairman for arranging the meeting. He said he felt
heartened by the fact that there was so much common ground between the various
local authorities and the police.

The Chairman asked if the local authority representatives would like a meeting
to be arranged on a regular basis. Representatives of Doncaster, Sheffield
and Rotherham thought such a meeting annually would be very useful (July was
suggested as a most appropriate time). Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested he
saw no benefit in such meetings as the procedures in Rotherham, Sheffield and
Doncaster were of little concern to the safety certification of Barnsley
Football Club.




There being no further business the m e eti ng closed at 3.30 pm.
                    MINUTES OF MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES
                              RE. THE TAYLOR REPORT
           HELD AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA
                       AT 2.00 PM, MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989


Present:                                                      ^

Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
Mr T F Broomhead, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendent Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Hellewell and Warne
Inspector Townend
Mr Roger Harvey          )
Mr Tony Paxton           ) representing Doncaster MBC
Mr Stephen Collingwood   )
Mr Robert Crosby       )
Mr D M Daley           )   representing Rotherham MBC
Mr Alec Harper           )
Mr Ken Jackson           ) representing Barnsley MBC
Mr Ward                )
Mr David Bownes        )   representing Sheffield City




The Chairman opened the meeting by explaining that whilst local authorities
tend to act as a discrete organisation it is necessary for South Yorkshire
Police officers to serve throughout the Force area which includes five
football league clubs representing the four football league divisions.  There
is therefore the need for some area of commonality.

The aim of this meeting therefore is two-fold.  First, to discuss areas of
common interest and, second to strengthen the relationship of the South
Yorkshire Police with the four separate licensing authorities for football
league grounds in the area.

The Chairman then explained to the meeting the position of the South Yorkshire
Police subsequent to the Taylor Inquiry. He highlighted the various inquiries
and investigations that were taking place in relation to the incidents of
15 April 1989.


Police Facilitation Team

The Chairman pointed out that he was nominated by the Chief Constable to
oversee the implementation of the Taylor recommendations as far as the South
Yorkshire Police was concerned.  Of the 43 recommendations, 11 had to be in
place before 19 August.  The Chairman explained how the in-force
implementation team was constituted and how it functioned.  It was recorded
that each of the 11 recommendations had in fact been implemented before the
start of the football season and that written agreements with each of the five
Clubs were in being.

He explained that the centralised operation based on Headquarters, that was
necessary at first, was now being increasingly delegated to the Divisional
responsibility to implement the remaining recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.
                                     - 2 -



The Chairman pointed out that so far our dealings with the various football
clubs in the area had been very positive and he invited comment from local
authority members on this fact.

Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) pointed out that at Barnsley most of the
recommendations are already covered.  The Chairman pointed out that
computerised turnstiles are an objective of Barnsley Football Club. Mr Harper
agreed but pointed out that the Taylor recommendations allow for manual
monitoring and that the Barnsley stance - that they were complying with the
recommendations - was a sound one.

The Chairman emphasised the need for both ourselves and local authorities to
encourage Clubs to comply with safety requirements. Mr Harper agreed pointing
out that often Clubs devote their resources to the football team to the
detriment of their stadium. Mr Harper suggested however that a conciliatory
and co-operative approach to the football clubs is likely to reap greater
rewards.

Mr Paxton made the point that he would not wish to see a dilution of the
single contact arrangements that existed, with local authorities as that
single contact, before the Taylor Report. He pointed out that the South
Yorkshire Police had necessarily been active in pursuing implementation of the
Taylor recommendations and feared that the local authorities co-ordinating
position may be overlooked.

The Chairman thanked Mr Paxton for this point and agreed to discuss the
process for future implementation at a subsequent in-force implementation team
meeting when Mr Paxton's views would be taken into account.


Ground Safety Certificates

The Chairman asked whether the agreements reached with football clubs should
be included in the ground Safety Certificates. Mr Paxton stated that
Doncaster are now considering re-writing the Safety Certificate (in
conjunction with their Legal & Admin Department) to take account of matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

None of the other representatives offered a view about the status of Safety
Certificates.

Mr Paxton raised the question of 'advisory groups' and how they might
influence licensing and certification.  The Chairman took up the subject of
advisory groups and asked the various local authority representatives how they
foresaw the constitution of their group. Would it be an extension of the
existing officer working party or would it be something different, and in
addition to, that working party?

Mr Paxton and Mr Harper, representing Doncaster and Barnsley respectively, saw
the advisory group as an additional group outside of the officer working party
which would meet at infrequent but regular intervals under a neutral chairman
who would then convey that group's views to the officer working party.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that this matter amongst many
others was not resolved.  He had submitted a report to members asking for
direction in certain areas.  The nature of the advisory group was one of those
areas. Mr Ward's personal view was that it may well be a two-tier structure
                                        - 3 -


    along the lines envisaged by Barnsley and Doncaster and pointed out that it
    would be unfortunate if technical officers were out-voted by Club and
    supporter members of such an advisory group.

    Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) said that the officer working group in Rotherham had
    always included a representative of the Club who might not necessarily be
    invited to meetings if the chairman of the working group felt it appropriate.

    The position therefore is that Barnsley and Doncaster envisage the advisory
    group as separate from the officer working group, Rotherham envisage it as an
    extension of the officer working group and, Sheffield have yet to resolve the
    matter.

    Mr Harper asked if the Chairman could clear up the ambiguity with relation to
    the intended constitution of the advisory group as far as the Tribunal members
    were concerned.  The Chairman pointed out that an ACPO Sub-Committee on
    Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is pursuing this question with the Treasury


•
    Solicitors and the Chairman agreed to report back to the local authorities if
    and when this is resolved.



    Delegation of Licensing Authority

    The Chairman raised this matter by pointing out that Mr Webster of the
    Sheffield City Council had written to say that no individual officer
    representing the Council had any authority to act without full Council
    approval.

    Mr Harper, representing the Planning Department at Barnsley MBC, stated that
    all matters were officially delegated to his Department by the members there.

    Mr Paxton of the Planning Department at Doncaster MBC, pointed out that
    technical matters are delegated to the Director of Planning and procedural
    matters to the Director of Legal & Admin Department.  He was hopeful that all
    matters might become the responsibility of one Department.



•
     Mr Crosby, representing the Environmental Health Department of Rotherham MBC,
    pointed out that all powers are delegated to Environmental Health officers.

    The Chairman's concern in this matter was that in the case of urgent need
    there must be someone empowered to revoke or suspend the Safety Certificate as
    required by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

    Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) stated that he had already appreciated the
    need for genuine emergency powers and had flagged this need for members'
    decision.

    The representatives of Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham pointed out that
    emergency powers are delegated to themselves.


    Ambulance Dispute

    The Chairman asked what action the licensing authorities intended to take in
    the event of SYMAS being unable to provide an ambulance on stand-by at future
    football matches. Mr Paxton (Doncaster MBC) stated that this was an agenda
    item for a meeting of the Authority next week although he did not anticipate
    many future matches where the crowd would reach 5,000.
                                           - 4 -



    Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested the ambulance position would not make a lot
    of difference in his mind and he would advise allowing the game to go ahead.
    He went on to express the view that this recommendation was one of several in
    the Taylor Report that, in his view, were unnecessary.

    The counter view was expressed by Mr Paxton who thought it a very necessary
    recommendation.

    Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that in Sheffield it would be a
    decision for members of the Council but his personal view was that in such a
    situation where an ambulance could not be provided the Safety Certificate
    would be revoked.

    Mr Crosby (Rotherham MBC) pointed out that the need at Rotherham is marginal
    with crowds hovering around the 5,000 mark. He determined to look at each
    individual match where this problem was likely to occur.

•
    Concluding Remarks

    The Chairman, in drawing the meeting to a close, thanked local authority
    representatives for attending and asked if there was anything that the police
    were doing that the local authorities would wish otherwise or anything that
    the local authorities would like to see the police undertaking in relation to
    the safety certification of football grounds. None of the members expressed
    a view.

    Mr Paxton thanked the Chairman for arranging the meeting. He said he felt
    heartened by the fact that there was so much common ground between the various
    local authorities and the police.

    The Chairman asked if the local authority representatives would like a meeting
    to be arranged on a regular basis. Representatives of Doncaster, Sheffield
    and Rotherham thought such a meeting annually would be very useful (July was
    suggested as a most appropriate time). Mr Harper (Barnsley MBC) suggested he


*
    saw no benefit in such meetings as the procedures in Rotherham, Sheffield and
    Doncaster were of little concern to the safety certification of Barnsley
    Football Club.




    There being no further business the m e e ti ng cl osed at 3.30 pm.
FOOTBALL GROUNDS


USE OF COMMAND CHANNEL


BACKGROUND


Radio communication at football grounds is provided by a UHF scheme                                                   operating
on     one   of     the        4     available              emergency          frequencies.         These frequencies are
intended to be shared by all forces and whilst there are                                             limitations        to the
range of transmission there is a need to consider neighbouring forces                                                  when any
of the frequencies are taken into use.


The anomaly of using 'emergency' frequencies for routine planned events,                                                      such
as     football         matches,           is recognised by the Directorate of Telecommunication.
The national            allocation              of        all    radio     frequencies         is     controlled        by the
Department         of     Trade           and Industry and the police service has to compete with
all other users for a share of what is a finite resource.                                              Because        there     is
only     limited         use        for     football             matches        in    terms of hours each week it is
difficult for the Directorate of Telecommunications to justify the                                                allocation
of     additional         frequencies.                     It is therefore necessary to consider carefully
the need for a second or command channel at football grounds.


Because the 4 emergency frequencies are to be                                        shared    nationally        it      is not
possible      to        install           any        of     them    on     a    permanent       basis.    We can install
permanent equipment and whilst the effect may be the same it is                                             necessary          to
maintain      such        a        stance       to        keep     within       the regulatory requirement of the
Directorate of Telecommunications.


OPERATIONAL USE


It must be recognised that there are insufficient                                       frequencies       to     provide        2
discrete channels for every ground if there is more than one game taking place
and the Force is to retain one channel                                   for    a    genuine     emergency       should        an
incident develop.
The   effect       of channel sharing creates a possibility for interference between
grounds, not only within the Force, but with surrounding Forces.


Routine use of a command channel should be avoided.


To minimise disruption from surrounding grounds or Forces a                            radio    discipline
is essential to identify messages to particular events.


Because     of     the potential interaction with surrounding Forces it is essential
that use of the emergency frequencies is co-ordinated.                            To achieve this ground
commanders        should        advise    HQ       Communications       Department    of   their     channel
requirement        4     days    before        a    game   to   allow      for   consultation      with   our
neighbours.


MOTOROLA RADIOS


Use   of    a     command        channel in addition to the policing channel is to maximum
advantage if the scan facility is used.It                       is   clearly         necessary for        all
personnel        using     the     command channel to understand                 its operation. Training
should be undertaken at local level.                       It   is   not    considered     necessary      for
formal     training        to be arranged but the assistance of HQ Communications staff
should be sought whenever necessary.


It is advisable to carry out a series of transmission before                           every       game   to
prove the equipment and the knowledge of the users.
FOOTBALL GROUNDS - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM


POLICE REQUIREMENT


CONTROL


The system should be independent of any other telephone installation.


The system must be operated from a control position in the police control room
at the ground.


The controller         must    have   a   display     which         indicates    the    status       of     all
telephones       on the system and those telephones which are interconnected at any
time.


All calls from a telephone must be routed                 to        the    controller    in    the        first
instance.




CONNECTIONS


The     system   must     be    capable   of connecting the police control room with any
telephone on      the     network,    either     singly        or     in   any   combination         at    the
discretion of the controller.


The     controller      must be able to call one or more telephones on the system and
have an indication on the control panel when a response is made by                             individual
handsets being lifted from their cradle.


Notification      of    an     incoming   call   at    the      control       position must be by an
illuminated display with an associated audible warning                        which     is    capable       of
being    controlled in volume and disabled by operator intervention.                          There must
be a display to indicate that the audible tone has been disabled.


The system must allow any telephone to be connected to any other telephone                                  or
combination        of       telephones,    but    such     connection      must   be made through the
controllers position and with his intervention.


The system       must allow for a number of such interconnections                   to    be     made    and
suppliers        shouldindicate the cost associated with the second                      and subsequent
such facility.


The controller must be capable of interrupting                      such    connections,       either     to
listen and talk to the parties involved or to disconnect if necessary.


TAPE RECORDING


There     should      be     a   capability      to   record    all activity on the system which
involves the control             position.        Cost     should   be     specified     for     providing
additional       recording facilities for connections between individual telephones
which have been linked by the controller.


TELEPHONES


The system must be capable of change by re-locating                        telephones     to     different
locations        in     or around the ground.         Costs should be given foradding further
telephones       to the system, including any modification to thecontrol                       position.
The location of telephones will be determined with police consultation.


Telephones sited in public areas must be of vandal proof design.                           The     handset
should    be     in     a    recessed     position       to prevent accidental removal and there
should be a reasonable pull required to take it into                       operational      use.         The
handset must not be in a locked cabinet.


Telephones located in secure areas can be of conventional design.                           The handset
must be designed to provide               maximum     elimination     of    ambient      noise     and   be
capable of single handed operation.


Removal     of    the       handset     from   the    cradle   position will be the only action
necessary to activate the call alarm at the controllers position.
Each telephone in a public    area   must   have   an   associated    light   which    is
illuminated when a call is initiated by the controller.        Telephones located in
remote areas must also have a second light fitted in a more prominent position
to   that   at the telephone point which is visible.      The light signal should be
blue and flashing and be eliminated as soon as the handset is lifted.


Telephones in public areas should be in yellow cabinets and          marked   with    the
word 'EMERGENCY'.


Telephones in secure areas should be clearly marked 'EMERGENCY'.
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               Ref:      OPS/RW/SJR
From:   A/Superintendent Waring - Operations    Division   Station/DESfftX HQ Operations
To:     Deputy Chief Constable, Mr. Hayes                  ^             21 September 1989


        SUBJECT:     IMPLEMENTATION TEAM - RECOMMENDATIONS 3 1 . 3 2 , 33 & 31*


        The Superintendent - Operations Division, was tasked with looking at
        the above numbered recommendations from the Taylor Report. I report as
        follows:-

        NUMBER OF RADIO CHANNELS

        For some time officers policing Sheffield United's ground have been
        experimenting with a seperate command channel where officers of an
        agreed level, say Inspector and above, can communicate with each other
        on an alternative channel from that which is controlling the Police
        Operation generally.   The suggestion was that in times of crisis this
        command channel would remain relatively free from transmission, so that
        executive decisions could be made and passed out to be acted upon
        without being jammed on an overloaded operational channel.

        Trials have continued at Sheffield United*s ground, but have also taken
        place at Sheffield Wednesday's ground, and at Barnsley.     The Officers
        who have conducted these experiments feel that the availability of the
        alternative command channel is of significant use to them.     It has to
        be said though that in the matches where it has been tried, in the main
        it has been under-used.   It would seem that in a normal match where all
        goes well, this will usually be the case.         Certainly the general
        feeling is that the availability of this alternate channel, where the
        Officers in Command can communicate with each other in an uninterrupted
        fashion, is a good thing.

        The only points against such a system are firstly the routine use of
        emergency channels is not to be encouraged as a matter of usual
        practice.    Emergency channels should be kept available for emergency
        use.    Secondly, it can happen that where a radio is scanning two
        channels, that the priority channel when activated will block out what
        was a very important message on the other channel.   Radio engineers do
        not favour the routine use of scanning two channels.

        LAND-LINES AND PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS

        The question of land-line schemes and public address systems has been
        addressed by visits to each ground in the County.  All the grounds have
        a public address system of one quality or another and enhancements to
        that system have been suggested where required.    With regard to land-
        line schemes, the points where land-line outlets are desirable, have
        been identified, but the technical ability of the land-line scheme is
        far from simple.    Whether or not the system should be exclusive for
        Police use or be joined to the Club circuit has been discussed.     The
        general view is that the system should be exclusive to the Police and
        that firm control should be exercised from the Police Control Room.
Should for instance individual telephones be able to contact each other
without going through the Control Room, should there be telephones with
dials, so that a particular extension can be chosen.     Questions like
these have been addressed and it would seem that a direct link to the
Police Control Room without a dial, the addition of some sort of
Conference facility so that several extensions can be addressed from
the Control Room and a simple method of achieving this are all
desirable.

The question of vandal-proofing these telephones has also been raised,
as some of them would be in positions where although desirable they
would not be able to be supervised all the time.      It has also been
suggested that what we are talking about is not necessarily a telephone
system, but an intercom and this is something that should be looked at
from a technical point of view.

An overview of individual ground is shown below.


SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB - SHEFFIELD

The Sheffield Wednesday Ground at Hillsborough has an excellent public
address system, with very many speakers in the ground, existing ones
are shown on the attached plans.

To enhance the system the Sub-Divisional Commander has identified 5
additional places where he would like speakers to be.  One of these is
outside the ground and the rest are inside.   Zone facility and Police
override are already available.

With regard to land-line systems, 20 key points have been identified
and are shown on the enclosed map.   The majority of these are inside
the ground on the lower level, with 3 being on the upper levels inside
the South, West and North Stands.

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB - SHEFFIELD

This football ground does have a PA system but for some time it has
been recognised that this should be modernised and the present internal
system should have an external system also installed.      Negotiations
have been on-going between the Club and the Division and several
letters have been exchanged on the subject.     The latest position is
shown on the attached papers and in fact the Club has now agreed to
accept a tender for the work to be carried out.  Incidentally, the cost
is some £ 2 5 ,0 0 0 .

With regard to land-line systems, the Sub-Division have identified 28
key points and these are shown on the attached plan.   Briefly, as well
as perimeter track and turnstile blocks, emergency services reception
area, casualty clearing station, players tunnel, referees room, first
aid  room,   are  included.     Present  at this   site   meeting  were
representatives of British Telecom and GPT (a company made up of GEC
and Plessey) and they have undertaken to come up with a specification
for proposed installation within six weeks.
 ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB - ROTHERHAM

 The public address system at Millmoor is only two years old, but
 certain improvements are required.    The current system is inside the
 ground only and a further 3 speakers are required, 2 being at the front
 of the ground and 1 in Millmoor Lane.   The system is currently capable
 of being zoned and there is a Police override facility.          It is
 apparently the case, however, that there is some loss of volume on
 transmission from Police Control and this is being looked at and has
 been raised with the Club.

With regard to a land-line system, 15 key points have been identified
and are shown on the attached plan.   They include the playing area,
referee room,  casualty clearing station,   gymnasium and turnstile
blocks.

BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB - BARNSLEY

The existing public address system at Oakwell is considered to be very
good and is capable of being zoned and allows each side of the ground
to be controlled independently or in any desired combination. A recent
check of the system during match conditions proved it to be effective
within the stadium.    The attached plans show existing and proposed
improvements to the system and these are basically to increase coverage
outside the ground.    This amounts to 6 extra speakers, which again
should be zoned to allow persons outside the ground to be addressed.

With regard to the land-line system, the survey has identified 16
points where these are desirable.      These include first aid room,
briefing room, detention room, perimeter track, referees room, players
tunnel and other parts of the stands. It is again noted that some of
these locations are accessible to the general public and the question
of vandal-proof telephones is raised.

DONCASTER ROVERS - DONCASTER

A survey has been conducted at this ground and the Sub-Division draw
attention to the fact that Doncaster Rovers with its small capacity
crowd and low normal attendances, may not merit the full implementation
of land-line and public address systems.    The possibility of problems
arising however, if of course recognised and the following is a summary
of what are seen to be reasonable recommendations.

With regard to the public address system, this is controlled from a
tannoy room situated at the rear of the main stand.    This is manned by
a member of the Belle Vue staff throughout the stadium being opened and
there is a manual override for the Police which is situated in the
Police Operations Box.  There is also a direct telephone link from the
Police Operations Box to the tannoy room.     Existing speakers are all
directed inside the ground, although messages from those speakers can
be heard immediately outside the ground.     However, it is considered
that these are not satisfactory for persons waiting to enter the ground
or in the car park.

Two extra speakers facing into the car park are suggested, along with 2
further speakers at strategic points inside the ground.     Because the
system is so small and even when extended would be relatively small,
zoning of the system may well not arise.
    The current telephone system at Belle Vue is that the Police Room has a
    South  Yorkshire   Police  internal  telephone   line  and  the Police
    Observation Post has a telephone connected to the Doncaster Rovers
    switchboard, one of which is in the referees room.

    The recommendations made are that a South Yorkshire line should be put
    into the Police Observations Post, which in case of an emergency would
    become the Command Post because it does have a view of the ground. The
    following six points are considered essential for an internal land-line
    system.   Observation post, exterior of main stand (car park area),
    referees tunnel to pitch area and three allocated to the perimeter
    track.  These are considered to be the essential points.   Other points
    which have been considered, are a fourth on the perimeter track and one
    in the Police Room.

    HAND SIGNALS

    As reported to the last meeting of the Implementation Group, the Public
    Order Forward Planning Unit at Scotland Yard were asked to look into
    the question of hand signals.     Superintendent Revill-Johnson visited
#   the Force during early September and some of the requirements and
    difficulties were discussed with him.

    To be effective, hand signals in a crowd situation were limited to
    shoulder height or above and Mr. Revill-Johnson explained that on a
    national basis the situation was further complicated because many
    Control Rooms had one-way glass which would make messages difficult to
    acknowledge and other Control Rooms did not have a complete view of all
    the inside of football grounds.       Large areas would therefore be
    obscured should an officer be attempting to hand signal towards the
    Control Room.    Despite these accepted difficulties, he undertook to
    continue the work and report to the Chairman of the ACPO Sub-Committee
    on Public Order, Mr. Hatfield, the Chief Constable of Nottinghamshire.

    The latest position is that six hand signals have been devised and
    these will be taken forward through the Public Order Sub-Committee to
    ACPO General Purposes Committee for ACPO approval, after consultation
    with members. The six messages which have been chosen a r e :-

    1.      Open Gates
    2.      Close Gates
    3-      Cutting Gear Required
    4.      Crowd Distress
    5.      Assistance Required
    6.      Message Received and Understood




    A/Superintender
                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                     Ref:
    From:        Acting       Superintendent           Beal                          Statk>n/Dept:Ha m m e r t o n     Road
    To:                                                                              Date:          „ „
                 Chief      Superintendent           Nesbit                                         2   September          1989

                                                                                                                                  i
               SUBJECT:         IMPLEMENTATION TEAM - ASSESSMENT OF P.A. AND
                                TELEPHONE REQUIRMENTS AT S.W.F.C.



               A t t a c h e d h e r e t o a r e m a p s s h o w i n g the p o s i t i o n s of s p e a k e r s
               s e r v i n g the p u b l i c a d d r e s s s y s t e m at H i l l s b o r o u g h , a d d i t i o n a l
               s p e a k e r s t h a t a r e r e q u i r e d a n j the p r o p o s e d s i t i n g of t e l e p h o n e
               l i n k s as r e c o m m e n d e d in the I n t e r i m R e p o r t o f J u s t i c e T a y l o r .

               T h e s e p l a n s w e r e r e q u e s t e d b y the      D e p u t y C h i e f C o n s t a b l e at
               an I m p l e m e n t a t i o n T e a m M e e t i n g on    T h u r s d a y 31 A u g u s t 1989.

               In   summary :

               One a d d i t i o n a l    s p e a k e r is r e q u i r e d o u t s i d e t u r n s t i l e s 7 7 - 8 8 ;
               One a d d i t i o n a l    s p e a k e r is r e q u i r e d at the r e a r of the N o r t h
               S t a n d , n e a r to     the P o l i c e Room;
               One a d d i t i o n a l    s p e a k e r is r e q u i r e d a d j a c e n t to G a t e *B * ;
               One a d d i ti o n a l     s p e a k e r is r e q u i r e d a d j a c e n t to G a t e 'C'
               O n e a d d i t i o n a l s p e a k e r is r e q u i r e d on th e N o r t h W e s t e l e v a t e d
               s e c t i o n to s e r v i c e the L e p p i n g s L a n e t e r r a c e s .

               Total      - 5 additional           speakers.

               So   f a r as t e l e p h o n e l i n k s are c o n c e r n e d , a s y s t e m p r o v i d i n g
               20   t e l e p h o n e p o i n t s w o u l d be s u f f i c i e n t a n d the p r o p o s e d s i t i n g
               of   e a c h t e l e p h o n e is s h o w n on the e n c l o s e d m a p s ,

               I a s k t h a t t h i s r e p o r t be f o r w a r d e d to C h i e f I n s p e c t o r B e t t i s o n ,
               H e a d q u a r t e r s C a r e e r D e v e l o p m e n t D e p a r t m e n t , fo r the i n f o r m a t i o n
               o f the D e p u t y C h i e f C o n s t a b l e at the n e x t m e e t i n g of the
               I m p l e m e n t a t i o n Team.




                   upe f
             ^ < SSuperintendent



           ©        <3l

                                                                         o u i




                - 6 SEP 1989
Gen/2
        C HSF S U P E R I N T I N D E f *T

        a -rfujfofcs & m *
                                                                                                        Main        Police        Access


     Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                             Police
                                                                                       x \R o o m
                                                                       First-Aid R o o m \
              Hillsborough Ground                                                                              >\             v

                                                                         Qymnathim
                                                                                                                                  \      C* 7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                              \   JT'K     \\x73-76         . y
          \%     '                                                                                                           A           \/\\5 5 -7 2   *-'•*>' -
              t ^ w ' //                                                                                                      \ V          \ n wvX             x.
                                                                     NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                             \ \ /\                      << y A y




/&SS.fi Co•,
         '' £ :
" ,r ,    f    ! l   °-

     ^ /h'
11 / W
                                                                     Player't
                                                                     Tunnel
   Away Fans Entrance
         and Enclosures


                                       1 9 -2 2                     SOUTH STAND
                     Police Control
                                                   m . f^JBUBLfiLa                   I    imi
                                                                                            —           J1 M
                                                                                                        i            i i y
                                                  5 S 7 2 3 - 2 % n J* j                 *-3 2   ? 3-36               fc*
                                                                         -




                  KEY
                                                          Dirac tort Entrance
                                                                                                  X »e.K>o-Te^» exvs-ft.ic^ 3»pe/\*6R^
                  TURNSTILES   EZZZ3
                                                                                                 « fe   t>€^crtes At>s>v-t»oj|0\u -Sf>£**£ft
                                                                                                                                     Main    Police              Access


   Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                                             Police
                                                                                                    \ \ R o o m \$>,
                                                                                       First-Aid Room '
         Hillsborough Ground
                                                                            ..................................... \
                                                                                                                                            ,   *\ <r\sf
                         '' <£'
                                                                                          Qymnaikim

                                                                                                                          i   A                      V
                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                    7 7 -8 8

                                                                                                                                                                                        ,55*
                                                                                                                                                                                \       N             V5               v C'
                                                                                   NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                                     X                             V^.''a O ’
                                                                                                                                                                          V '       \       / v\               ,   V    ,

                                                       X       X       X.        *.       X         X         X                                                           \ \/ v     J A®V'
                                                       X       X       X         X        x         *         X           5    *                                         \ \ A   ' ~ \ y V v
                                                                                                                                                                         \ y \ + f,
                                                                                                                                                                         o A     V<' /
                                                                                                                                      16                                 jC \ xj &   »I

                          \                                                                                                                  v tn
                              \              41
                                                                                                                                      14         5
 { • ) ,qT/,                                 31
 i;:
i i        '
                                         c   21                                     Player‘a
                                                                                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                               \ \%L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V \i
                                                                                    Tunnel •
 Away Fans Entrance
      and Enclosures

                                                  -X           5?       X             5*:------X---- ------- K ------ 5ST"
                                                                                  sourw       s m m o
                 Police Control
                                                  ,        ,        n a.m.,                                   .— ,----------- m pi I V7t> ^ ~ * 3 7 - 4 2
                                                                                                          J           I       29-3~2 3 3 -3 6     ^          |m ui

                                                                                                                                           O^&S          e x W T U C y -S?€Av<eR^>
               KEY
                                                                    Director$ Entrance
               TURNSTILES. . . . EZZZI
                                                                                                       Main      Police   Access


 Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                         Police
                                                                               ARoom
                                                               First-Aid R o o m \
     Hillsborough Ground
                                                                 Gymnatium
                                                                                                                                 7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                                    7 3 -7 6                 ^
                                                                                                                                        5 5 -7 2                   t
                                                                                                                                                     ^ j *? ) x.
                                                             NORTH STAND

                                                        X                X.       X                                                       'V>e*'—
                                                                                                                                           A / x
                                                                                                                            X   \ / \      .         O p
                                                                                                                              x / xi*P ,f
                                                                                                                            ,      I O (7
                                                                                                                                 \ •    g I
                                                                                                                                 X             (<0
                                                                                                                                                           »Jr49-5
                                                                                                                                                              43-




                                                             Player '*
                                                             Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures'



                             1 9 -2 2                    SOUTH STAND
         Police Control
                                                 n m in M|                    «■■■■!■ ■■■■■■I,.. ■Mi... a■ iff      j
                                        anciai 2 3 - 2 8 1 ^ -   j            J       j   29- 32 3 3 -3 6


       KEY                                                                                       ^ e J o - c e s e<vs-ri^c^ s ?eA K£R*>
      TURN$TILES    177771
                                                                                                 E>e4>-ces                      sPeAvsees Re^,'y>
                                                                                                  Main   Police    Access


Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                                Police
                                                                                      ARoom
                                                                        First-Aid Room '
        Hillsborough Ground
                                                                         Oymnatlum
                                                                                                                        7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                           7 3 -7 6
                                                                                                                            5 5 -7 2         *
                                                                                                                                       "V0          V     «
    ix              ,'X
    \»         1*                                                   NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                               v—             .tfr *
                                                                                                                                             1A®



                                                                                                                                fvO          1
                                                                                                                                             L > 4 9 -5




                                                                    Playara
                                                                    Tunnal
Away Fans Entrance
  and Enclosures


                                    1 9 -2 2                       SOt/TM STAND
           Police Control
                                                        J3-JB -JB L-X          * ,— , .*■*— BUS
                                               Gfflc/a/ 2 3 - 2 8 i «           J » 2 9 -3 2 3 3 -3 6      <>ark


                                                                                                  J      *
         KEY                                                                                      oC-iotdS                   ' S f tBA KB^S
                                                        Dirac tora Entranca
         TURNSTILES. . . . EZZZZI
                                                                                             No                                         R€s0O
                                                                                                                     Main    Police       Access


      Sheffield Wednesday F. C.
                                                                                                          W R o o m \\'v   * N* \ \
                                                                                                                             \\V>' v
               Hillsborough Ground                                                                                           0\VVP'
                                                                                                                            \ -£'V   \
                                                                                                                            AotV \ 'P \ \
                                                                                      Gymnasium                              kV'*A\   \
                                                                                                                                                  7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                                                     7 3 -7 6
                                ■r- <?-6 '                                            i      r -<S,                                                   5 5 -7 2    *y   ,   c
                                                                                      : S
                                                                                      w    !<
                                                                                        I— 13?©
                                                                                              ^'                                                                         a.
                                                                                                                                                                 V^,'' A O
              \N          1/                                                      NORTH STAND                                                                        _' *
                                                                                                                                                                  *     ''
                                                                                          S>
                                                                                                                                              \  / \< p J /
                                                                                                                                              , y \ : o (j •
                                                                                                                                              hr* \ i fvO
                                                                                                                                                       yJ ,
                                                                                                                                                       V\  •


v s / 's i        ' ,

25^           £> ,7
              ^ /
   n'r»  &■ 11 1
  // /i by
         Q
            •
 Vi /1 *«V
         , /''
             /

                                                                                  P layart
                                                                                  Tunnel
    Away Fans Entrance
             and Enclosures'



                                             1 9 -2 2                             SOUTH STAND
                        PolicPfcontrol
                                                                   n   pi   p i                                                           ^   ^   37-42
                                                        Olllclal
                                                                   23~28l - - i i r——J                I      29-3 2 3 3 -3 6    Lrk
                                                                                                                                 *



                                                                                                                                 i
                   KEY
                                                                   Director* Entrance
                   tu r n s tile s     mm
                                                                                                               Main   Police        Access    ^ 2 5 5 5 5 ,


   Sheffield Wednesday F. C.                                                                          Police
                                                                                                      Room
                                                                                               Room
               Hillsborough Ground
                                                                                                                               \V
                                                                                   Gymnasium
                                                                                                                                         7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                                            7 3 -7 6
                                                                                                                                             5 5 -7 2     *0 '
                                                                                    ©
                                                                               NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                        ^        V *
                                                                                                                                                         v^r-' a O*




 r r x   $ :   ! i
 !• ' A        '
! ; : Uj
v/ ^ /
                                                                               Player's
                                                                               Tunnel
 Away Fans Entrance
         and Enclosures


                                                1 9 -2 2                       SOUTH STAND
                       Police Control
                                                                     n .Bi.a
                                                           OHIclal



                     KEY
                                                                     Directors Entrance
                     TURNSTILES. . . . EZZZZ1
NOTE FDR FILE
Installation of internal emergency telephone system at S.U.F.C. Bramail Lane.

At 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday 13 September 1989, a site meeting took at place
at Bramail Lane attended by:

Superintendent Marsh           Operations $ Traffic Division

Chief Inspector Charles   -     'Dl' Sub-Division

P.C. Bradley                    'Dl' Sub-Division

P.C. Owen           o          Connruni cat ions Department, Force H.Q.

Mr. D. Capper                  Club Secretary for S.U.F.C.

Mr. G.J. Badger

Mr. R. Kitchen                 British Telecom (Sheffield)

Mr. A.L. Winfrow

Mr. K.W. Bell                  G.P.T. (Castleford)

An initial discussion covered the requirements of the Taylor Report regarding
the provision of an emergency telephone system for the ground.   This was
followed by a discussion on the specific locations of telephones at 'Key' sites
around the ground and the type of system handsets available which would be
best suited for the purpose.

The club indicated that they would want to include a telephone link to each
bank of turnstiles and it was agreed that this could be incorporated without
any problems.

It was also emphasised that the Police Control Roam need to be in a position
to 'control' the telephone network and to differentiate the priority in which
they accepted incoming calls.

It was made clear by both B.T. and G.P.T. that a system was not available 'off
the peg' but it was envisaged that existing equipment sold by the respective
companies could be modified of adapted to suit the requirements of the proposed
system.

A physical inspection of the ground then took place in order that the company
representatives could have an insight into the proposed locations and the
general layout of the ground etc.

The meeting concluded at 12.20 p.m. prior to which it was agreed that both
B.T. and G.P.T. would be provided with a scaled plan of the ground showing
the proposed location of each telephone (this has been done by P.C. Bradley).
It was agreed that each conpany would subnit a draft plan/specification of
their proposed installation within six weeks.



cJuef Inspector.
14.09.89
H r. D. C ap p er,
Company S e c r e ta r y ,
S h e f f i e l d U n it e d F o o t b a l l C lu b                      D/LAi/EB
B ram all L ana,
SHEFFIELD.                                                               10 August 1989
S2 4SU.




 Dear Mr, Capper,

 I refer to o u r d i s c u s s i o n s and th e joint emergency procedures exercise that
 was held at 3.00 p .m . on Saturday, 5 August 1 989.

 It is apparent that there is an u rg en t n e e d , w it h in B raniall Lane F o o t b a ll
 Ground, f o r a modern and e f f i c i e n t Tannoy sy stem t h a t can com m unicate e f f e c t ­
 i v e l y w ith t h o s e i n s i d e t h e stadiu m and a l s o t o crowds o u t s i d e i n the"*fceneral
 area o f th e t u r n s t i l e s .

 It i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t su c h »od ern p u b lic - a d d r e s s s y ste m be i n s t a l l e d w ith o u t
 d e la y .

 1 lo o k fo rw a rd t o y o u r r e s p o n s e .

 Yours sincerely,




 Acti            lef Superintendent




                                                                -S u p erin ten d en t B a tes                          3702
                                                                                                                             KEY P01HTS
                                                                                                                                    Casualty Clearing Station -
                                                                                                                                                   G y m n asiu n

                                                                                                                             2.     E m ergency Services Reception
                                                                                                                             3.     Bnergency Cutting Gear Roan -
                                                                                                                                                   Outside
                                                                                                                             •'-
                                                                                                                             4.     Players1 Tunnel
                                                                                                                             5.     Referee's Roan
                                                                                                                             6.     First Aid Room
                                                                            JO N STREET ETAND
                                                                                                                             Perimeter Track
                      6*s ^<4& 6/V.                                                                                                 Adjacent to Police Room
                      tOJfeft,                          J                                                                           Centre of Spion Kop                   «
                                                                                                          SPICN K3P                 Adjacent to Disabled Area
                                                                                                                                    Adjacent to Old Players'
                                      &«€e«Ks*4 -Ri                                                                                               Dug Out
                      ^    - §4    f W e         &>                                                                                 B ra m a il Lane/John Street
                                                                                                                                                      Terraces
                       *^id                                     eSAM       AM All LANE GR CUN'D                             12.     Centre of Bramall Lane Terrace
                                                                  ii£
                                                                 vWO                                                        ALL PERIMETER TRACK PDIOTS TO
                           c«»«eca                                                                                          BE SET M A Y FROM EMERGENCY BCIT
                                     ft                                                                                     GAPS
                            ^TTfcp ^,,-th.f/t'
                                                                                                                            Turnstile Blocks
                                                                                                                            13.       1 -   8 South Stand
                              t,**rKe>C-          -+                                                                        14.       7 - 10 Bramall Lane Terrace
                                                   et                                    SXTH   ST AMD                       15.     11 - 12 Bramall Lane Stand
                                           ,/4                                                                               16.     14 - 15 Bramall Lane Stand
                                                                                                                             t?.     1? - 26 B r a m a ll Lane Terrace
                     "(''I 0>*^A<rr                              '■Mi W                                                      Is.     30 - 34 John Street Stand/                 ,a*
                           s'&*fcO C»^£.J                                                                                                                  Terrace

                                  -VC®»*tTi«cr6^.                                                                            19.     36 - 43 John Street Stand/ + ,q*
                                                                                                                                                    Terrace
                               D <?
                                                                                                                             20.     48       Disabled Pen
                          (y) lttter«-o^S fWifc 6 6 ^ ^                                                                      21.     50 - 64 Spion Kop
                                  **<■»■ «>4 SiAct »Ck>g<j                                                                   22.     65 - 73 Spion Kop
                                                                                                                              23.    74 - 79 South Stand
                                                                                                                              24.    South Stand Central Concourse
                                                                                                                              25.    Bramall Lane Stand Concourse
                                                                                                                              26.    John Street Stand Concourse
                                                                                                                              27.    John Street Stand Concourse
                                                                                                                              28.    Rear of Scion Kop
                                                                 ^        ^=^7              !---!------                     DRAWN
                                                                                                                                                            SCALE
                                                                                                                                               A : d .(t

EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                            SHEFFIELD U NITED *. FOOTBALL CLUB                     LTD   CHECKED
                                                                                                                                                                1:1<     X O


C o n s u l t in g   Er»gineer -
                                                                                                                            approved                                D R A W I N G No.
St. Andrews House
23«Mfcgfiefd Road
Sheffield S11 9 A S                1#t.(D7<255§3§?t
                                                 CRQBSBCfc*.
                                                               LOCATION PLAN ^                                              DATE
                                                                                                                                                                     10606/8
                                                                                                                                                                                        ]
ISfail:
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                   REF:
        FROM: Acting Chief Inspector Wood
                                                                   STATION/DEPT.    Main Street
        TO:   Chief Superintendent Wain                                             5.9.89
                                                                   DATE:

                  SUBJECT:   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR* S INQUIRY    -    RECOMMENDATION 32


                  In line with the above mentioned report and reconjnendation 32 of
                  that document, concerning the provision of telephone links to
                  complement the radio communication system, I submit the following
                  suggestions in respect of Rotherham United Football Club.

                  Telephone links to/provided in the locations given below and as
                  shewn on the attached plan:

                        LOCATION                                    NO. OF PHONES

                  Playing area track                                       4
                  Secretary’s office                                        1
                  Referee’s room                                            1
                  First Aid room (casualty                                  1
                    clearance station)
                  Gymnasium (mortuary)                                      1
                  Tivoli terrace (police observation                        2
                     points)
                  Turnstiles - Tivoli end                                   1
                  Turnstiles - Millmoor Lane                                1
                  Under Mainstand                                           1
                  Near Lighting Tower between Tivoli
                      and Kop terracing                                     1
                  Police Control                                            1
                                                       TOTAL               15


                  Certain of the above locations are vulnerable in terms of likelihood
                  of damage, viz. the Tivoli terrace and the point between the Tivoli
                  and Kop, and I ask that special consideration be given to that
                  fact. It is unreasonable, in my view, to ask police officers on
                  duty at a busy football ground and who may well be.required to
                  leave the observation point for some reason to be responsible for
                  the safety of a telephone handset.

                  The Public Address system at Millmoor is reasonable, being only two
                  years old, however certain improvements are required. The system
                  currently operates inside the ground only and can be enhanced
                  greatly by the addition of 2 further speakers at the front of the
                  ground and 1 down Millmoor Lane (all outside). While the system
                  can be isolated into separate sections of the ground and has an
                  over-ride facility, I understand that there is some loss of volume
                  on transmissions from police control.

                  If an approach is to be made to the club regarding the above matters,
                  I ask that consideration be given to also rquesting the provision
                  of a further C.C.T.V. camera. The original grant from the Football
                  Trust provided for only three cameras, one on the ground frontage
                  and two inside. The provision of a further camera in Millmoor
                  Lane would greatly improve the ground commander's ability to assess
                  the number and safety of visiting supporters.



GEN/2
    I submit this report for consideration, please, with the request
    that it be forwarded to the Chief Superintendent, Operations and
    Traffic, for the attention of Chief Inspector Waring.




    A/Chief Inspector




      j                   r < ; y              A y ( -              ' c               A -




       ci       j                         .



           J                                                   tc        cx   Cc           c
                                                                                               f           A /e x .        ly .


                    c .                        <%&_ (f -                                                      c <-                   ^         ^

           £*       .     c   . ' T   .        .           /    \                                   i ’c s ^ t . y                   C     c   i   v /.


                                      tC( y W c ^'e                         ^C ith e u c                     ^           UNO°

                                  ^                                                   ^            U                       r<>       / Cc^ iC

      Ji                              ^ -cvaO fy’                   <x    ■C<         ^£ -C ^(                  (Z                        (^Ci'A^rsQ

                                                                                          XK.C         ,'^ L C S L iU ^




          o J i -HXjlj                        a ^p t                                                             av£>€Cc-            c a .v * '^          .
(
                                                   ^            <i€.vw(c                       ^            ^                             cf
v/ CiA<i~^                            ^

    fX .c                     *                        '       ~ d^d                                                 ^              4<i

                                                                          ^Cj£?                    A'MC, (ic K/ ^ j             a /~f
    c /jx z c J s -^ £


                                                                                s')
                                                                                                                     i     c    f

                                                       \
                                                                                                                          <7^
Chief Superintendent, Operations & Traffic

This information has been requested by Superintendent Marsh as a result
of the Football Review procedures.




Chief Superintendent
Rotherham 6 September 1989 JTW/md
'T h /H i's




                                             '\w\\ I




              b.                                                r



                                               W   s k -' 4 t

                          l , i yS S S .\
                          <\ Railway

                                                                    I
                             ~Tol*M*-r>ta»
                              1-S7

                   MMM t*«T (W9
                   A-6
                   iocN7ifin> *y
           OAKWELL FOOTBALL STADIUM - P. A.     SYSTEM AND TELEPHONES




PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

The existing Public Address System at Oakwell is a ’zoned’ system which

enables each of the 4 sides of the ground to be controlled independently

on   in    any desired combination.        It   is usually used,    however,    to

communicate with the whole of the stadium and can be considered to be

a first class system.



The attached plan marked 'PA Existing1 indicates the present location

of   theloud   speakers   and   the   4    zones.    A   recent   check   of   the

effectiveness of the system during match conditions proved it to be

an effective system within the Stadium.



The attached plan Market 'P.A. Proposed1 shows the areas where we would

seek to have increased coverage which is basically outside the ground.

The loud speakers shown are merely suggestions, the actual sightings

to be left to the experts.        We see this as again being 'zoned' and to

be used to communicate with persons outside the ground.



TELEPHONES’

At this time the Police Control R09111 has an extension of the Club

Telephone System allocated to it.         There is also a telephone extension

in the Referees Room, together with other club determined extensions.



Attached herewith is a plan of the Oakwell Stadium marked 'Telephones'

showing   locations of telephones which are considered appropriate.            This
system to be a dedicated      'police system' and not incorporated in the

existing Club's System. The locations of the telephones suggested are:

1           Police Control Room

2           First Aid Room

3           Police Briefing Room

4           Police Detention Room

5 to 8      Each corner of the ground on the perimeter track

9           Disabled Stand

10          Concourse at rear of Brewery Stand

11          Concourse at rear of Main Stand

12          Referees Room

13          Players Tunnel

14          Block 'A' of Main Stand

15          Block 'E' of Main Stand

16          Concourse at rear of Pontefract Road End Stand.



Where these telephones are at locations accessible to the general public,

then they should be secured in locked receptacles with a key issue

otherwise     the   system will    lend   itself   to   abuse   and will   require

supervising at all times.




Acting Superintendent

B1 Sub-Division

21.9.89




                                      - 2 -
BARNSLEY F.C                                             OAKWELL
                                                         £>te*Ii ®-P


                                                                                                                                                              Z.oiJ>£
                                                                                       I 1
                                                                                  Cents Toilet

                                                                                                                                                                            Cate 12
                                                  p jr                                                         □                R ef re




                                                                       TOTAL Ground capacity                                                                Dividing Gate
                                         (5250)
                                                                       ■ 30,099
                                       1 SPION                         Density on all terracing
                                                                         1*5.9 persons per 10 sq m
                                                                        EXCEPT:
                                                                        Brewery Stand = **3.1 persons
                                                                        Spion Kp      = 37.8 persons

                     Cents T o ile t

 Date 1                                                                                                                                                                     Cate 101
                                           '^reshments
                                                                                                                                                                            Cate 9
 Police Room


                                                             BTH)^ Terraces .(3,315)
                                                                                                          , (SOUTH)
                                                                                             Players Tunnel ^ 3 ^ 5 )
                                                                                                                                          Refreshments                      Barnsley F.C. Social Club
 Disabled Stand]                                                                                                            Ladies &
                                                                                                                                Toilet

 Ground Control                                                        MAIN        (2*16*0         STAND
      system control

 Cash Office                                                        Lf  Gents Toilet   no             Cents ToileT


                                                                                                                                                         E.^Tenj'7 O-'F
 P olice B r ie f in a Room                                                                                                                                 X o*J<=

 First Aid
                                                                                                                                                Cate 8
                                                                                  dvi ding


                                                                                                           %         Iflqfe 6\ \Gate 7                                                 South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                                                                                                       PLANS DEPT.       89.
                    Cate 3                        Offices              Cate 4                Cate 5
                                                                                                                        *   r             #
BARNSLEY F.C                                                    OAKWELL                                                                                                                   A



                                                                                           Gents Toilet                                                                             Gate Z3!

                                                                                     Brewery S tand              £7500
                                                                                                                                       Refreshments




                                                                               TOTAL Ground capacity
                                                                                                                                                                D iv id in g Gate
                                                                                  30,099
                                          i       SPION
                                                                                Density on all terracing
                                              >     KOP    S                      1+5.9 persons per 10 sq m
                                                                                EXCEPT:
                                                                                Brewery Stand =43.1 persons
                                                                                Spion Kp      = 37.8 persons

                        G e n ii Toilet

  Gate 1                                                                                                                                                                            Gate 101
                                              \ Refreshments
 | Police Room
                                                                                                                                                                                    Gate 9

                                                                                                    I h"                 /50UTH)
 Disabled Stand
                                                               /Y   (NOHTH)^TerrocesX3,315)


                                                                            f MAINt T (2.164) T
                                                                                                        Players Tunnel


                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                             llf5)


                                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                                                               R efreshm ents

                                                                                                                                      Ladies & Dents
                                                                                                                                                                                -| Barnsley F.C. Social Club

  Ground Control                                                                                              STAND
   . . . . SYSTEM COOTEPwL
  Cash Office                                                                   Gents Toilet



 Police Briefing Room

  First Aid

 Gate 2                                                                                                                                                Gate 8
                                                                                           iv id in g

                                                                                                                                  IGate 6     \Gate 7
                                                                                                                                                                                               South Yorkshire Police
                                                          Offices              Gate 4                   Gate 5                                                                                 PLANS DEPT.       89.

                                                                                                                                     ter •
BARNSLEY F.C                                         OAKWELL


                                                                                  Cent s Toilet




                                                                           Brewery Stand (7500)
                                                                                                                                R efreshm ents




                                     (5250)                          TOTAL Ground capacity                                                                Dividing Gate
                                                                     = 30,099
                                   \ SPION                           Der.r.ity on a l l t e r r a ~ : n . £
                                                                     _ 1*5 . 9 persons p e r        "'0   so m
                                                                     EXJKPX;
                                                                     Brewery Stand = 43.1 persons
                                                                     Spion Kp      = 37.8 persons

                    Cents Toilet

  Gate 1
                                    \ Refreshments
                                                                                                                                 (8670
 | Police Room

                                                                                                            ,        (SOUTH)             R efreshm ents                   ^Barnsley F.C. Social Club
  Disabled Stand1                                       (NORTH)   Terraces (3,315)             Players Tunnel        ^ 14^)
                                                                                                                               Ladies & Cents /
                                                                                                                                   Toilet
 f Ground Control                                                   MAIN           (2.1^)                 STAND
                                                         t                                ID                  Cents ToileT
 [ Cash Oflice                                                        Cents



 Police Bnefina Room

  First Aid

                                                                                    viding Gat<


                                                                                                                    •o                 l Gate 71                                     South Y orkshire P o lite
                                                                                                                                                                                     PLANS D tPT.         69.
                                              Offices                                                                          te r        #
                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                        Ref: RLG/PC
From:   Superintendent Greenwood                       Station/Dept:   A1
To:     Chief Inspector Waring, HQ Operations          Date.           21 September 1989


        SUBJECT:      DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL GROUND - TELEPHONE/PUBLIC
                      ADDRESS SYSTEMS



            In confirmation of our recent telephone conversation, I attach*^
            for your information, recommendations for improvements to be made
            to the public address system and the telephone system at Doncaster
            Rovers football ground, as a consequence of the recommendations of
            the Taylor Enquiry.

            Also attached is in addition to Lord Justice Taylor’s recommen­
            dations, a summary of recommendations from the Green Guide to
            Safety at Sports Grounds.
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                  Ref:
        From:       Ps.2480 Jackson                                              Station/Dept: A1 Doncaster
    To:             S u p e rin te n d e n t Greenwood                           Date:         2 0 th September 1989



                SUBJECT:      DONCASTER ROVERS - TELEPHONE/PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS


                The fo llo w in g i s a resume o f th e f a c i l i t i e s c u r r e n t ly a v a ila b le and my
                recommendations f o r fu t u r e f a c i l i t i e s a t B e lle Vue F o o tb a ll Stadium .
                I t seems from th e In te r im R eport o f th e H ills b o ro u g h E n q u iry th a t th e re i s
                no leeway i n th e p r o v is io n o f a te le p h o n e system and i t appears th a t t h i s has
                been accepted by th e South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e . A summary o f what i s a t present
                known i s shown a t ite m 6.

                Any p le a s f o r le s s r e s t r i c t i o n s a t B e lle Vue would have to be made in
                accordance w ith th e re aso n ing o f th e B e lle Vue C ontingency P lan d r a f t , (eg
                s m a ll c a p a c ity cro w d /lo w normal a tte n d a n c e s /a ll p o s s ib ly la rg e gates made
                a l l - t i c k e t / l o c a t i o n and la y o u t o f B e lle Vue S tadium ). However, i t would appear
                th a t H eadquarters are a lre a d y aware o f t h i s d is t in c t io n b e a rin g i n mind the
                command le v e ls a t B e lle Vue as quoted i n th e p rese n t s ta n d in g in s t r u c t io n s
                f o r th e P o lic in g o f F o o tb a ll Matches.

                One f u r t h e r p o in t th a t must be borne i n mind i s th e fa c t th a t th e present
                development o f th e a i r f i e l d area may y e t lea d to a new stadium b e ing developed
                and th e e v e n tu a l demise o f B e lle Vue. A lth o ug h th a t may w e ll be some years
                ahead, th e im p o s itio n o f e x tra v a g a n t systems a t huge expense co u ld prove an
                unnecessary waste o f money.

                Subm itted f o r in fo rm a tio n .




                ]?s. 2480




Gen/2
                            INDEX




1. Summary of recommendations from the Guide to Safety at Sports

  Grounds re Public Address Systems.



2. Summary of recommendations from the Taylor Enquiry re Telephone

   Systems and Public Address Systems.



3. Doncaster Rovers Public Address System - present system.



4. Recommendations.



5. Doncaster Rovers, Telephone System - present system.



6. Recommendations.




Appendix A - Plan showing existing and proposed arrangements.
SECTION 1     -   COMMUNICATIONS




Summary of recommendations from the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds re Public

Address Systems - published 1986



There should be a communications system capable of clearly relaying essential

messages to all parts of the ground in both normal circumstances and in an

emergency.



(192)   Precise requirements for communications will depend on the sort      of ground

        and       the numbers of people who attend   there.   It   should beavailable

        for use and capable of coping with all emergencies.



(194)   At LARGER grounds the following arrangements are likely to be needed

        (i)       There should be inter-communication between the central control

                  and all turnstiles or banks of turnstiles and all entry and exit

                  gates used by the public.

        (ii)      ..........
        (iii) Public Address equipment should be installed so that broadcast

                  messages can be heard under reasonable conditions (including

                  emergencies) by all   persons of   normal hearingin any partofthe

                  ground to which the   public has   access.The system shouldbe capable

                  of being controlled from the central control point and should

                  ideally be capable of addressing messages to each major section

                  of the ground.
SECTION 2     -   COMMUNICA TIONS




Recommendations from th e In t e r im Report o f th e H ills b o ro u g h E n q u iry w ith s p e c if ic

re ga rd to te le p h o n e systems and p u b lic address systems



(32)   To complement r a d io com m unications, th e re should be a c o m p le te ly separate

        system o f la n d lin e s w it h te lephone lin k s between th e C o n tro l Room and key

        points a t th e ground.



(33)    W ith in th e C o n tro l Room, th e re should be a p u b lic address system to

        communicate w it h i n d iv id u a l areas o u ts id e and in s id e th e ground, w ith groups

        o f areas o r w it h th e whole ground.         Im p o rta n t announcements should be

        preceded by a lo u d s ig n a l to catch the a t t e n t io n o f th e crowd d e s p ite a

        h ig h le v e l o f n o is e i n th e ground.   T h is arrangement should be p ro m in e n tly

        a d v e rtis e d on e ve ry programme so ld f o r every m atch.
SECTION 3




DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL STADIUM, BELLE VUE




Public Address System

The present system is controlled from a Tannoy Room situated at the rear of the

m a in stand.   This is fully manned by a member of the Belle Vue staff throughout

the period of the stadium being open for public access on match days.




The speaker system consists of two speakers on either end of the stand facing

inwards to those seated,    three speakers facing out from the stand (one on either

end of the stand and one in the centre) and one speaker situated on the

floodlight pylon at the Popular Side/Town End corner.     (see plan)




There is a manual override on the public address system situated in the Police

Operations box.     There is also a direct telephone link from the Police Operations

box to the Tannoy Room.
SECTION 4




RECOMMENDATIONS          -   PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM




The two obvious areas a t B e lle Vue where emergencies in v o lv in g crowd s a fe ty are

l i k e l y to occur are th e v i s i t i n g   s u p p o rte rs ' pen a t th e R ossin g to n End o f the

stadium and th e main stand i t s e l f .



Both areas are a b le to hear any message broadcast over th e system in normal

c ircu m s ta n ce s .   However, i s i t recommended th a t the system i s extended to in c lu d e

a d d it io n a l speakers a t th e fo llo w in g lo c a tio n s

( i)     One a d d it io n a l speaker a t th e P o p ula r Side/Town End c o rn e r to supplement

         th e one a lre a d y in p la ce th e r e .      The present speaker has to cover th e

         e n t ir e P o p ula r Side (1 ,7 0 0 c a p a c ity ) , the Town End t e r r a c in g (510 c a p a c ity )

         and th e t u r n s t i l e s 25-30.    In any abnormal s e t o f circum stan ce s (eg

          c a p a c ity cro w d /cru s h a t tu r n s tile s / c r o w d d is tu rb a n c e ) th e one speaker may

          not be s u f f i c i e n t f o r emergency purposes.

( ii)     S im ila r ly , one a d d it io n a l speaker would be re q u ire d a t th e P opular

          S id e /R o s s in g to n End c o rn e r to supplement those speakers d ir e c te d towards

          th e P o p ula r Side and the 'p e n '.

( iii)   A lth o u g h messages from th e e x is t in g speakers can be heard im m e d iate ly

          o u ts id e th e ground, i t     i s co n sid e red th a t these are n o t a t a l l s a t is f a c t o r y

          f o r persons a w a itin g e n try to th e ground o r i n th e ca r p a rk .             I t is

          b e lie v e d th a t th e p r o v is io n o f a t le a s t two speakers, one a t e it h e r end

          o f th e stand p o in tin g in t o th e ca r p a rk , would a s s is t i n passing

          in fo rm a tio n i n th e event o f emergency a c tio n , crowd c o n tr o l problems

          o u ts id e th e ground o r r a d io problem s.
SECTION 5




DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL STADIUM, BELLE VUE



Telephone System

There are two d i s t i n c t systems a v a ila b le to th e P o lic e a t B e lle Vue.             The P o lic e

Room s itu a te d a t th e Town End o f th e ground has a te le ph o n e l i n k connected to

th e fo r c e i n t e r n a l te le ph o n e system.   The P o lic e O b se rv a tio n Post has one

te le p h o n e connected to th e Doncaster Rovers s w itch b o a rd .            I t has th e f a c i l i t y

to d i a l d ir e c t to o th e r Doncaster Rovers in t e r n a l e x te n s io n s (e g , r e fe r e e 's

room ).      There i s no e x te n s io n in t o th e South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e system from the

O b s e rv a tio n P o s t.



The P o lic e Room has no view o f any p a rt o f th e stadium whereas th e O b se rva tion

Post has a f u l l vie w o f a l l p a rts o f th e ground.
SECTION 6



RECOMMENDATIONS   -    TELEPHONE SYSTEM



Following recommendation from the Hillsborough Enquiry (No.32) regarding a

complimentary landline system, the South Yorkshire Police are likely to institute

and recommend a new 'star' system developed in conjunction with British Telecom.

The centre of the 'star' will be the Police Command Post.     The system will be

self-contained with no dial-out facility and no connection with the Doncaster

Rovers internal telephone system of the South Yorkshire Police network.

The cost of such a system is in direct proportion to the number of 'branches'

or extensions leading from the centre.     It is not as yet known if the system

will have a 'conference' facility, but it is believed to incorporate vandalproof

telephones which will remain in situ rather than plug-in points.      The telephone

will warn of calls awaiting answering by means of a flashing light rather than

a ringing tone.   Divisions will be made aware of further details in due course.

If this system is to be used force-wide, then the following recommendations are

suggested for Belle Vue:-

1.   An additional extension to the South Yorkshire Police network to be situated

     in the Police Observation Post.

     If an incident or problem occurs within the stadium, the Observation Post

     will assume the status of command    post for   the Gr^ftidCommander.   It is

     inconceivable that such a command    post can   function satisfactorily without

     a direct Police controlled telephone line.

2.   The following points at Belle Vue would be suitable for extensions to the

     'star' system:-

     (a) Observation Post - central control.

     (b) Exterior of stand (car park area) - This area would be used as casualty
            clearing station and as a central point in case of problems arising

           outside the ground.

     (c)     Referees' tunnel to pitch.

     (d)     Perimeter track     at   corner    of    main stand terrace and Rossington End.

     (e)     Perimeter track     at   corner    of    Popular     Terrace     andRossington En

     (f)     Perimeter track     at   corner    of    Popular     Terrace     andTown End Terr



NB   These are considered to be essential points.     A case for further

     discretionary points (eg perimeter track Town End Terrace/Main Stand Terrace

     and Police Room) can be made out.



It is believed that Bramhall Lane would merit about 20+ telephone points

following a recent review.
          DONCASTER   MOVERS F.C,




                                                                                        :to
          Beil Vue Ground               j f J L F J U . kJUPL. S T A_HJL_JSlB A J J I
                                         ---:
                                            --      --- c m c m r i l O C -'---1
                                                                               - -r£?Tf
          TOTAL 6R0UKD CAPACITYt ?||4



*   faes&tr    S   M       m        *
                                                                f29l


r   ?tcd>seb



*   tffeAsD m a w r e            IX m
                       ■   i?'
                                                                                            Ca," 'r *




                                                                                 DCC/JEL
                                                                                 25 September 1989


R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
C le rk & F in a n c ia l O f fic e r
South Y o rk s h ire P o lic e A u th o r ity
P 0 Box 37
Regent S tre e t
B arnsley S70 2DX




Dear                                                1

F o llo w in g th e p u b lic a tio n o f th e In te r im Report o f the In q u ir y by The Rt Hon
Lord J u s tic e T a y lo r in t o the H ills b o ro u g h d is a s te r , we are examining v i r t u a l l y
every aspect o f the p o lic in g o f the f iv e league f o o t b a ll grounds w it h in South
Y o rk s h ire .

One m ajor to p ic f o r c o n s id e ra tio n i s th e q u e stio n o f the f in a n c ia l
c o n tr ib u tio n made by the f o o t b a ll c lu b s towards th e co s t o f t h is p o lic in g .
The charge made by tTie P o lic e A u th o r ity to each f o o t b a ll c lu b , th e amount o f
which i s determ ined by re fe re n c e to a s lid in g scale based on crowd s iz e a t the
match in q u e s tio n , re co ve rs , on average, o n ly 20% o f the a c tu a l c o s t o f the
p o lic in g o p e ra tio n . This fig u r e r e la te s to th e 'p re T a y lo r ' era and increases
in p o lic e manpower made necessary by the requirem ents o f the In te r im Report
undoubtedly mean th a t unless the A u t h o r it y 's c r i t e r i a f o r ch a rg in g f o o t b a ll
clu b s i s re v is e d the percentage recovered w i l l drop even f u r t h e r .

W ith t h is in mind I in te n d soon to submit a paper to the A u th o r ity proposing
th e y accept in p r in c ip le th a t such r e v is io n Is necessary and suggesting
v a rio u s ways t h is m ight be achieved. As a f i r s t step i t i s necessary to know
p re c is e ly w hich p o lic e o f f ic e r s can le g it im a t e ly be charged f o r . There is
co n sid e ra b le doubt in t h is area and the purpose o f t h i s l e t t e r i s to s e t out
th e s it u a t io n as we see i t and ask i f you would seek le g a l o p in io n on i t .

The s t a r t in g p o in t i s S e ctio n 15 o f th e P o lic e A ct 1964 w hich runs as
fo llo w s

       15(1) - The c h ie f o f f i c e r o f p o lic e o f any p o lic e fo rc e aay
       p ro v id e , a t th e request o f any person, s p e c ia l p o lic e s e rv ic e s a t
       any premises o r in any l o c a l i t y i n th e p o lic e area f o r w hich the
       Force i s m a in ta in e d , s u b je c t to th e payment to th e P o lic e A u th o r ity
       o f chatges on such scales as may be determ ined by th a t A u th o r ity .

T h is c le a r ly a llo w s the C h ie f C onstable, a t h is d is c r e tio n , to p ro y id e p o lic e
o f f ic e r s f o r s p e c ia l p o lic e s e rv ic e s and a llo w s the P o lic e A u th o r ity to charge
f o r them.
 R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA                      -   2   -                      25 September 1989



There is, however, no precise definition of the term 'spcial police services'
although the case of Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club did go some way
towards providing such a definition. This case arose from a dispute between
Sheffield United Football Club and South Yorkshire Police Authority in the
1982/83 football season. The former disputed the right of the latter to
charge for policing at Bramall Lane football ground. The Club maintained that
the level of policing they received was no more than that to which they were
entitled as normal citizens; they therefore refused to pay and were sued by
the Police Authority for recovery of the money owed.

The folice Authority were successful in this litigation both at first Instance
and on appeal. At both hearings various comments were made as to the meaning
of 'special police services'. The fact officers deployed Inside the ground
were on private property was accepted as significant (although not decisive)
in showing that such officers fell within the term 'special police services'*
however, none of the judgments expressly or even implicitly excluded officers
policing a football match outside the ground from falling within 'special
police services' and as such being chargeable to the football club.

Can officers outside the ground be said to fall within the meanirig of 'special
police services'? If so how far can this be extended?

We deploy officers outside to monitor queues at turnstiles. These officers
are there to prevent a breach of the peace but also to monitor the queue for
persons who are either unfit to enter the ground, perhaps because they have
been drinking or are i n p o s s e s s i o n o f a r t i c l e s t h a t a r e prohibited. They are
instructed to carry out random searching of persons wishing to enter the
ground. This is to detect prohibited items atnd to deter people from bringing
such items with them. The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act 1985
gives police officers limited powers to search, but usually searching is
carried out Ori the basis that the football ground is private property and the
Club make it a condition of entry that anyone wishing to enter should, if
required, submit to being searched by a police officer. I f not the officer is
authorised on behalf of the Club to exclude that person from entering. It
would seem officers deployed to this type of duty are fulfilling a dual role.
They are there to prevent a breach of the peace and if necessary to perform
certain statutory duties but they also act as servants of the Club. For
example, in enforcing the 'ground rules' of the Club. In this latter role
their situation is analogous to the doormen of a nightclub who search persons
entering that Club. This seems to be an entirely private function and I can
think of no situation other than a football match in which we would allow
officers to carry out such a function. It would, therefore, appear to be a
'special police service' hotwithstanding the fact it is often carried out on
public roads*

We deploy police officers in the streets surrounding the ground to prevent and
deal with breaches of the peace. These officers would nbt be deployed in this
wax were it not for the football match.

We often deploy officers at bus and rail termini to meet incoming fans and
escort the® to the match venue. After the match we escort them back again.

There are also occasions when additional officers are deployed in town centres
to deal with any threat of disorder from football supporters attending a
particular match. These officers are in addition to the police strength
normally deployed in that area.
R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA                             -   3   -                             25 September 1989


There i s o b v io u s ly c o n s id e ra b le co st in c u rre d i n r a is in g the a d d itio n a l
manpower re q u ire d to p o lic e f o o t b a ll matches but th e re are a ls o c e r ta in hidden
c o s ts . I t i s im p o s sib le f o r us to p ro v id e s u f f ic i e n t a number o f o f f ic e r s
from those o f f ic e r s on normal d u ty a t the tim e o f the match. To do so would
denude the p o lic in g o f the County to a dangerous le v e l. O f fic e r s , th e r e fo re ,
have to be paid o v e rtim e . Sometimes, however, i t makes o p e ra tio n a l sense to
p o lic e a f o o t b a ll match u sin g o f f ic e r s on normal d u ty and to cover f o r t h e i r
absence by paying ove rtim e to o f f ic e r s a t the s ta t io n where these o f f ic e r s
would,, n o rm a lly work. For example, o f f ic e r s on th e a fte rn o o n s h i f t may be used
to p o lic e a f o o t b a ll match and o f f ic e r s on the morning s h i f t remain on d u ty on
o ve rtim e to cover f o r t h e i r co lle a g u e s absence.          Could t h is 'knock on'
ove rtim e be claim ed fo r? I t r e s u lts d i r e c t l y from the f o o t b a ll match and i f
i t i s not p a id f o r by the Club the co st f a l l s on the ra te p a y e rs .

There are the m a tte rs on which I would l ik e C ounsel's o p in io n . I a p p re c ia te
th a t o p in io n alone i s n o t the u ltim a te de te rm in a nt and th a t o n ly l i t i g a t i o n
d e a lin g s p e c if ic a l ly w ith t h i s to p ic i s l i k e l y to produce a d e f i n i t i v e
d e c is io n , n e v e rth e le s s , any r e - n e g o tia tio n w ith the South Y o rk s h ire f o o t b a ll
clu b s w i l l in v o lv e hard b a rg a in in g and a le g a l o p in io n fa v o u rin g us w i l l
o b v io u s ly stre n g th e n our hand.

I enclose the fo llo w in g documents f o r the in fo rm a tio n o f Counsel concerned

       1.    Judgment o f Boreham J a t f i r s t in sta n c e in the case o f
              H a rris - v - SUFC;

       2.    J u d g m e n ts o f t h e C o u r t o f Appcs!. i n   tlxo sssme c s s s *

       3.    Copy o f S p o rtin g Events (C o n tro l o f A lc o h o l E tc ) Act 1985;

       4.    Copy o f l e t t e r dated 1 March 1989, from the Home S e cre ta ry Rt
              Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP to Tom Pendry MP. I accept t h is
              correspondence has no le g a l s ig n ific a n c e but in i t Mr Hurd
              does c le a r ly s ta te the long sta n d in g p o lic y o f successive
              governments th a t f o o t b a ll clu b s should cover the f u l l cost o f
              p o lic in g provid e d in re sp e ct o f f o o t b a ll matches a t t h e ir
              grounds. He does however to some e x te n t l i m i t t h is when a
              few lin e s la t e r he says th a t P o lic e A u th o r it ie s have no power
              to in c lu d e in t h e i r charges any element o f th e c o sts o f
              p o lic in g o u ts id e f o o t b a ll grounds. I can f in d no support in
              law f o r t h is l a t t e r a s s e rtio n .

Yours s in c e r e ly




Enclosures
                                                                            /i-Tl /r ^
           ^                                                               A5//A
                                                                              (TTso
Following the publication of the interim report of the enquiry by the      Rt            ,/

Hon Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster, we are examining

virtually every aspect of the policing of the five league football grounds        Jjj
within South Yorkshire.                                                          1^2-


One major topic for consideration is the question of the financial

contribution made by the football clubs towards the cost of this policing.

The charge made by the police authority to each football club, the amount

of which is determined by Reference to a sliding scale based on crowd size

at the match in question, recovers, on average, only 20% of the actual

cost of the policing operation.    This figure relates to the 'pre Taylor1

era and increases in police manpower made necessary by the requirements

of the interim report undoubtedly mean that unless the Authority's criteria#'?

for charging football clubs is revised the percentage recovered will drop

even further.    With this in mind I intend soon to submit a paper to the

Authority proposing they accept in principle that such revision is necessary

and suggesting various ways this might be achieved.    As a first step it

is necessary to know precisely which police officers can legitimately be

charged for.    There is considerable doubt in this area and the purpose

of this letter is to set out the situation as we see it and ask if you

would seek legal opinion on it.



The starting point is section 15 of the Police Act 1964 which runs as

follows:



     15 (1)    The chief officer of police of any police force

    may provide, at the request of any person, special police

     services at any premises or in any locality in the police
      area for which the force is maintained, subject to the

     payment to the police authority of charges on such scales

     as may be determined by that authority.



This clearly allows the Chief Constable, at his discretion to provide police

officers for special police services and allows the police authority to

charge for them.



There is, however, no precise definition of the term 'special police

services' although the case of Harris v Sheffield United Football Club

did go someway towards providing such a definition.    This case arose from

a dispute between Sheffield United Football Club and South Yorkshire Police

Authority in the 1982/83 Football Season.   The former disputed the right

of the latter to charge for policing at Bramall Lane Football Ground.

The Club maintained that the level of policing they received was no more

than that to which they were entitled as normal citizens; they therefore

refused to pay and were sued by the Police authority for recovery of the

money owed.   The police authority were successful in this litigation both

at first instance and on appeal.   At both hearings various comments were

made as to the meaning of special police services.    The fact officers

deployed inside the ground were on private property was accepted as

significant (although not decisive) in showing that such officers fell

within the term special police services, however none of the judgements

expressly or even implicitly excluded officers policing a football match

outside the ground from falling within special police services and as such

being chargeable to the football club.
- 3 -



Can officers outside the ground be said to fall within the meaning of

special police services?   If so how far can this be extended.   We deploy

officers outside to monitor queues at turnstiles.   These officers are there

to prevent a breach of the peace but also to monitor the queue for persons

who are either unfit to enter the ground, perhaps because they have been

drinking or are in possession of articles that are prohibited.    They are

instructed to carry out random searching of persons wishing to enter the

ground.   This is to detect prohibited items and to deter people from

bringing such items with them.   The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol

etc) Act 1985 gives police officers limited powers to search, but usually

searching is carried out on the basis that the football ground is private

property and the club make it a condition of entry that anyone wishing

to enter should, if required, submit to being searched by a police officer.

If not the officer is authorised on behalf of the club to exclude that

person from entering.   It would seem officers deployed to this tvoe of

i



also act as servants of the clut£    In this latter role their situation       c~j


is analogous to the doormen of a nightclub who search persons entering

that club.   This seems to be an entirely private function and I can think

of no situation other than a football match in which we would allow officers

to carry out such a function.    It would, therefore, appear to be a special

police service notwithstanding the fact it is often carried out on public

roads.
We deploy police officers in the streets surrounding the ground to prevent

and deal with breaches of the peace.    These officers would not be deployed

in this way were it not for the football match.



We often deploy officers at bus and rail termini to meet incoming fans

and escort them to the match venue.    After the match we escort them back

again.



There are also occasions when additional officers are deployed in town

centres to deal with any threat of disorder from football supporters

attending a particular match.   These officers are in addition to the police

strength normally deployed in that area.



There is obviously considerable cost incurred in raising the additional

manpower required to police football matches but there are also certain

hidden costs.   It is inpossible for us to provide sufficient a number of

officers from those officers on normal duty at the time of the match.

To do so would denude the policing of the county to a dangerous level.

Officers, therefore, have to be paid overtime.    Sometimes, however, it

makes operational sense to police a football match using officers on normal

duty and to cover for their absence by paying overtime to officers at the

station where these officers would normally work.   For example officers

on the afternoon shift may be used to police a football match and officers

on the morning shift remain on duty on overtime to cover for their

colleagues absence.   Could this 'knock on' overtime be claimed for?    It
results directly from the football match and if it is not paid for by the

club the cost falls on the rate payers.



There are the matters on which I would like counsel's opinion.    I appreciate

that opinion alone is not the ultimate determinant and that only litigation

dealing specifically with this topic is likely to produce a definitive

decision, nevertheless any renegotiation with the South Yorkshire Football

Clubs will involve hard bargaining and a legal opinion favouring us will

obviously strengthen our hand.



I enclose the following documents for the information of Counsel concerned.



1)   The Judgement of Boreham J at first instance in the case of Harris

     v SUFC.



2)   Judgements of the Court of Appeal in the same case.



3)   Copy of Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985.



4)   Copy of letter dated 1 March 1989, from the Home Secretary Douglas

     Hurd to Tom Pendry MP.   I accept this correspondence has no legal

     significance but in it Mr Hurd does clearly state the long standing

     policy of successive governments that football clubs should cover the

     full cost of policing provided in respect of football matches at their

     grounds.   He does however to some extent limit this when a few lines
V
K




    - 6 -



       later he says that Police Authorities have no power to include in their

       charges any element of the costs of policing outside football grounds.

       I can find no support in law for this latter assertion.
                                                                           H a rris


                  (on       b e h a lf      o f    the     South             Y o rk s h ire             P o lic e            A u t h o r it y )




                                                                              v   .



                                  S h e ff ie ld         U nite d           F o o tb a ll            Club         L im ite d
                                                                                                                                                      "v




 BOREHAM           J:                                                 JUDGMENT                                                                             9


           In      th is        a c tio n         the    p l a i n t i f f            (th e         A u t h o r it y )          c la im s             the



 sum     o f     £51,6 99.5^p                w hich        is       a lle g e d           to    be        due       from             the        d e fe n d a n ts



 (th e     Club)           fo r     p o lic e       s e rv ic e s           p ro v id e d            by      the         A u t h o r it y           at



 the     C lu b 's         f o o t b a ll         ground         at        E ra m a ll          Lane,             S h e f f ie ld              on      dates



between            August           14th          1982    and          November                13th          19   83     .      The         Club



adm it         th a t     the      s e rv ic e s         were         p ro v id e d            but        deny           t h e i r        l i a b i l i t y



to      pay.        They          c o u n te r - c la im           suras          paid         to      the        A u t h o r it y             fo r



s im ila r        s e rv ic e s          rendered              p r i o r      to       August             14th         1982.               I     am



to ld     th a t        the       outcome          o f    these             p ro ce e d in g s            is       o f       g re a t          im p o rta n c e



to     p o lic e        a u t h o r i t i e s      and         f o o t b a l l        clu b s         th ro u g h o u t              the        la n d .




          The      e s s e n tia l          fa c ts      are          s h o rt        and      are        not        in        d is p u t e ,b u t



to   u nderstand                  some      o f    the     argum ents                   i t    is       necessary                    to        re vie w



those      fa c ts         in      the      l i g h t    o f      re c e n t          h i s t o r y .          The           Club         was         founded
                                                                                               ■                                                                      ff
  in      18 8 9 ,      was             e le c te d        a     member          o f    the         F o o tb a ll              League            in ,1892



  and      has       been               a    member            ever       s in c e .          I t     is       now        one        o f       f iv e        f o o t b a l l



  league           c lu b s            w it h i n       the            A u t h o r i t y 's         a re a .           I t s     ground               at



  B ra m a ll           Lane,               S h e f f ie ld          is      w e ll     known            to         soccer           e n th u s ia s ts .



  At     one      tim e           i t       was       e q u a lly         w e ll       known         as       a      te s t      and           county



  c r i c k e t      g ro u n d ,b u t                in       re c e n t     years        i t s         use        has        been          r e s t r i c t e d



  to     s o c c e r.




             For      as          long         as      can        be      r e c a lle d        the         d e fe n d a n ts '               home          f i x t u r e s



 have        been          p o lic e d            in s id e         the       ground           by      the          lo c a l         p o lic e          a u t h o r it y



 W ith      the       p a ssin g               o f    the        years          the     number                o f     p o lic e            o f f i c e r s



 in v o lv e d        in         t h i s      d u ty       has         in c re a s e d .            At        the      same           tim e ,           as



 in    the        case           o f        many      a n o th e r          c lu b ,    the         number             o f      s p e c ta to rs



at     each        match                has     d ecreased.                     For     in s ta n c e ,              in        the      tw e n tie s


                                                   /
and      t h i r t i e s          when          la rg e          g a te s      were       re c o rd e d ,(s o m e tim e s                         over



40,000)           p o l i c i n g             w it h i n         the      grounds          was           c a r r ie d          out          by    a     very



sm all       body          o f         o f f i c e r s .          In      the      f i f t i e s         and         s ix tie s , w h e n               la rg e



gates        were          s t i l l          bein g        re c o rd e d ,a b o u t                tw e n ty         o f f i c e r s            were



n o rm a lly         r e q u ir e d ;             a    few        more        when       the         ground               was        f u l l      to       c a p a c ity
      T h e ir     main         concern               a t     th a t         tim e       was      to     ensure              th a t      s p e c ta to r s



      were       ab le       to       watch           in      s a fe ty          and      c o m fo rt           and       th a t       both          e n tr y



      to     and     egress               from        the        ground            were        smooth            and        u n o b s tru c te d -

  «



      There        were         o th e r          s u b s id ia r y              d u tie s       such         as        s u p e r v is io n           o f



      the      ta k in g s          a t    the        t u r n s t i l e s         and       e n s u rin g           th a t       th e re           was      no
                                                     G


  e n try          onto         the        p it c h .            W ith        the      s e v e n tie s           two       unhappy                 fe a tu re s



  c o in c id e d .                 F i r s t ,       the        crowds           decreased               m arkedly                to     a        maximum



  o f       2 0 , 000- 3 0 , 0 0 0 ;               s e c o n d ly ,          t h e i r      b e h a vio u r             d e te r io r a te d ,           w ith



  the         s u p p o rte rs            o f      some          club s          being         p a r t i c u l a r l y          u n r u ly ,          a g g re s s iv e



 and          d is r u p t i v e .              As     a     r e s u l t         the     number           o f      o f f i c e r s        re q u ire d



 fo r         duty       w it h i n         the        ground            incre a se d             to      a     f ig u r e         v a r y in g          between



 about            t h i r t y        and        e ig h t y        or     more,           a c c o rd in g           to      the        o p p o s it io n .



 In         a d d i t i o n , d e t e c t i v e             o f f i c e r s         i n f i l t r a t e d          the       crowd            in     o rd e r



 to        reduce          such           crim es           as     p ic k in g           p o c k e ts .            In     the        e ig h t ie s          th in g s



have           not      im proved.                   'G ates           have         d e c lin e d        to      between                5,000          and



25,000             w ith        a     g e n e ra l          le v e l       o f     about          12,000.                 At     the       same'         tim e



the          number        o f        u n ifo rm e d             o f f i c e r s       on      duty       w it h in            the      ground



has         v a rie d      between                 t h i r t y         and       n in e ty       w ith        an        average           o f       about



s i x t y .
                      More      s i g n i f i c a n t l y                 fo r     p re s e n t        purposes              the          emphasis



      o f     the      p o li c in g           has         changed:                the        prim e       duty        now          is     the      e nforce m e n t



     o f     law       and     o rd e r.               There        are          s t i l l      o th e r     d u tie s           such       as      crowd



     management                and         c o n t r o l        and        the       enforce m ent               o f       the        C lu b 's      ground



     r e g u la tio n s            but         the      m aintenance                   o f      law      and     o rd e r          has  become
                                                                                                                                     •0


     the       main        fu n c t io n .              To      t h i s     th e re           have       been      two           c o n t r ib u t in g



     f a c t o r s .         F i r s t ,        and        o b v io u s ly ,           the       d e t e r io r a t io n             in     the      b e h a v io u r



     o f     s p e c ta to r s .               As     Mr.       G o s lin ,           the        A s s is ta n t       C h ie f            C onstable



    o f     South         Y o rk s h ire              at     the       r e le v a n t          tim e ,       s'aid



              "T h in g s       have            changed            a      g re a t       deal         since        the           f i f t i e s .

                Now       th e re        a re ,o n           o c c a s io n s , s it u a t io n s               which             are       ve ry

                c lo s e      to      r i o t . "



    T his       has       been        the           e x p e rie n c e        o f      clu b s         th ro u g h o u t           the       la n d ,a lth o u g h



    the       s u p p o rte rs           o f        some      c lu b s       have            e s ta b lis h e d        a     fa r          worse



    r e p u t a tio n         than         o th e r s .            The       most            s e rio u s      in c id e n t           o ccu rre d


                                                      /
at          S ra m a ll        Lane            in     March            1 9 8 5 , when           s u p p o rte rs           o f      the      v i s i t i n g



team           rip p e d       out         seats            and     th re w          b o t t l e s ,       iro n       bars           and      snooker



b a lls         a t     the        p o li c e .            To     combat             such        b e h a vio u r        and           to    p r o t e c t



p la y e rs           and     o f f i c i a l s            and      to      p re v e n t         the       p it c h    being               used      as



a     b a ttle g r o u n d ,             h ig h         and       s u b s t a n t ia l           fe n c in g       was           e re c te d       around



t h r e e . s i d e s - o f           the           ground         to       c o n ta in          the       s ta n d in g          s p e c ta to r s .
      The       second             reason            is        th a t         from          about              1979        the       Club,         which         has



      been          acknowledged                     at        a l l        tim es          as        s a fe ty        c o n s c io u s ,          have         in c re a s e d



     t h e i r      s a fe ty         measures.                        They           have            i n s t a l l e d       crush            b a r r ie r s



     adequate                in      s tr e n g th          and             numbers              to      m it ig a t e            the      p o t e n t ia l

                                                                                                                                                            "s

     c ru s h in g           e f f e c t      o f        the      movement                    o f^ la r g e           bodies             o f    e x c ite d



     s p e c ta to r s .              In      a d d it io n ,                by       the        c a r e f u l        s i t i n g        and      c o n s tr u c tio n



     o f     gangways                they      have             ensured,                  as          fa r     as     p o s s ib le ,           th a t    the



  gangways                   and      the      e x its            are         a t     a l l           tim es        kept         u n o b s tru c te d



 and          a c c e s s ib le .              A ll        t h is           has       been 'c a r r ie d                   out       under          the    s u p e r v is io n



 o f         Dr.     W ilf r e d           Eastwood,                   an     e x p e rie n c e d                c o n s u lt in g             engineer,



 w h o ,fo r            many         y e a rs ,h a s             made             a   s p e c ia l             study        o f      s a fe ty       p re c a u tio n s



 at         f o o t b a l l        g ro u n d s.               The          r e s u l t         o f     these          and        o th e r       measures



 has          been,          as      the      A u t h o r it y               r e a d i ly             acknow ledges,                      to     make      B ram all



Lane           one       o f      the       s a fe s t          o f         so cce r          grounds.


                                                     /




               In    a d d it io n            to         the      ve ry           s u b s a n tia l               p o lic e        p re s e n c e ,th e



Club          h a s , f o r        some        y e a rs ,e m p 1oyed                        a     number             o f     p a r t - t im e         stew ards



to         a s s is t     in       crowd            management,                       the         s e c u rin g            o f " e x i t s       and      the



e n fo rce m e nt              o f      the         C lu b 's           ground              r e g u la t io n s .                  I t    is     acknow ledged,



however,                by     the         Club          th a t         in        cases           o f        d i f f i c u l t y         the     stew ards
                                                                                                                                                                         p
      r e ly        h e a v ily              on     the       p o lic e       who      are            in        u n ifo rm ,         who         are         young e r,



   f i t t e r            and      b e t t e r          d is c i p l i n e d        and          tr a in e d             to      a ct       c o l l e c t i v e l y



   and         who,as              a     r e s u lt , h a v e            more       a u t h o r i t y .                  In      a d d it io n ,             every



   u n ifo rm e d                p o lic e           o f f i c e r       on     d u ty     is          tr a in e d            in     f i r s t        a id .



  Thus,             w h i l s t          I        a cce p t      Mr.        G r i f f i t h s '            c o n te n tio n               on    b e h a lf        o f   the



  C lu b ,t h a t                the         p re d o m in a n t            purpose             o f        u n ifo rm e d           po licem e n                in s id e



  the          ground             in         re c e n t         ye ars        has     been             to       d e te r         breaches              o f      the



  peace             and          u n ru ly           b e h a v io u r         and    to         m a in ta in              o r,      i f        n e ce ssa ry,



  re s t o r e            law       and            order,        i t   would         be     wrong                 to      o v e rlo o k           t h e i r



 c o n t r i b u t i o n               to          crowd        management                and           s a fe t y            and       the      en fo rce m e n t



 o f     the         C lu b 's               ground           r e g u la t io n s .              Indee d,                th e re          m ig h t      be       o cc a s io n s



 such          as         the      d ra m a tic              and       d is a s tr o u s              f i r e       at     the       ground             o f



 B ra d fo rd              C ity         F o o tb a ll            C lub,w hen             the          ove rw h e lm in g                   p r i o r i t y



would           become                 crowd           s a fe ty        and       rescue.

                                                        ✓




               As     a    f i r s t          e s s e n t ia l         step         tow ards                  the        m aintenance                  o f     law



and      o rd e r          i t      is        n e ce ssa ry            to      keep       the           s u p p o rte rs              o f       the       r i v a l



clu b s        s e g re g a te d                  a t - a l l      tim e s .         To     a ch ie ve                 t h i s      the         p o lic e



have       mounted                 a         combined             o p e r a tio n         a t         a i r      home         matches , between



the      o f f i c e r s           on        d u ty         o u ts id e       the     ground                  and        those            on     d u ty        i n s id e .
 F i r s t ,      the      c lu b      s u p p o rte rs              are          a d m itte d             through          p a r t i c u l a r            :



 t u r n s t i l e s       to      t e r r a c in g           a t    the          end         o f    the        ground         known          as



 The      Kop.           S e co ndly,               the       v i s i t i n g           s u p p o rte rs           are     met          at    the



 r a ilw a y         s t a t io n      or        t h e i r      coach             parks             and      e sco rte d         to      t u r n s t i l e s

                                                                                                                                                     'S


 at    the        o p p o s ite            (B ra m a il             Lane)           end        o f     the       ground.                At    the



 t u r n s t i l e s       they        are         r e lie v e d            o f    d r in k          and        c o n t a in e r s , such                 as



 b o t t le s        and    g la s s e s ;           those           a lre a d y           under           the        in flu e n c e          o f



 a lc o h o l      are      re fu s e d           a d m itta n c e .                    The         rem ainder           are        then        a d m itte d



 to    the        B ra m all           Lane          te r ra c e s           and         th e re          overseen           by       u n ifo rm e d



 o f f i c e r s .         T h e ir        d u ty      is      to     p re v e n t             or      d e te r       p ro v o c a tiv e ,



d is r u p t i v e         or     v i o l e n t       b e h a v io u r.                  At         tim es       they      are        c a lle d



onto        the       te r ra c e s         to      se p a ra te             w a rrin g              fa n s .         W ith o u t        them             an



e x c it in g        game         m ig h t        ve ry        e a s ily           become             an     u g ly      and      f r i g h t e n i n g



s p e c ta c le .           The       f i n a l       phase           o f         the     o p e ra tio n            comes         a t        the          end



o f   the       game       when         the         v i s i t i n g         s u p p o rte rs               are      held       on       the         te r ra c e s



w h ils t       the      home         s u p p o rte rs              d is p e r s e .                They        are      then         e s c o rte d



by    the       o f f i c e r s       on     d u ty          o u ts id e           back         to      the       r a ilw a y       s t a t io n



or    t h e i r      coach         p a rk s .
                A ll        t h is      has         c a lle d           fo r            ve ry      c o n s id e ra b le              o r g a n is a tio n



     and      c lo s e       l i a i s o n          between                the        Club      and       the        p o lic e .           For          as



     long       as        memory           can           r e c a l l       the        pro cedu res             have           been       in       essence



     the      same,          a lth o u g h               w ith      re fin e m e n ts              d ic t a te d          by     e x p e rie n c e

                                                                                                                                                         ■N

     and      e x tra        demands.                     In      re c e n t   years               sta n d a rd          i n s t r u c t i o n s              have
                                                                     u       -                                                                 y


     been       in      fo rc e         (th e y           are       b e fo re          the      c o u rt)s o          th a t       in      substance



  the        same          methods            o f         p o l i c i n g        have           been         a p p lie d        to      a l l         fiv e



  c lu b s       w it h i n          the      A u t h o r i t y ' s              are a .           B r i e f l y     what         has          happened



  is       t h i s .        In       J u ly      or         August             o f     each      year         the        s e n io r        p o lic e



 o f f i c e r         re s p o n s ib le                 fo r      the        p o li c in g        o p e ra tio n s            meets            the



 Chairman                 and        S e c r e t a r ie s , o f                each       o f    the         fiv e       c lu b s .           T ogether



 they         re v ie w          the        p o li c in g              arrangem ents                  made         d u rin g         the         p re v io u s



 season,               d is c u s s        problem s                w hich            have       a ris e n         and        c o n s id e r          the



p o li c in g             re q u ire m e n ts                fo r       the          fo rth c o m in g         season.                  When          the


                                                    /'

season            b egin s            the      d i v i s i o n a l             commander                in     whose           area        a      p a r t i c u l a r



ground            is       s it u a t e d        d is c u s s e s              w ith       the        clu b        the     number               o f    u n ifo rm e d



o f f i c e r s         r e q u ire d         fo r          each        home           game.           Those          numbers              depend



in     p a rt        on     the        expected                   s iz e       o f     the      crowd         and        in     p a rt         on      the



number           and        r e p u t a t io n              o f     the        v i s i t o r ' s       s u p p o rte rs .               There           has



been        a d m ira b le             c o - o p e r a tio n               between              the     Club         and        the      p o lic e
   and       an       e q u a lly         a d m ira b le            u n d e rs ta n d in g                    by     each      o f     the             problem s



   o f      the       o th e r .          H a p p ily        th a t         good         w i l l         has         s u rv iv e d         t h is           l i t i g a t i o n




                At       the      b e g in n in g          o f     each           week      an          o p e ra tio n          o rd e r           i   ?0     com piled



  by        the      p o lic e       and      c i r c u la t e d              w it h i n         the          Force         and       to      the            Club.



  Such        aji      o rd e r      is     b e fo re            the        c o u r t.           I t      c o n ta in s         d e t a ile d                i n s t r u c ­



  tio n s         fo r     p o l i c i n g      each             p a r t i c u l a r        p a rt            o f     the     gro u n d ,              fo r



 crowd            c o n t r o l     and       f o r     the          en fo rce m e n t                  o f     the       C lu b 's        ground



 r e g u la t io n s .              They       can          be      sum m arised,                      th e r e fo r e ,          as       they             were



 by      Mr .        G o s lin        and      C h ie f           In s p e c to r          Payne,.as                   p r o v id in g         fo r



 (a)        the       m aintenance                or       e n fo rce m e n t              o f         law          and     o rd e r;



 (b)        the       e n forcem ent              o f      the         C lu b 's         ground                r e g u la t io n s ,          many



      o f    w hich        are       concerned                   w ith        law        and           o rd e r;



 (c)        the      s a fe t y      and      c o m fo rt            o f      the        s p e c ta to rs ,               o f f i c i a l s            and



p la y e r s .




            The       manpower              r e q u ire d            fo r      these           o p e ra tio n s               is ,      as     I        have



in d ic a te d ,          c o n s id e r a b le .                   I t      cannot            be        p ro vid e d          by       o f f i c e r s



who      would           n o rm a lly        be       on     d u ty         a t     the      re le v a n t                times,w          ith o u t
      a d v e rs e ly            a f f e c t i n g              norm al           p o li c in g            re q u ire m e n ts              elsew here



      in      the        A u t h o r i t y ' s                a re a .          I t     is ,        th e r e fo r e ,           p ro v id e d             by     e x te n d in g



      the        s h i f t s      o f         those            in v o lv e d            and         by     c a l l i n g        on      o f f i c e r s          who



      would            o th e rw is e               have           been        on     r e s t        day.            This        in v o lv e s             the

                                                                                                                                                                     •N
      payment             o f     s u b s t a n t ia l                   o v e rtim e .



                  For       as      long             as        memory            can          r e c a l l ,      the       Club          has        paid          fo r



  th is           s e r v ic e          o f         u n ifo rm e d             o f f i c e r s           w it h in       the         ground           and         u n t i l



  the          19   80   's      they               pa id          w it h o u t       demur.                They           have          never             been



  c a lle d             upon       to         pay         fo r        the       p o lic e           on      d u ty       o u ts id e         the          ground



  nor         fo r       the       d e te c t iv e                  o f f i c e r s       w it h in           the        grou nd.              Of         co urse,



 over            the       years              the         charges               made           by     the       A u t h o r it y          have            in c re a s e d ,



 m a in ly             because                o f     the           r is e s      in.     p o lic e           o f f i c e r s '         pay      and            the



 need            fo r     in c r e a s in g                   num bers.                 T his        has       c o in c id e d            w ith           r is e s



 in        o th e r       expenses                    and          w ith       d im in is h in g               g a te s .             The     in c re a s e s



are          w e ll       documented                      and            are     not          in     d is p u te .              Some        i n d i c a t i o n



o f        t h e i r      im pact              on      the           Club        can          be    g iv e n        by     a     co u p le          o f        exam ples:



in         the      season              1979/80                    the     c o s t      to         the      Club         fo r        p o l i c i n g        a     crowd



o f        16,000          was       £600; , in                     1981/82             i t        had      r is e n       to        £ 1 ,9 9 0 ;         the



f ig u r e s           r e l a t i n g          to        a     crowd           o f     22,000             showed              even       la r g e r            in c re a s e s



from          £742         in      1979/80                    to      £2,635            in         1981/82.
                   In         1981      Mr.             R eginald              B re a le y                  became         the      C lu b 's            Chairm an!



      At      th a t      tim e         the          Club          was         lo s in g          n e a rly           t h r e e - q u a r t e r s             o f        a



      m i l l i o n       pounds               per        annum.                 He     ordered                  d r a s t ic       curbs           on        e x p e n d itu re



      These         were         s u c c e s s fu l                and         w it h i n         three             years         the        Club        was         b re a k in g

                                                                                                                                                                    •N
     even.              One      o f      the           m a tte rs             he     in v e s t ig a t e d               was       the       e v e r-in C r e a s in g



     co st        o f    p o lic e            s e r v ic e s .                His      e n q u ir ie s               led     him        to     b e lie v e



     th a t      the          charge           made           to        the          Clubs            in      South        Y o rk s h ire            were            out



     o f    s c a le      w ith          those             made           to        clu b s           in      o th e r     areas,            and         so     he



     took        v a rio u s           ste p s           in    the          hope          o f     re d u c in g            th a t       b urden.                F i r s t ,



  in        May         1982      he          w rote          to        the      Home           S e c re ta ry ;             the        r e p ly         was        not



 very            e n c o u ra g in g , but                    at        le a s t      some            m is u n d e rs ta n d in g s                 were            removed.



 For          in s ta n c e ,           i t     came           as        some         c o m fo rt              to     le a rn       th a t      soccer



 was         not        the      o n ly         s p o rt           to      face        t h is              p a r t i c u l a r      expense.                   In



 a d d it io n           the         le g a l           p o s it io n           was" c l a r i f i e d                 and       Mr.      D re a le y



 became            aware             th a t      p o lic e              s e rv ic e s           were            o n ly     p ro v id e d           a t    the



C lu b 's          re q u e s t.               In        December                   1982        n e g o tia tio n s .w e r e                   commenced



between                 the     r e p r e s e n t a t iv e s                   o f    the         A u t h o r it y           and        the     f i v e         clu b s



in         the    hope         o f      re d u c in g              the         le v e l         o f        cha rge s.             These         d is c u s s io n s



were          s u c c e s s fu l.               In        March            19 8 3       new           s c a le s         were       a g re e d ;          they



were         c a lc u la te d            on         a    new        b a s is ,w h ic h                 was          r e la te d      to       the        s iz e
     o f    the     crowd           and       hence           to      the            gate        money         and      not       to        the     number



     o f    p o lic e      o f f i c e r s           employed.                       T his       was       e n c o u ra g in g , but              the



     C lu b 's     hopes            th a t       the       new       ra te s               would       be     backdated                to        the



  commencement                     o f      the        1982/83              season            were          not      r e a lis e d .              They

                                                                                                                                                        -N


  came         in t o      e f f e c t       on        A p r il      1st             1983.




               Pending             the       agreement                 o f           the     nen       ra te s       payments               had        been



  suspended.                  By         A p r i l      1st        1983.              th e r e f o r e ,       the      a rr e a r s         were



 s u b s t a n t ia l         -     in       the        case        o f         the        Club       about         £55,000.                 The-



 A u t h o r it y          demanded               payment.                      In     August           they        agreed             to    payment



 by        in s t a lm e n ts .             By       the      end         o f        August          the       Club        had      paid           ju s t



 over         £ 1 4 ,000.             I t     has        paid         no         more.             The       amount         o f     the          a rr e a r s



 was        too    much           fo r      Mr.        B re a le y              who,         in      about        May       19    8 3,       turned



 fo r       s u p p o rt     to      the         M in is t e r            o f        S p o rt.         He     did     so      p a r t l y         in



the        b e l i e f     th a t        since'         June         1982             the     Club          had      been          m aking



s p e c i f i c      re q u e s ts           fo r       p o lic e           s e rv ic e s           fo r      s e le c te d       games.



He      was       wrong       about            t h a t ;      in      f a c t          no     such          re q u e s t      had        been          made.



The        tim e    honoured                 p r a c t ic e         o f         w eekly           d is c u s s io n '      between                the



Club        and     the      p o lic e            as     to       n e x t        S a tu rd a y 's            re q u ire m e n ts             had



been        fo llo w e d .            The        M in is t e r            was          unable          to      a s s is t .         As       a    means
       o f     re d u c in g               expense               th e re          was       discussed                    at        the      p re -se a so n



       m eeting                in      J u ly        1983            between             the       p l a i n t i f f s              and       the     r e p r e s e n t a tiv e s



       o f     the        f i v e          clu b s         the       p o s s i b i l i t y             o f     making               in c re a s e d       use         o f



      stew ards                 f o r       crowd           c o n t r o l          so,          h o p e fu lly ,              re d u c in g         the       p o lic e



      presence.                       I t w a s            the       unanimous                   view          o f      the         m eeting         th a t      th is



      was       u n d e s ir a b le .                  T h e ir          view          was         th a t        the          stew ards             lacked           the



     necessary                      a u t h o r i t y .




                   There             is     no     doubt              th a t        a l l       the       club s           welcomed               the      p o lic e



     to      t h e i r         gro u n d s.                As      Mr.        B re a le y             had            r e a d i ly        conceded,              he



     has      never             denied             the          b e n e f it         to         the      Club           o f     h a vin g        the      p o lic e



  in         the     g ro u n d ;             the y         have a            d e te r r e n t          e f f e c t           0/1    the       u n ru ly       elem ent



  and         he     c o n s id e rs                 i t        l i k e l y        th a t        s p e c ta to rs              were          more       l i k e l y



  to-come                i f        the y      knew          th a t        the        p o lic e              were         th e re .            Indeed,          he



 agreed             th a t           i f     the      p o lic e           were            not         th e re          h is        Club        would       not



 be       ta k in g            the         re a so n a b le            p re c a u tio n s                 n e cessary                 to      comply          w ith



 the         F o o tb a ll             A s s o c ia tio n s -s                    r e g u la tio n s                and       in     p a r t i c u l a r



R e g u la tio n                3 1 ( a ) .        But          he     i n s is t e d            th a t        the        c o s t        was     too      h ig h .



In        O ctober              1983         he      asked            f o r        the          debt         to .b e          c a n c e lle d        on       the



g r o u n d ^t h a t                th e re       had        been         no        re q u e s t             fo r      p o lic e           s e r v ic e s .




                                                                              -     13      -
      T his         re q u e s t       was        re fu s e d .           He      then          suggested                th a t       the      Club



      m ight           i n s t a l    c 1o s e - c i r c u i t            t e l e v i s i o n            and     so     o b v ia te         the       need



      fo r        p o lic e       w it h in        the       ground;             any        tr o u b le         or      problem             would



      be     re v e a le d           on    the      screen              and      the       p o lic e           could         then        be       c a lle d



      in     from         o u ts id e .           T h is ,       not       s u r p r i s i n g l y ,           was       not        a c c e p ta b le .




                  By     December               1983       the          Club      was          h e a v ily       in      a r r e a r s        w ith



  the         in s ta lm e n ts .                The       p l a i n t i f f s          issued            t h e i r     w r i t .         The        Club



  then            made       a     fre s h       e f f o r t       to     r id         them selves               o f    the         burden,          by



 in t im a t i n g               th a t    fo r      the       game         a g a in s t         B o lto n          W anderers              due       to



 be        played           on       December              3 1st        they       did         not       re q u e s t        p o lic e        s e r v ic e s .



 The         p o lic e        were         so     concerned                th a t        they        th re a te n e d              p ro c e e d in g s



 be fo re            the      lo c a l       j u s t i c e s       under          the          p r o v is io n s         o f       S e c tio n        10



o f        the      S a fe ty        o f   S p o rts           G rounds^Act                    1975.           By      Decemember                  21st



the         A u t h o r it y         a u th o r is e d         such           p ro ce e d in g s              but      a d v is e d       the        Club



th a t       t h i s      a u t h o r it y        would          be      w ithd ra w n             i f     the         Club        made       a    re q u e st



these             s e rv ic e s       under         S e c tio n           15(1)          o f     the          1964      P o lic e        A ct.



The        Club        re le n te d          t o . t h e       e x te n t        o f     re q u e s tin g              and     I     q u o t e : -



           " P o lic e        s e rv ic e s         in     such          numbers               and       at    such          tim es

             as     the       C h ie f       C o n s ta b le          m ight           d i r e c t . "
    They made               it clear that                          the request was not                                    for special                         police


   s e rv ic e s        nor         was      i t        made         p u rsu a n t             to        S e c tio n          15(1)              o f     the         1964   Act



   T his        was     not       good           enough             f o r         the        A u t h o r it y .               As    a       r e s u l t        i t



   was     agreed             th a t      the           Club        would            re q u e s t           and       a gain            I    q u o te :-

                                                                                                                                                               'S

           " S p e c ia l         p o lic e            s e r v ic e s             from        the         C h ie f      C onstable                      under

              S e c tio n         15(1)            o f       the      P o lic e           Act            1964     fo r         the          B o lto n

              Wanderers                match             on        December               31st            and     a l l        subsequent

              home       matches              fo r           the      1983/84                 f o o t b a l l        s e a so n ."



  The      re q u e s t        was        expressed                   to      be        w ith o u t          p r e ju d ic e                to         the     m a tte rs



  ra is e d      in      th is         a c tio n .                 Thus       honour                and      g o o d w ill           were               p re s e rv e d



  pending             the      outcome                 o f    these           p ro c e e d in g s .




            A g a in s t         t h is            background                     and         in     these           c irc u m s ta n c e s                   Mr.      B e n tly



 on     b e h a lf      o f      the      A u t h o r i t y ,              contends                 th a t        the         sums          claim ed



 in     th is     a c tio n           are        due         u nd e r:



 (1)     S e c tio n          15(1)         o f         the        P o lic e         Act           1964       w hich           p ro v id e s :
                                                   /


           The        c h ie f      o f f i c e r            o f    p o lic e           o f        any      p o lic e          fo rc e            may

           p ro v id e         at      the         re q u e s t        o f        any         person            s p e c ia l            p o lic e

           s e rv ic e s         at       any          prem ises              or        in         any      l o c a l i t y         in       the

           p o lic e          area        fo r         w hich         the         fo rc e           is     m a in ta in e d ,s u b je c t

           to    the           payment                 to     the      p o lic e              a u t h o r it y          o f        charges               on

           such        sca le s           as.may              be     d e te rm in e d                by      th a t       a u t h o r i t y . "



A l t e r n a t i v e l y ,         (2)      the             term s         o f     c o n tr a c t           between               the           A u t h o r it y



and     the      C lub.             The      Club             d e n ie s          l i a b i l i t y          on      the       f o l lo w in g                 broad



g ro u n d s :

                                                                           - 15 -
       (1)      The services                              provided                were not special                          police services.


   They        were,        or         a t      le a s t            the y         were         p re d o m in a n tly ,            o r d in a r y            s e r v ic e s ,



   th a t      is      s e rv ic e s                 p ro v id e d           w it h in          the        scope          and       in      pursuance



   o f       the     A u t h o r i t y 's                  a b s o lu te              p u b lic        d uty      to      m a in ta in           law         and

                                                                                                                                                                -s

   o rd e r.           The       essence                      o f    s p e c ia l          s e rv ic e s          is      th a t      the y           are      d i f f e r e n t



   in     k in d       from            o r d in a r y               s e rv ic e s         and       the         s e rv ic e s        p ro v id e d             by



  the        A u t h o r it y           were              not        s p e c ia l         in      th a t       re g a rd .



  (2)          That        the          Club              made         no        re q u e s t      fo r        s p e c ia l        p o lic e           s e r v ic e s ;



  such        re q u e s t,             i f      any,          as      they           made        were         fo r      o r d in a r y          p o lic e



  s e r v i c e s .



  (3)         That         the         A u t h o r i t y              is ,        t h e r e fo r e ,           not       e n t i t l e d         to     charge



 fo r        such      s e r v ic e s .



 I t     fo llo w s ,         t h e r e f o r e ,                   th a t        the      main          t h r u s t      o f      c o u n s e l’ s           sub­



 m is s io n s         has       been                d ir e c te d           to        the      q u e s tio n           w hether            or        not       the


                                                          *
 s e rv ic e s        p ro v id e d                  by       the      A u t h o r it y           fo r      the         Club        were         s p e c ia l



p o lic e          s e rv ic e s .                   H ow e ve r,            a     number          o f      s u b s id ia r y            p o in ts           have



been         ta ke n .           I t         w i l l          be     c o n v e n ie n t           to     deal           w ith      these           here



and      now.           F i r s t ,            i t        w i l l      be        r e c a lle d         th a t     Mr.           B e n tly        bases



h is     case         in     the         a l t e r n a t i v e                   on     S e c tio n        15(1)           o f     the      P o lic e



Act          1964      and        on          c o n t r a c t .              I        sh ould          make       i t     c le a r        th a t        I     approach
       the          p l a i n t i f f ' s               c la im         as     one         fo r     breach              o f    c o n tr a c t.                 W h ils t            ”



       S e c tio n             15(1)            o f      the       1964         Act         re c o g n is e s            a     p r a c t ic e             w hich              has



       been          fo llo w e d               fo r         very        many        years             and      gave           s t a t u t o r y             power



      to        p ro v id e            s p e c ia l           p o lic e         s e rv ic e s           fo r       payment               on          re q u e s t             i t   does



  fin o t        of-      i t s e l f           p ro v id e         a    cause             o f     a c tio n ;          i t     is      m e r e l y Qa n                 e n a b lin g



   p r o v is io n .                    To        succeed               the      A u t h o r it y            must         prove               (1)       a     re q u e s t           fo r



   and          a      prom ise              to         pay       fo r       the      r e le v a n t           s e rv ic e s ;            ( 2 )         th a t           the



  s e rv ic e s                sought                  and     p ro v id e d          were          s p e c ia l          p o lic e            s e r v ic e s .




                    As       to      (1)         i t     is     not          d is p u te d          th a t      the           evidence                 o f     the



  course                 o f       d e a lin g           between              the      p a r t ie s          could             j u s t i f y           the          in fe re n c e



 o f       a     re q u e s t            fo r          s e rv ic e s          and      a     prom ise              to         pay.            The         course



 o f       conduct                              commenced                at      a     tim e        w hich          was         long           beyond                   the



 memory                o f        l i v i n g          persons           and         has         c o n tin u e d          unbroken                    over              the



 succe e d in g                    ye a rs.              H aving               regard             to     the       n a tu re            o f         the       s e rv ic e s



and         the              s ta tu s          o f      the       prem ises                in      w hich         they          were               p ro v id e d ,



namely               a       p r iv a t e          s p o rts           ground          o f        la rg e       c a p a c ity ,               i t      is ,         I



th in k ,           h ig h ly            p ro b a b le            th a t        the        course            o f      d e a lin g             commenced



w ith          an        express                re q u e s t        from         the         Club        fo r       a     p o lic e            presence



and        an       express                prom ise               to     pay.              But,     be       th a t       as      i t     may,               fo r



            ng       as        memory              can        r e c a l l        the        pro ce d u re               has      rem ained                    s u b s t a n t i a l l y
     the        same,             namely            a     p re -se a so n              m ee ting               between           s e n io r            re p re s e n ­



     t a t iv e s           o f    the       p a r t ie s             to    d is c u s s           in     g e n e ra l          term s        the             C lu b ’ s



     re q u ire m e n t              fo r       the           e n suing         season.                   P a r t i c u l a r        m atches,when



     tr o u b le            was     most            l ik e l y , w e r e            i d e n t i f i e d , in              the       knowledge                       th a t


                                0                                           0
     the        Club         would          then              be     expected               to      re c e iv e           and       the       A u t h o r it y



     to    p ro v id e            a d d it io n a l                o f f i c e r s .         Then             a t    the       b e g in n in g                o f     each



 week            the         C lu b 's        re q u ire m e n ts                   fo r     the         next            home     game            were              a p p ra is e d



 in        g r e a te r           d e t a i l        and           alw ays       on        the          u n d e rs ta n d in g             th a t         the



 A u t h o r it y             expected                  payment.                 U n t il          the          1982/83           season                i t         was



 a ls o         on      the        u n d e rs ta n d in g                  th a t      the         Club             expected          to          pay.



 To        adapt            the      words              o f     S ir       W ilf r e d           Greene,              M aster         o f         the          R o lls ,



 in       .I .12_ r e :__ C 1 e a d o n             T ru s t          L im ite d           [ 19 3 8 ]          k    A.E .R .        518           at     page             525,



the         Club            knew       th a t           s e rv ic e s          were         being             p ro v id e d         fo r      t h e i r              b e n e fit



w ith           an     e x p e c ta tio n                th a t          the    Club          would                pay    fo r      those              s e rv ic e s ;



at        the        very         le a s t          they           acqu iesce d               in        the         p r o v is io n         o f        those



s e rv ic e s           and         to ok         the          b e n e f it      o f       them.                They       must       be          taken



i m p lie d ly              to      have        re q u e ste d                 those         s e rv ic e s               and     th e re b y            prom ised



to        pay        fo r     them.             I       do         not     o v e rlo o k           the         f a c t     th a t     in          1983              the



Club        c h a lle n g e d               the         p l a i n t i f f ' s          r i g h t         to         payment         f i r s t          on           the
      ground          th a t          they          were             l i a b l e         o n ly           i f     they         made          an    e xp re ss         re q u e s t



      fo r     a    p a r t i c u l a r             match               and         th a t              they     had       made            few     such          re q u e s ts .



     This          was      based            on        a         m is u n d e rs ta n d in g .                         They        had        made         no     express



     re q u e s ts ;             they        had             fo llo w e d            the            tim e        honoured                  p ro c e d u re .          In

                                                                                                                                                                     •N
     any      event              t h e i r        c o m p la in t             a t      th a t             tim e      was       about              the     amount           q




     claim ed            not          the        p r o p r i e t y            o f      the               charge.              L a te r        the y       c h a lle n g e d



     the      p r o p r i e t y            o f     the            charge,           but             I     have       no       doubt           th a t      they       re q u e ste d



     the      s e rv ic e s            w hich              were         in     fa c t               p ro v id e d         and        expected               to      pay



     fo r     them         i f        the        p l a i n t i f f s           were                e n t i t l e d        to     ch a rg e .              Whether



  or         not    th ey           were           e n t i t l e d            to      charge                    must      depend             on     w he ther



 or         not     what            th e y        p ro v id e d              were          s p e c ia l             p o lic e          s e r v ic e s .            Thus



 I      do     not       a ccept                 Mr.         G r i f f i t h s '         subm ission                      th a t       d u rin g          th§      re le v a n t



 p e rio d ,          or         at     le a s t             d u rin g         D art               o f    th a t       p e rio d ,           the        C lu b 's     re q u e s ts



 were          l im i t e d           to         the         p r o v is io n             o f        o r d in a r y         p o lic e          s e r v ic e s .


                                                             *
N e ith e r          s id e           was         concerned                   w ith                la b e ls ;         each        knew           the      kind



and          the     e x te n t            o f     the            s e r v ic e         expected                    by      the       Club          and      p ro v id e d



by      the        A u t h o r i t y .                 I t        was     fo r        th a t              s e rv ic e         th a t        re q u e s ts         were



made.              The       c r u c i a l             q u e s tio n ,              as         I         have      s a id ,        i s :      Were        they



s p e c ia l        p o lic e              s e rv ic e s ?
                    Then        Mr.         B e n tly            su b m its                  th a t       w here.as                  here ,                in        a      course



      o f    d e a lin g        ov =r        many              years,               s e rv ic e s            have             been          p ro v id e d                  at     the



      express             or        im p lie d               re q u e s t            o f      the         C lu b ,in            the             knowledge                       th a t



    the        A u t h o r it y            expected                   payment,                    then        the             law         w i l l         im p ly           a     prom ise

                                                                                                                                                                                  ■N

    to       pay        and         the      A u t h o r it y              i s ,            th e r e fo r e ,             e n t i t l e d                 to         payment.



    In       such         c irc u m s ta n c e s ,                   he         conte n d s,                  i t    does             not             m a tte r             th a t



    the       p l a i n t i f f s           were             p r o v id in g                 no     more            than            i t      was           t h e i r            p u b lic



   duty         to       p ro v id e .              The          p e rfo rm a n ce                     o f     a     p u b lic               duty               is         good



   c o n s id e r a tio n                 fo r      a        prom ise                 to       pay        and        th e re               is        no        p r i n c i p l e



   o f      p u b lic         p o lic y          w hich              p re c lu d e s               the         re c o v e ry                o f           the        agreed



  p r ic e .            T h is ,       I     t h in k ,             is         the          le a s t         im p re s s iv e                   o f       Mr.            B e n t ly 's



  s u b m issio n s             a n d , i t             is      f a i r         to          s a y . i t       was         p re se n te d                      r a t h e r         more



  t e n t a t i v e l y         than             the          r e s t .             I t s       su p p o rt              is     sa id                to       come          from



 two        c o m p a ra tiv e ly                 re c e n t             d e c is io n s               in       the           C ourt              o f         A ppeal:



^ - rd        V -       By ham        C19 5 6 ] ' 2                 A .E .R .              318      and         W illia m s                     v.        W     i l l i e



 [1 9 5 7 ]         1    W.L.R.             148.               In     my            view ,         they             do        not         p ro v id e                s u p p o rt



 fo r       Mr.         B e n t ly 's            s u b m is s io n .                 They          were             both        concerned                            w ith



the         duty        o f    one         i n d i v i d u a l                 to      a n o th e r.                 They           were              not            concerned



w ith        p u b lic         duty         in      the             w id e r          sphere,                 namely                the           duty               o f    a



p u b lic .b o d y             to     the         p u b lic              a t        la r g e .            A p p lie d               to          the           l a t t e r
category of case                                   they would                            run counter                             to a long line of authority


to    the           c o n tr a r y .               See          fo r          in s ta n c e                  the        o b s e rv a tio n s                    o f       Lord



Cave,          the          Lord             C h a n c e llo r,                     in         G lasbro ok                        v.        Glamorgan                     County



C o u n c il         [1925]                  A . C.        270         a t         page              277.               I        q u o te :-

                                                                                                                                                                                 •>

       "No           doubt             th e re             is       an         a b s o lu te                  and           u n c o n d itio n a l
                                                                                                         0
            o b li g a t i o n                b in d in g              the              p o lic e             a u t h o r i t i e s                  to      take

            a l l      steps             which              appear                      to         them         to          be        n ecessary                   fo r

            keeping                the            peace,               fo r             p r e v e n tin g                   crim e            or       fo r

         p r o t e c t in g                   p ro p e rty                from                c r im in a l                 i n j u r y          and         the

         p u b lic ,w h o                     pay          fo r        t h i s            p r o t e c t io n                     throu gh              the         ra te s

        and            taxes,            cannot                 l a w f u l l y                 be        c a lle d               upon           to        make        a

         f u r t h e r             payment                  fo r          th a t              w hich           is           t h e i r         r i g h t .             This

        was           la id            down           by        Lord               J u s tic e                P ic k fo rd                  in       the       case

        o f          G lam org anshire                               Coal                Co.         v.        The           G lam organshire

        S ta n d in g                  J o in t           Com m ittee                         in       the         fo llo w in g                     term s:

         ' I f        one          p a rty            to        a      d is p u te                  is       th re a te n e d                    w ith        v io le n c e

        by          the          o th e r          p a rty           he            is         e n t i t l e d               to        p r o t e c t io n              from

        such            v io le n c e ,w h e th e r                             h is           c o n te n tio n                       in     the           d is p u te           be

        r i g h t           or      w rong,and                       to         a llo w              the           p o lic e               a u t h o r it y            to

        deny            him         p r o t e c t io n                   from                 th a t         v io le n c e                 u nless            he       pays

       a l l          the         expense                  in        a d d it io n                   to        the           c o n t r ib u t io n                 w hich

       w ith           o th e r              ra te         payers                   he         makes               to        the           s u p p o rt         o f        the

       p o lic e             is         o n ly          one          degree                    le ss          dangerous                          than         to

       a llo w              th a t       a u t h o r i t y                    to        decide                w hich              p a rty             is      r i g h t

       in        the         d i ^p u t e          and           g ra n t               or         w ith h o ld                  p r o t e c t io n             a c c o r d in g ly

       There                is     a     m oral              d u ty            on         each               p a rty             to        the        d is p u te           to

       do        n o th in g             to        a g g ra v a te                      i t        and        to        take               re a so n a b le            means

       o f       s e l f —p r o t e c t i o n ,                     but            the             d is c h a rg e                o f       t h is         du ty       by

       them            is        not          a    c o n d it io n                      p re ce d e n t                 to        the         d is c h a rg e

      by         the         p o lic e             a u t h o r i t y                    o f     t h e i r          own            d u t y . '              W ith       th is

      s ta te m e n t                  o f        the       law           I        e n t i r e l y             agree                  and'       I     th in k         th a t

      any           a tte m p t               by      a     p o lic e                   a u t h o r it y                to        e x t r a c t            payment

      fo r          s e rv ic e s                 w hich            f a l l         w it h i n                the           p la in          o b lig a t io n s

      o f      the          p o lic e              fo rc e             should                   be        f i r m l y            d isco u n te n a n ce d

      by       the          c o u r t s . "




                                                                              -21-
      In     my         judgm ent,                    i f       the        A u t h o r it y           was         not        p r o v id in g             s p e c ia l



   p o lic e             s e rv ic e s               fo r         the       C l u b , i t         is     not             e n t i t l e d          to     payment.




                   Mr.        G r i f f i t h s             has          contended                    th a t       i f      I       were          to     fin d          th a t

                                                                                                                                                                         "N

   the.       s e rv ic e s               p ro v id e d               by      the        A u t h o r it y            were            in       p a rt         s p e c ia l



  s e rv ic e s               and         in         p a rt       s e rv ic e s            which,            in     accordance                         w ith        t h e i r



  p u b lic             duty,           they          were            bound           to        p r o v id e ,t h e                 Club          should            bear



  the              co st          o f     the fo rm er                   but         not        o f    the         l a t t e r .              I    th in k          there



  are              two        answers to                        th a t      s u b m is s io n :              f i r s t , in               d e c id in g             w hether



  or       not          the       s e rv ic e s                 were         s p e c ia l          s e rv ic e s                I   t h in k           the        s e rv ic e s



 must          be        viewed                 as      a       w hole;          to        break          them             down           in to         t h e i r       c o n s t it u e n t



 p a rts           is        u n r e a l i s t i c ;               s e c o n d ly ,             even         i f         th a t      e x e rc is e             could



 r e a l i s t i c a l l y                      be     achie ved                i t      would           be        im p o s s ib le                to        sever



 them         in        o rd e r          to         p ric e          them.


                                                            ✓




             W ith            th a t        I        tu rn         to       the        q u e s tio n              w hich is               c e n tr a l            to     th is



l i t i g a t i o n .                   The          e x p re s s io n                " s p e c ia l         p o lic e s e r v ic e s "                      is        now



e n s h rin e d              in         S e c tio n             15(1)          o f      the           1964         Act          b u t ' i t       is      prob a b le



th a t       i t        is     as        long           e s ta b lis h e d                 as     the        p r a c t ic e               i t s e l f .            C e r t a in ly



the        e x p re s s io n               was         c u r r e n t          in       the        1 9 2 0 's ,b u t                 nowhere              in        the
       1964             Act       or    in       r e le v a n t         j u d i c i a l           a u t h o r it y          i   3     any          d e f i n i t i o n



      o f       i t s        terras       to      be      fo u n d .           That,              perhaps,                is        not       s u r p r i s i n g .



      I t      may           v e ry     w e ll      be,       as       Mr.          B e n tly        su b m its,                th a t        l i k e      the           e le p h a n t



      they          are          e a s ie r       to    re c o g n is e              than          to        d e fin e .            Both             p a r t ie s



     are         agreed,                how ever,             th a t          the     e xp re ssio n                  r e la t e s            to      s e rv ic e s



     which              are        beyond          what         the       A u th o r ity                is      bound            by        i t s      p u b lic



     duty           to         p ro v id e ,       beyond              what         o rd in a ry             members                o f       the       p u b lic



     are        e n t i t l e d         to      e x p e c t.            What,            then,           is         the     am bit             o f      th a t          p u b lic



     duty?               I t      is    c o n v e n ie n tly             summarised                      in         Hals b u r y ' s               Laws        o f



     England,                   4th     e d i t i o n ,       Volume                36,        paragraph                  3 20        in      these            te r m s :-



               "G eneral                f u n c t io n s         o f     c o n s ta b le s .

                 The           p rim a ry        fu n c t io n          o f     the            c o n s ta b le            re m a in s ,a s               in

                 the           17th      C entury,            the       p re s e rv a tio n                   o f     the        Queen's                peace.

                From             this      general              function                  stems          a      number              of        particular

                duties                 additional               to      those             conferred                   by        statute               and

                including                  those          mentioned                   hereafter.                          The       first             duty

                of       a      constable               is     always               fa          prevent               the        commission

               of        a      crime.            If      a    constable                      reasonably                   apprehends

               that             the     a c t i o n , 'of        any          person              may        result             in        a    breach              of

               the           peace        it      is      his        duty           to       prevent                that        action.                   It       is

               his         general              duty          to p r o t e c t               life       and          property.                       The

               general                 function               of c o n t r o l l i n g               traffic               on        the           roads
               is        derived             from       this           duty.”



To          s i m i l a r         e f f e c t                 is the           law           r e l a t i n g         to    p o lic e c o n s ta b le s



in          S c o tla n d             w hich       is     se t     out         in        the       P o lic e           (S c o tla n d )                Act         1967,


S e c tio n             17,        upon         w hich        Mr.       G r i f f i t h s            r e l i e d .              S u b se ctio n                (   1)     p ro v id e s




                                                                          -     23       -
            "S u b je c t           to        the           p r o v is io n s            o f        t h i s         Act          i t     s h a ll       be

             the        duty         o f       the           c o n s ta b le s              o f       a       p o lic e              fo rc e :

             (a)        to     g u a rd ,           p a t r o l           and          watch              so        as

                        (1)         to        p re v e n t           the          comm ission                       o f        o ffe n c e s ;

                        (2)         to        p re s e rv e              o rd e r;          and

                        (3)         to     p r o t e c t             l i f e       and          p r o p e r t y . "



 I t    is     unnecessary                         to        quote             f u r t h e r .                                                                          >

                                                                                                                                                              Q                          0




             In    su p p o rt             o f      the            A u t h o r i t y ' s             c a s e ,th a t                   the        s e rv ic e s          p ro v id e d



 by    them        to        the         Club           were            o u ts id e             the           sphere               o f     t h e i r        p u b lic



d u ty ,M r.            B e n tly          makes               a    number               o f      p o in t s .                  He       subm its            f i r s t



 th a t      the        p u b lic          duty              o f    a     c h ie f          c o n s ta b le                    does        not        extend             to



p r o t e c t in g           every             c i t i z e n            c o m p le te ly                  a g a in s t             every           p o s s ib le



or        even       a n t ic ip a t e d                             c rim e .              His           re s o u rc e s o f                 men           and     money



are       l im i t e d         and         h is     o b l i g a t i o n                is       l im i t e d                   by t h e m .           M oreover,



h is      duty       is        to        be      c a r r ie d             o u t     in         an         even            handed             manner               and



so     he     must           d e cide            f a i r l y            and       re a s o n a b ly                  which               c a ll s '    he      w i l l
                                                        /



answer            and        which            he        w i l l         not       and          w hich               he         can       o n ly       answer            i f



the       s e rv ic e s            are         p a id          f o r .          Where             th e re             is        a th r e a t           to     law



and       o rd e r        on       p r iv a t e                     land          he        has           a    numbero f                     a l t e r n a t i v e s          open



to     him:        (1)        to     send               p o lic e          o f f i c e r s ;                  (2)        i f     i t      appears             th a t



the       event         would            be        p r o d u c tiv e               o f         d is o r d e r ,                 take         steps           to     p re v e n t     i t
      (3)       at          s p o rts           grounds                make          a p p lic a t io n                under            S e c tio n           10     o f



      the      S a fe ty               o f     S p o rts          Grounds               Act           1975;            (4)        to     say         "My       re s o u rc e s



      in     men        and            money             are      l i m i t e d ,          I     cannot                a f f o r d       to        p ro v id e        the



     s e rv ic e s               u nless             you        pay          fo r     them ".               He         is     not        bound           to     adopt

                                                                                                                                                                      ■N

     the       a l t e r n a t i v e                 most        fa v o u ra b le                to       the       persons                  s ta g in g        the



     e ve n t.              S econd ly,                   he     su b m its             th a t        the         Club         seek           to      i n t e r p r e t



  the         e x p re s s io n                    " s p e c ia l           p o lic e          s e r v ic e s "             too        n a rro w ly .              His



  case          is          th a t           p o lic e         s e rv ic e s           may        be        s p e c ia l,          not        o n ly       when           they



  are         d iffe r e n t,                 in      kind            but      a ls o          when         they            are        more        e x te n s iv e



  than          i t         is     the          A u t h o r i t y ' s               duty        to        p ro v id e .                For     in s ta n c e ,



 w h i l s t          i t        is        the       duty         o f        the      p o lic e            to      p re v e n t          th re a te n e d             or



 apprehended                           breaches                 o f     the         peace,            the       o r d in a r y           c i t i z e n         has



 to          w a it         u n t i l          danger             is         upon       him          or      is        th re a te n e d             b e fo re         he



 is        e n t i t l e d            to       c a l l     fo r         a s s is ta n c e              from         the           p o lic e .            Here         what



is         c a lle d             the         law      and        o rd e r           p r o t e c t io n            is        more        e x te n s iv e            and



is         com m itted                 in        advance               o f     th re a te n e d                 danger             or     th r e a ts          o f



b re a c h e s ^ o f               the          peace.                 T h ir d l y ,           here         the            p o lic e         were       not         d i s ­



c h a rg in g           t h e i r             own        du ty         to      the       p u b lic ;              they         were           in     f a c t       d is c h a r g in g



the        C lu b 's             d u tie s           to        the      s p e c ta to rs               whom            the        Club         i n v i t e d         to



the        g ro u n d .                The         Club         chose           to      i n v i t e          la rg e          numbers               to     t h e i r
       p r iv a t e     p re m ise s;            i t     was        the         C lu b 's          duty        to         p ro v id e        fo r        t h e i r "



       s a f e t y ,    h e a lth         and      c o m fo rt.                They         could             have         employed                a    s e c u r it y



       firm     as      banks         and       o th e rs           have         to     do         to     p r o t e c t          t h e i r      i n t e r e s t ;



       they     chose         to      re q u e s t           the     p o lic e          to         p e rfo rm             those         d u tie s           knowing


                                                                                                                                                            "N -
   th a t       the      p o lic e          expected                payment.                 F o u r th ly ,               the         police           w it h i n



   the        ground          p ro v id e d            s e rv ic e s       w hich            i t        was     not         w it h in           the      scope



   o f     t h e i r    p u b lic          duty         to      p e rfo rm .               For          in s ta n c e ,           they          a s s is te d



   in      crowd        management                    and      in        the         enforcem ent                   o f     such         ground



  r e g u la tio n s           as     re fu s e d             e n try      to         those             who     t r i e d         to     e n te r        w ith o u t



  p a yin g       or     p r o h ib it e d             s p e c ta to rs              e n c ro a c h in g             on         p a rts      o f       the



  ground                 w hich           t h e i r      e n tr y        fee         did      not         e n t i t l e          them        to        e n te r .



 I t      may     be,     su b m its            Mr.          B e n tly ,         th a t       the         m aintenance                    o f      law



 and       o rd e r      was        the      p re d o m in a n t               aim      but         th e re         were          o th e r         s e rv ic e s



 p e rfo rm e d .             The         s e rv ic e s         must           B"e    viewed             as     a     w ho le;            they          are



 not       s e v e ra b le .




            The        case        fo r     the         Club        is     th a t         the        s e rv ic e s              p ro v id e d          by



the       A u t h o r it y      were          w it h i n        the        scope            o f     t h e i r        a b s o lu te           p u b lic



d u ty      and        were     p ro v id e d            in     pursuance                  o f      th a t       d u ty .              S p e c ia l



p o lic e       s e rv ic e s        on      the        o th e r         hand         are         s e r v ic e s           in     the        n a tu re
       o f     a     lu x u ry        or       beyond                  what          is     necessary                      in       the        c i r c u m s t a n c e s /



       beyond             what        i t      is        the           A u t h o r i t y 's           duty            to        s u p p ly,             f or    in s ta n c e ,



       the         p r o v is io n          o f      a      p o lic e          presence                 at        a     la rg e           wedding              in         o rd e r



       to     keep         s u r v e illa n c e                   over         the          p re s e n ts .                Here           the       p o lic e             presence



       was      n°       lu x u r y ;         i t        was       c l e a r l y            regarded                  as        a    n e c e s s ity .               The       C lu b 's



       case         is     r e a l l y        t h i s :           in      re c e n t         years           the           problem s               fa c in g          club s



    and         the       p o lic e          have            changed.                      In     the        t h i r t i e s ,           when        much           la r g e r



   crowds                were       a t t r a c t e d              to      m a tc h e s ,o n ly               a        very            sm all        body           o f



   p o lic e             was     r e q u ir e d              w it h i n         the         g ro u nd,b ecau se                          th e re        was         v i r t u a l l y



   no        law         and     o rd e r           p roblem .                  That            s i t u a t i o n           was         s u b s t a n t i a l l y



  unchanged                    u n t i l      the           m i d - f i f t i e s .                Since              then            la w le s s n e s s ,



  h o o lig a n is m              and         a g g re s s io n                have          moved           in s id e                the       ground          and



  onto          the        te r ra c e s ,          ca u s in g             a .serious                 law            and           o rd e r     problem               and



  the         need        fo r      more            and        more            o f f i c e r s         in s id e                the       ground .              Now,



 u n le ss           the       p o lic e            a r'e      p re s e n t            in       numbers,                   very          s e rio u s           breaches



 o f    the          peace         are         p r o b a b le -                i f        not      t h i s     week                 then       next      week             -   and



are          v i r t u a l l y        c e r t a in            on         many         i d e n t i f i a b l e               occa sio n s              when           club s



whose              s u p p o rte rs           have            a        p a r t i c u l a r l y          bad           r e p u t a tio n             v i s i t



 B ra m a ll             Lane.              That            t h i s       is         the     pred om in ant                         r e a s o n , i f     not



r e a l l y         the        sole         r e a s o n , f o r             p r o v id in g            the            p o lic e           s e r v ic e
     w it h in        the            ground            is ,     says           Mr.       G r i f f i t h s ,           co n firm e d              by     a         number



     o f    m a tte rs .                 F i r s t ,        the         combined              o p e ra tio n             between                 those             in s id e



     and         those          o u ts id e           the      ground              in       re s p e c t        o f      the        v i s i t i n g          s u p p o rte rs .



     They          p e rfo rm            the        same       fu n c t io n ,              namely          the         p r e s e r v a tio n                o f

                                                                                                                                                                   •N-

     the         peace.              No       charge           is        made        fo r         those         o u ts id e          the         ground
                                                                                        9                    u

     because              they          are      p r o v id in g            o rd in a ry             p o lic e          s e rv ic e s ,           so         i t



     is     sa id         are        those           w it h i n         the     ground.                    Indeed,             t h is        is        re c o g n is e d ,



   i t      is     s u b m itte d ,              in      the        b r i e f i n g          i n s t r u c t i o n s           g iv e n          to     the              o f f i c e r s



   on      duty           in s id e           the      groun d.                S e con dly,               the         A u t h o r i t y ' s           r e a c t io n



  to       the       C lu b 's           d e c is io n             to     do    w ith o u t           a    p o lic e           presence                 in s id e



  the        ground              fo r      the         B o lto n          match          on       December                  31st         1983,          namely



  to       a p p ly        to        the      j u s t i c e s           under        the          p r o v is io n s           o f        S e c tio n          10



 o f       the      S a fe ty           o f    S p o rts           Grounds               Act        1975        on       the        ground              th a t



 w i-th o u t         a     p o lic e          presence                  serio U s            breaches                o f     the         peace          were



 l i k e l y .            T h ir d l y ,            w ith      the         reduced                a tte n d a n c e s          in         re c e n t         years              and



 the        in c re a s e d             s a fe t y       fe a tu re s              i n s t a lle d , c r o w d               management                   and



s a fe ty          are          no      lo n g e r       pro ble m s.                   There          have           been          no     i n j u r i e s



or        danger           to        s p e c ta to r s          on        t h is        a c c o u n t.           F o u r th ly ,             the        e n fo r c e ­



ment         o f    the          C lu b 's          ground              r e g u la tio n s            is    no         lo n g e r          o f    any         re a l



s i g n i f i c a n c e , s a v e               o n ly        in        re s p e c t        o f     those         r e g u la tio n s                  w hich
      r e la te          (as        the         m a j o r i t y            o f       them         do)        to      the         p r e s e r v a t io n                o f



  law        and          o rd e r.               Mr.            G r i f f i t h s         subm its               th a t         every         c h ie f           c o n s ta b le



  has       a         d u ty        to     the             p u b lic           w hich        must            be    c a r r ie d             out        in        as        f a i r



  and       even            h a n d « :d         a     manner                  as    h is         re so urce s               in       money          and          manpower

                                                                                                                                                                        •>
 w i l l         a llo w .               The         C h ie f         C on sta b le                in        th is       case           was       faced               in



 re s p e c t             o f       each         home             f i x t u r e        w ith        two           sim ple             q u e s tio n s .                 F i r s t ,



 is       th e re               a    t h r e a t            to      law          and      o rd e r       which               I    ought           to        meet?



 S econdly,                     have        I        the          re s o u rc e s            in     manpower                     to    meet         i t       w ith o u t



 d e p r iv in g                o th e rs            o f     the          p r o t e c t io n            to        which           they        are           e n t i t l e d ?



 I f     the           answers              to         both           those            q u e s tio n s             are           in    the        a f f i r m a t i v e ,



 as      Mr.           G r i f f i t h s          su b m its               sh o u ld          be        the       case            here,           then           the



 duty           to      meet          the         t h r e a t             is     a b s o lu te           and         the          s e rv ic e s             so        p ro vid e d



are        o r d in a r y            s e r v ic e s                w it h i n          the        scope           o f    o r d in a r y             d u ty        and



the         comm unity                     must             pay.               What        happened                  here             was     th a t         in s te a d



o f     a d d re s s in g                h is        mind            to        the        problem s               on     a       m a tch -b y-m a tch



b a s is f in             the        l i g h t         o f        com peting                 p r i o r i t i e s ,               the        C h ie f        C onstable



made        a         b la n k e t         d e c is io n              c o v e rin g            the       whole               season.                 He          must



have       c o n clu d e d                 that,            c e r t a in            steps          were           necessary                  fo r         keeping



the      peace,                 p r e v e n t in g               crim e             and      p r o t e c t in g            p r o p e r t y .                In        th a t



event           i t      was        h is        p u b lic            du ty           to     p ro v id e            p o lic e           s e r v ic e s            unle ss
     in    his         judgment          higher         priority                 for    those       services               had       exhausted


     his     resources              in     manpower.               He       wa s       not    entitled              to     conclude,


     as    he     must      have         done,        that        there          was        a threat           to    law        and     order


     and     he        could    muster            the    manpower                 to    meet       that        threat           and     then

                                                                                                                                           •v
     because           of   his      limited            financial                resources            go       on    to     say       "but


     I must        charge           fo r    those        services".                     That       w as    wrong,           says        Mr.     Griffiths.


     If    the     Authority               is    correct           in       its        contention              then       lawful           enter-

»
     tainment           may    be        prohibited               by    a combination                     of    the       breakdown


     of    la w    an d     order          and    the     inability                    of    the    Club        to       pa y    fo r      police


    protection.                The         next       step,        says          Mr.        Griffiths,              will        be    to


    prohibit            public        or        political              meetings              by    the     same       process,


    in    which         event       the         police    would              be    in       the     political              arena.


    This,         he    contends,            is    entirely                 unacceptable.


•    -




             In        support       of     their        respective                    submissions,                 counsel           have


    relied        heavily           on     the     judgments                in     the       Court        of    Appeal           and


    the    speeches            in    the        House     of       Lords           in       the    case        of    Glasbrook


    Brothers           v.   Glamorgan             County           Council.                  The    Court           of     Appeal


    decision           is   reported             in     [1924]          1 K.B.              879.      Th e      headnote              reads:-




                                                              -        30    -
            "Where           under        particular             circumstances                     police        protection
                is    necessary,            although             the      police             authority           are      bound
                to    provide         sufficient             protection                  without          payment,             if       the
                party        applying        for       it    requires               it       to    be    provided          in       a
                special        an d      particular              form        which           is    not    necessary             he
                may    be     required           to    pay       for      it.

                         On    the       occasion           of    a strike               a colliery             manager
             applied           for       police       protection                  for     hi s      colliery           an d
                insisted           that     it    could          not     be       efficiently              protected
            except            by    billetting              a certain              number           of    policemen             on
            the        colliery           premises.               Th e     police             authority          were         ready
            and        willing        to     provide             sufficient               police          protection               in
            another           way,        but     refused           to     billet             their       men    at       the
            colliery               except        on   the        terms        of    the        manager          agreeing             to
            pa y      fo r    the     police          force         so     provided               at     a certain            specified
            r a t e.         It    w as     held      by    Lords          Justices               Banks     an d      Scrutton,
            Lord        Justice           Atkin       dissenting,                  t ha t     there        was       nothing
            illegal           in     the     agreement              nor      was        it    void       for     want         of
            consideration.


 It    is       clear,        therefore,              that       in      t h at     case          there    ha d       already


 been       a    threat        of     violence,             an    emergency                  had       arisen      a nd    the          colliery


w e r e,        it    wa s    not     doubted,          entitled              to     police             protection.                 The


sole       question            in     the    appeal          wa s      whether            or       not    in    the       particular


circumstances                  the.police             were        entitled               to       charge       for     the      protection


which       they        actually            provided.               Early          in     hi s      judgment          Lord         Justice


Banks       considered              what        were       the      legal          duties          and     obligations


of    a county           police           force       and    in        the    course              of    doing        so   he       had


this    to       say     at       page     886:-
             "There          is,       however,            no      absolute                  standard           of       duty
                and    no.definition                     of     the       exact              of    amount           of    police
                protection              to      which         an        individual                 is     entitled.
              Every         case        must        depend              upon          its      own      circumstances.”


     A little          later          he     came        to     consider                an        argument           advanced                in


     the     appeal             that       it    wa s      illegal             to m a k e            any     charge            for      police

         . 0                Q
     services          of       any    kind^ h o w e v e r              special.                  T h a t,     of     course,             is


     an    argument             which           c o u l d n o t be       relied              upon        since        the       passing


     of    the    Police           Act          1964. In the                 course            of    dealing             with           that


     submission              he       had       this     to     say          at       p a ge      887 :-


             To   test          this        last       contention                     I put         the      case        of    an
             extremely             nervous             person            who          wa s     unable          to    sleep          for
            fear       of       burglars            an d      who        therefore                 applied           for       a
            constable              to be         stationed               on       point           duty       all      night
            outside             his     house.             If h i s          request              wa s     granted            on
            condition              that         a payment               could           be        made     for       this
            special             service          Mr.       Montgomery                   contended              that           the
           contract              to    make        the        payment             was        illegal.                I cannot
           accept           that       v i ew .         The     service                 upon         which       the       con­
           stable           would          be    employed               i!    police              service            and,unless
           it     is    shown              that      the      granting                  of     the       request          deprives
           other       people           of'a        reasonable                    amount            of .police            protection,-
           I ca n      see        nothing           o b j e c t i o n a b l e , s t i 11                 less       i 1 1 e g a l ,a b o u t
           the    transaction.                      If     people             for        their           own    pleasure                or
           f or   their           own       profit         or      because               in       special           cases          of    their
           peculiar             circumstances                   desire                special           police           service
           I se e      no       reason          why      they           should          not        be     called          upon          to
           pay    for       it."



L o rd     Justice          Scutton             dealt         with        the          same        point        in       this       way


at    page       890    :-




                                                                    -    32       -
        "Before        us    counsel          fo r    the        colliery              company             argued            an
          important          point        that       had       no t     been         argued           in     the       court
         below,        namely          that     all       charges            by      police           authorities
         for    performing              their        duty        of     protecting                   the     public
         were        illegal.           There        is    no     doubt           t h at      for         many     years
         police       authorities               have       furnished               for        payment             at    the
         request        of       individual           citizens              policemen                 to    perform
         duties        in    the       nature        of    maintaining                  order          or        preventi
         crime.         Instances             are     where           valuable             property               is    tempo­
         rarily       and        temptingly           exposed              to m i x e d         a s s e m b l i e s ,as            at
         weddings           to    guard       the     presents              or     sales         or        bazaars;or
         where       assemblies           are       likely            to    produce             disorder,as                  at
         races,or           football          meetings,or                  to    regulate             traffic            to
         private       f e s t i v i t i e s ,such          as     dances.                 It    would           take        very
        clear        authority           to    persuade           me        t h is      is      illegal.

                 Obvi-ously             the    police          authorities                   cannot          be        expected
        to    and     cannot           protect       every        citizen               completely                against
        possible,even                  anticipated)crime.                         Th e       cost         would         be
        prohibitive,              the     premium           of    insurance                  would          be    over
        100%.         I am       excluding           cases        of       specific              information                  of
        definite           crime       and    only        referring               to     apprehensions                       of
        possible           crime.And          it     may       w el l      be     that          if    a    citizen            is
        merely        apprehensive              and        he ca n         be     given          at       hi s    request
        protection           against          what        he    apprehends                 without               detriment
        to m o r e     reasonable             police           duties,he               m ay     be        given        t h at
        protection           at    his       own     expense,              the     money             paid        going        in
        the    first        instance          to     the       police           authority."


Mr.    Bently    relies           on    those       observations                   as      giving            authoritative



 guidance       as    to    what       may    be     regarded              as     special             police           services.




       Th e   decision           of     the   House        of     Lords           is     reported                in     [1925]


A.C.   270.      There       again        the      decision             was       by     a simple                majority.
 In    the        course            of    his       speech        the     Lord          Chancellor             highlighted


 the     two       points            that          were    raised         in       the    appeal          before their


 lordships,                         I quote              from     page        277 :-


         "First          it     was          argued        that        when        a subject          has       need          of
            police           protection                 and     ha s    done        nothing          to    increase                   >>
            the     risk        he        is    entitled           to    protection              without             payment
            an d    an       agreement               to    pa y    is    without              consideration                   and
            contrary            to       public           policy.            Secondly           it    w as      said,
            following               a    suggestion               made       in     the       Court       of    Appeal,
            that        on    general              principles            the        police       authorities                   ar e
            not     e n t i t 1 e d ,e x c e p t           in     the    cases           specifically                provided
            for     in       the        statute,to              make     a charge              for    these          services.
            It     is    convenient                 to     deal        first        with       the    latter             and       more
         general              contention."


That ,       of     course,              is    a    contention               that        can    no    longer             be


sustained               since           the    passing            of    the        1964       Police      Act.            However,


in    the        course        of        dealing          with         that    point           the    Lord          Chancellor


gave     some           indication                 of    the    sort      of       services           which,


in    his    view,might                   amount          to    special            police        services;                I    pick


up    his    speech            at        about          half    way     down           page    278:


       "It       has     always              been        recognised            that       where        individuals

        desire           that           services           of     a special              kind    which,though
       no t ^within                 the        obligations              of     a    police       authority,can
       most         effectively                    be     rendered           by     them,should                be    performed
       by        members            of       the    police         force,              the     police          authorities
       may,         to       us e       an     expression              which        is    to    be    found          in       the
       Police            Pensions              Act        1890, "lend" the                services             of    constables
       for         that       purpose              in     consideration                  of    payment.              Instances
       are         the        lending              of     constables              on     the    occasions                of    large
       gatherings                   in       and    outside            private           premises,as                on    the
                 "occasions               of    weddings,             athletic               or      boxing           contests                or
                   r ac e        meetings        an d     the        provisions               of       constables                  at
                   large          railway        stations.                 Of        course,           no    such            lending
                   could          possibly           take      place            if    the     constables                 were
                   required             elsewhere           for       the        preservation                    of     order, but
                   as    Lord       Justice           Banks         pointed            out,an             effective               police
                   force         requires           a margin           of        reserve           strength              in       order
                   to   deal        with        emergencies                and       to     employ           that        margin              ofN
                 reserve,when                  no t     otherwise               required,on                  special              police
                 service           for       p a y m e n t , is      to     the        advantage                 both        of        the
                 persons           utilising             the        services              and     of        the    public               who
                 a re    thereby             relieved          of     some           part       of     the        police           charges."


    £   He   then       went       on     to    deal        with      the        second           question,                  namely           whether


        in   the      particular               circumstances                    of     the      case        before            their           Lordships


        what    had      been       provided             were        to    be        called          or     properly               to        be


        called        special           police          services.                       in      the       course             of    dealing


        with    that         there        came       a passage             upon        which           Mr.       Griffiths               places


        considerable               reliance,            se e        page        281:




#
               'The     question             for      the      court        was        whether              on    July        9th        1921
                the     police          authorities,acting                           reasonably                  an d    in g o o d
               faith,considered                       a police            garrison              at     the        colliery
               necessary            for        the      protection               of       life       an d        property               from
               violence            or     in    other        words         whether              the       decision                of     the
               Chief         Constable             in    refusing               special           protection                  unless
               paid      for       wa s      such       a decision               as    a man           in    his         position
               an d     with       his       duties       could           reasonably                 take.'             If    in       the
               judgment            of     the    police             authorities, formed                           reasonably
               an d     in       good     faith, the           garrison               was     necessary                  for       the
               protection               of     life     and         property,then                  t he y        were         not
               entitled            to     make      a charge              for        it,for        t ha t        would            be    to
               exact         a   payment         for     the        performance                   of    a duty               which       they


                                                                -    35     -
         "clearly           owed     to     the       appellants              an d    their      servants.
          B ut    if     they       thought           the        garrison          a superfluity             and
          only        acceded        to     Mr.       James'           request        with     a view        to
          meeting           his     wishes,           then        in    my    opinion         they     were
          entitled           to     treat        the       garrison           duty     as     special        duty
          and     to     charge          fo r    it."


 Mr.    Griffiths            contends            that       in     the       instant         case     the    Chief
                                                                                                                         •V

 Constable            must    have        cccme       to    the        conclusion            that     the    police


 services         at    the       Club's         ground          were        necessary         f or    the    protection


 of    peo-ple        congregated               in    the    stadium           and     perhaps         for    the    protection


 of    stadium         property          and,         therefore,             t h at    was     a duty        which       was


 owed    to     the     Club      for      which           the    Authority            were     not     entitled


 to    charge.




         With     al l       these       matters            so    succinctly            and     helpfully           presented


by     both    counsel         in    mind,           I approach              the      question        in     this    way.


The     duty     of    the     Authority,                  through       the       Chief      Constable,            is    the

                                     /


preservation             of.the          Queen's           peace        by    preventing            crime     and        by    arresting


a nd   prosecuting            those         w ho      break        the       law,     an d    the     protection              of    the


persons        and     the    property               of    all    citizens.             He     does     not       wait        for       the


peace    to      be    broken;       if         he    reasonably              apprehends            that     the    action              of


any    person         may    result        in        a breach          of     the .peace        it     is    hi s   duty           to


prevent       that      action       (see            for    example          Duncan          v . Jones       [1936]           1 K.B.218).
     This     duty     must       be    carried           out     in   a        f a ir   and      even        h a n d e d manner..


     Because        hi s       resources           are    finite       he       w i l l not       be     able       to    provide


     perfect        protection           for        all.        Even       if     he     has      available           resources


  public          duty     is    not     boundless.               He       h as    a duty          to    protect          against


  or    threatened              crime,        particularly               threatened               violent           crime.-'        It


 not        his   public         duty        to     protect       against              the     mere      apprehension               of


 possible            crime.           There         is    no    absolute           standard             of    duty       and   no


 definition               of    the    exact         amount       of    police           protection              to      which      an


 individual               is    entitled.                Every    case       must        depend          upon      its     o wn


 circumstances.




             Special           services,           on    the     other          h and, ar e       services            which       are


beyond         the     call       of    public           duty,     but          w h ic h are      within           the    powers


of     the    policend                 can    most        effectively              be     rendered            by     them,


provided,            of    course,           that        the    services           can       be    provided           without
                                             /


prejudice            to    their       public            duty.        The       mere      fact      t h at     the       services


ar e    of a k i n d           which     is       similar        to    those           which      they        provide


in     pursuance           of    their        public           duty,    for        instance             the    maintenance


of     law    and     order,          does        no t    preclude          those        services             from


being        special           (see    Glasbrook's               case).           All     must        depend
     on   the     scope         and     extent           of    the    services         and       the    circumstances


     in   which       they       ar e       provided.




            Th e     relevant               circumstances              I find         are    that       for    each     home

                                                                                                                           "V
 fixture           th e        Club     invited           large       numbers         of    people       t^p c o n g r e g a t e


 on       their      own       premises            for     their       own    purposes;            people       who    in


 the      course          of    a game           might        become       very       excited.           It    is    accepted


 t h at    at      some        fixtures            violence          was     almost         certain       if    the    police


 were      not       present           in    substantial              numbers         -     that      was' w e l l    known        to    the


 Club      an d      to    the        police.            It    created       problems            in    two     areas:           first,


 outside          the      ground,           in     the       public       domain,         where       the     police       gave


 protection               as    part        of     their       public      d u ty .        That       alone    must        have     put


a severe           strain         on        normal        policing.           The      second          area    was     inside           the


ground,         which           was     a    private           domain.        There         the    potential           trouble­


makers       were         not,        as    in     Glasbrook's             c a se,     intruders.              They     were


invited         to    enter           on    payment.            T h u s .the      Club       had      created        for        them­


selves       and      on       their        ow n    property,          albeit          unwittingly,             a special           risk


of    trouble         and       breaches            of    the     peace,       and        thus     a special          need        for


protection;               which       need,         in    practical          t er m s ,     they       could        only    meet        by


engaging          police         service's.               As    Mr.    Bently         has    put       it,     the    police
     inside        the     ground      were        not    carrying           out    their          ow n    public           duties.


  They         were      carrying        ou t      the    duties       owed        by     the      Club        to     those


  whom         they      had    invited         onto      their       premises.




              Whilst       it    is    the      d u t ^ of     the     police           to    keep        the       peace


  an d    to       prevent       threatened              breaches       of      the      peace       it     is       not     their


  duty        to    give       protection          where       possible           future           breaches           of    the


 peace         were      apprehended             (see     pe r     Lord      Justice           Scrutton              in


 G l a s b r o o k 1s c a s e ) .        It     was      this      latter         protection              to     which


 the      police,          at   the    request           of    the    C l ub,      were       committed               in    advance


 each         w eek.       In   this     way       the    Club       obtained           a service              which        the


 ordinary           citizen       would         not      expect       an d    to    which,          in     my        judgment,


 he    was      clearly         not    entitled.              This     is    not        a case       where           breaches


of     the      peace      were       actually           threatened          at     the       time        the       provision


of     police          services       was     made.           At   most      there           was    the     possibility


in     some        cases,       indeed       the    probability,              of      a breach            of     the       peace;


but      no    more.        Breaches          of    the       peace     were       no t      inevitable,                  nor


di d     they      invariably          occur.            Furthermore,              in     addition              to    what


may    be      called       their      law      an d     order       role     the       police        were           expected       jto
  and       did     take        part    in     crowd       management              , ensuring              the     safety


 of      spectators,              the    enforcement              of     the       Club's          regulations              an d


 to     be     on    hand       to     assist        in    the    event        of       some       emergency           such


 as     fi r e      or   accidental            injury.




             Th e    numbers           considered           necessary             to    carry        out     these          services


 could        only       be     provided           by     calling       on     officers             who,     at    the


 material           times,          would      otherwise              have     been         off     d uty.        Th e      scope


 an d    extent          of     those     services             a nd    their        impact          on    the     Chief


 Constable's              manpower           resources            put    them          beyond        what       the      Cl ub,


 in     the    circumstances,                  ware       entitled           to    have       provided            in     pursuance


of      the    Chief          Constable's               public        duty.        He       was    entitled            to     provide


those         services           because        he      was     able     to       do    so    without           depriving


other         people       of     police        protection.               In       other          words      the       services


provided            were      within         his     powers;          they     were          not    within         the      scope


of    hi s    public          duty.          I am       satisfied         t h at        they       were      special


services^as              I understand                that      expression              to    have        been      used


in    G l a s b r o o k 's c a s e       and       within        the    meaning             of     Section         15(1)


of    the     Police          Act      1964.        It     follows       that          he    was     entitled            to


provide          them      on    condition              that     they    were          paid        for.
I have       already     given     my   reasons     for    concluding      that    the   services


were    provided       at   the    request    of    the    Club   an d   upon   the    Club's


promise      to   pay.      In    the   result     the    Authority's      claim      succeeds


and    the   Club's      counterclaim        must    fail.
                                                                                                                                                     Ss-*®:
  '*3                                                                                                        :




                                                                                 The Weekly Law Reports 24 July 1987                 j P f y f e rVly Law Reports 24 July 1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          305
wmmmm                          304
                               LcwtiOliver•            Crest Homes Pic. v. Marks (H.L.(E.))                [1987]                                                                                                                              JsW-,
                               of Ajlmerton
                                                                                                                                                                          [court cf appeal]
                               As Nourse L.J. observed in the course of his judgment in the instant                                                                                                                                          • ■V*!*"
                               case, each case m ust turn on its own individual facts. In the instant case           m Gm              * h* a r r i s v . S h e f f i e l d u n i t e d f o o t b a l l c l u b l t d .
                               [1987] 3 W .L .R . 48, 58, the determinative point to my mind is that it i$
                               purely adventitious that there happened to be two actions. That has                          Sp W tw '- c u 1ft 17 1R-                                         Kerr, Neill and Balcombe L.JJ.
                               been brought about partly by purely technical considerations and partly,                                              I 6: } 1'
                                                                                                                                              March 19
                               as Crest allege, by the appellants’ failure to m ake full and frank
                               disclosure under the 1984 order, and the fact that the parties to the two             m ^ ^ m t ^ L . r )—uU tUit el z sS — LL*aw
                                                                                                                                                              U W enforcement— C h ief constable providing
                                                                                                                                                                                                   r-    ^ t ,officers
                                                                                                                                                                                                               'J   . J             . >*-
                               actions are not identical is quite immaterial. The cause of action is the             m f m S ^ P Uc _ attend inside ground        ornund at football
                                                                                                                                                                             football m  atches-WWhether
                                                                                                                                                                                       matches—    heiher “special
                                                                                                                                                                                                              special
M M S sS M
                               same in each and the first and second appellants are defendants in both.                       J U S t notice services’’ provided "at the request o f football club—                             ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ’        .• ,*

 W-                                                                                                                                        w hether police authority entitled to charge fo r attendances
               p               The remaining defendants could equally well have been joined as
               "3 ;
                  sfe. i V      defendants in a single set of proceedings. Thus it is a pure technicality                        H IS police A c t 1964 (c. 48), s. 15(1)                                                       ‘’                          1
                        ;ii:
                                that the 1985 order happens to have been m ade in proceedings other                                       • *< Football matches took place at premises in Sheffield belonging                   •*’•**'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ",*i*
                                than those is which Crest seek to move to enforce the undertakings. It                                         the defendants, a club. Until 1970 the club had made special                              :

                                has been subm itted that proceedings for contempt of court are always to                           R e a rra n g e m e n ts for the attendance of police officers at matches
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •

                                be regarded, for the purpose of the implied undertaking on discover}', as                            ^ for which payments had been m ade. Thereafter Che police had
                                                                                                                                            continued to* attend at matches both inside and outside the
                                “collateral” to the action in which they are launched, so that even if the
                                1985 order had been m ade in the 1984 action it would still have been
                                                                                                                                      lit  W ound but the club formed the view that the chief constable
                                                                                                                                   f t ? was obliged to arrange for police attendance in order to fulnl
                                necessary to seek the leave of the court to use the m aterial thus                                 I® ''his duty to maintain law and order and to protect life and                                  * *
                                discovered for the purposes of the motion for contempt in that action.                                      property. Accordingly they refused to make any payments to
                                My Lords, I find myself quite unable to accept that submission. The                               M ^ t k e police authority. T he plaintiff, acting on behalf of the police
                                proper policing and enforcement or observance of orders m ade and                                llp ^ a u th o r ity for the district in which the football ground was
                                undertakings given to the court in an action are, in my judgm ent, as                    w m I P h ii tu a t e d 'is s u e d a writ against the club claiming £51,669 for the
                                much an integral part of the action as any other step taken by a plaintiff                      I lf e s e r v ie e s of police officers inside their ground between August
                                in the proper prosecution of his claim. The normal procedure where the                          ^ S l r i 9 8 2 and N ovember 1983 o n the ground th a t the attendances
                                contempt complained of is that of a party to the action is to apply for                          S®B*constituted “special police services” within the meaning of
                                committal by motion in that action as an incidental step in the action.                          * 0 P s e c tio n 15(1) of the Police A ct 19641 and for which the police
                                                                                                                                 l i ^ a u t h o r i t y were entitled to m ake a charge. The club m their
                                There- is, in my judgm ent, nothing “collateral” o r “alien” about                                ll||? d e f e n e e denied any liability claiming that the attendances did
                                enforcement of the court’s order in the action in which discovery is                              Jpa^'not constitute “special police services” as the chief constable in
                                 obtained and I do not entertain any doubt at all that documents -n®                              l l f c a n i t i n g for officers to attend inside the ground was doing no
                                disclosed on discovery in the action can perfectly properly be used for                         J te f e m o r e than carrying out his duties. Further the club denied that
                                 the purpose of taking such a step without in any way infringing the                            K l p t h e y had since D ecem ber 1983 “requested ’ police services at
                                 implied undertaking and without the necessity of obtaining the prior                           l l p S 't h e ground for the purposes of section 15£1) of the Act and they
                                 leave of the court.                                                                                f e s o u g h t by way of counterclaim a declaration that they were not
                                      The evidence in the instant case discloses that there is, to put it no                        jf lllia b le to' m ake any paym ents for police services unless they
                                                                                                                                        ^ requested attendance by officers to fulfill roles other than police                            it
                                 higher, at least a serious question to be investigated as to w hether there
                                 has not been a deliberate contempt by .flouting the court’s orders and                              gjfeduty,        B oreham J- found as a fact that at some matches at the
                                                                                                                                     P f c l u b ’s ground violence was almost certain unless.the police
                                 breaking undertakings freely given to the court in the 1984 action. In
                                                                                                                                     ff& a tte n d ed in substantial num bers but he concluded that the
                                 substance the 1984 ac tio n ' and the 1985 action are a single set of                               ^ ^ a tte n d a n c e s inside the club's ground did not constitute special
                                 proceedings— a circumstance emphasised by the order that the two                                       "^police services” within the meaning of the statutory provisions
                                 should be“heard together— and the fact that, because, for reasons good                                     *and that the services had at all material times been requested
                                 or bad, C rest’s claim has been prosecuted by the issue of two writs                                       "" r the club. H e gave judgm ent in favour of the police authority.
                                 instead of one, the court’s leave is required for the use of the d o c u m e n ts                               On appeal by the club;-                                                        ' v.’1 «
                         fi      obtained under the 1985 order is the merest technicality. To accede to                                         ’nH
                                                                                                                                                  'e“eld,
                                                                                                                                                       '‘
                                                                                                                                                      iu , dismissing the appeal, (1) that in deciding what
                                 C rest’s application will, in these circumstances, cause no injustice to the                                 constituted “special" police services” for the purpose of section
                                 appellants nor will it detract from the solemnity and im portance of the               F                     15(1) of the Police A ct 1964 it was necessary to look at all the                                        -t
                                 implied undertaking. Although, therefore, I have not felt able to agree                                   . circumstances of the individual case; that the court should bear
             |§lfefcU.v                                                                                                  sJSsSSiti: • - -                                                                            u,:-           :■        <
                                 fullv with the reasoning of the Court of A ppeal so far as it was based
             llif&l-i-           upon section 72 of the Act of 1981, I have been left in no doubt that the                                                                                                                                       - *

                                  conclusion at which that court arrived was correct. I would accordingly                           R** was entitled to have regard tc the resources available to him
                                                                                                                                    |p ? ' and the cost of providing them ; and that it was relevant to
                                  dismiss the appeal.                                                              HM,!:                      consider w hether the services were required on private premises,
                f ji» f .!>                                                   Appeals dismissed with costs.                          t i i y the nature of the occasion and when they were required; that,
                         f •                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f**''Juts
                                                                                                                                          S'accordingly, in the circumstances, the provision of police officers
                                    Solicitors: Jaques & Lewis; Stoffel & Co.; Lovell White & King.                                       * to attend regularly at the club’s football ground throughout the
                                                                                                            M. G.                          * season to guard against the possibility of violence constituted                        ■■
                                                                                                                                           *|the provision of “special police services . for which a charge
                                                                                                                                          ^ Police Act 1964, s. 15(1): see post, p. 308 f . a   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sra|
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -•              -*..
                                                    The Weekly Law Reports 24 July   1957

306
                             Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                      [1987]            S k u .                              Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)
                   could properly b e m ade (post, pp. 315g— 317c, 31 9d -f, 320a-b,                Jill
                                                                                                    ,e1 | f f 9 7 5 ; ( 4 ) that the chief constable was entitled to say if there was a threat
                   d - e).
                                                                                                                 jaw and order on private land “my resources in men and m oney arc
                         G lasbrook Brothers Ltd. v. Glamorgan County Council
                   [1925] A .C . 270, H .L .(E .) considered.                                                              I cannot afford to provide the service [of police officers] unless
                         (2)        T h at in o rder for the football matches to take place it      1lfti?fthe owners of the land] pay for them ;” (5) that the law and order
                   was necessary th a t police officers attended inside the ground to                §fc|jpro;ection given to the club was more extensive than that given to an
                   enable the club to m eet its responsibilities to the public and that                      ordinary citizen; ( 6 ) that (a) refusing entry to those who tried to enter
                   it followed th a t in such circumstances a request for their                              the g r o u n d without paying and (b) prohibiting spectators encroaching on
                   attendance by the club was to be implied (post, pp. 317c - f ,                    jj. parts of the ground which their entry fee did not entitle them to entei
                   3 2 0 c- d , d -e ).
                         Per B alcom be L .J. Cases involving the policing of political -
                                                                                                                    outside the duty of the chief constable; (7) that police services at
                   events w here public disorder is threatened are not in pari                     ’fillthe ground had to be viewed as a whole taking into account services
                   m ateria and the dismissal of the present appeal does not pose                        p o th e r than the maintenance of law and order, and were not severable.
                   any th reat to th e political freedoms which the citizen of this                        |eyen. when since at least January 1984 the club had not requested the
                   country' enjoys (post, p. 320c).                                               I J l f e h i e f constable to do other than his duty, as defined by the judge;
                         Decision of B o r e ia m J. affirmed.                                        ‘ifi(8 ) that if services provided by the chief constable were of a kind which
                                                                                                     ...•Jijvas similar to those which he provided in pursuance of his public duty
      T he following cases are referred to in the judgm ents:
                                                                                                     '^ y j u c h services could be special police services; (9) that the club had
      China Navigation Co. Ltd. v. Attorney-G eneral [1932] 2 K.B. 197, C.A .                        # f t £ e a t e d a special need for protection; (10) that the protection to which
      Glamorgan Coal Co. L td. v. Glamorganshire Standing Joint Committee
                                                                                                       lif'tbe police £ t the request of the club were committed in advance each
           [1916] 2 K .B . 206; 114 L .T . 717, C .A .
      G lasbrook Brothers Ltd. v. Glamorgan County Council [1924] 1 K.B, 879,                            ffweek, was against possible future breaches of the peace; ( 1 1 ) that there
           C .A .; [1925] A .C . 270, H .L .(E .)                                                       f|w a s at home fixtures, except in some cases, nearly a possibility of a
      Reg. v. C hief Constable o f D evon and Cornwall, E x parte Central Electricitv               'fi^|> reach of the peace; ( 1 2 ) that the police were expected and further were
           Generating Board [1982] Q .B . 458; [1981] 3 W .L .R . 967; [1981] 3 Ail                     ^ r e q u e s t e d by the club since at least about January 1984 to do other than
           E .R . 826, C .A .                                                                      ^ ^ f their' duty, and (13) that after about D ecem ber 1983 or at all the club
      Reg. v. C om m issioner o f Police o f the Metropolis, E x parte Blackburn                                   made any request for special police services.
           [1968] 2 Q .B . 118; [1968] 2 W .L .R . 893; [1968] 1 All E .R . 763, C.A.
                                                                                                                 ^aCtS are $et 0ut *n        j uc*gment     Neill L.J.
      Reg. v. Com m issioner o f Police o f the Metropolis, E x parte Blackburn (No.
           3) [1973] Q .B . 241;'[1973] 2 W .L .R . 43; [1973] 1 All E .R . 324, C.A.             i i ^ 0 £ j o h n Griffiths Q.C. a n d / . M. D. Chappie for the club.
      Reg. v. O xford, E x parte L evey, T he Times, 1 Novem ber 1986, C .A .
                                                                                                   ‘v4'"V- David Bentlev Q.C. and W. B. Phillips for the police authority.
      Wathen v. Sandys (1811) 2 Cam p. 640

      The following additional cases were cited in argument:                                          iaC-i                                                              Cur. adv. vult.
                                                                                                                             '                                    -
      H aynes v. H arw ood [1935] 1 K .B. 146, C.A .
      M oss v. M e Lachlan, The Tim es, 29 Novem ber 1984, D .C .                                               March. T he following judgments were handed down.
      Ogwo v. Taylor [1987] 2 W .L .R . 988; [1987] 1 All E .R . 668, C .A .
                                                                                                      i l l j l l t N e i l l L .J. This is an appeal from the order of Boreham J. dated 26
   A ppeal  from B oreham J.                                                                                ’||March 1986. It raises a question as to the responsibility for the cost of
    By writ dated 12 D ecem ber 1983 the plaintiff, Mr. John Charles                                         g~providing for the attendance -of police officers inside the ground of the
H arris, acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police Authority,                                           ^Sheffield U nited Football Club at Bramall Lane in Sheffield on the
claimed against the defendants, Sheffield U nited Football Club Ltd.,                                jg p jo ccasio n s when league or other im portant football matches are played a!
£51,669 plus interest of £19,810 for police services at the club’s football                                          ground. We have been told that the answer to this question is of
ground at Bramall Lane, Sheffield, By way of counterclaim dated 8                                r f t f t ' Tsome general interest both to police authorities and to other leading
February 1984 the club sought a declaration that they were not liable lor                        M              football clubs.
such charges. O n 26 M arch 1986 B oreham J. allowed the claim and                               i               -             It is the case for the South Yorkshire police authority, within whose
dismissed the counterclaim holding that the police authority were entitled                             , - J area            Bramall Lane ground lies, that the attendance of police officers
to m ake charge for attending inside the club’s grounO, the a tte n d a n c e s                     | ^ p j °n these occasions constitutes the provision of “special police services"
constituting “special police services” for the purposes of section 15(1) of                                   -within the meaning of section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964, and that as
the Police A ct 1964.                                                                                                Provis*on o f these services has been expressly or impliedly requested
    By a notice dated 23 A pril 1986 the club appealed on the gro un d s                                            tlie c*u^ ! tlie police authority is entitled to m a k e charges therefor. It
that the judge was wrong in deciding ( 1 ) that the court had to view the                                          the case for the club on the other hand that as the chief constable of
services of police officers at hom e fixtures as a whole and not break                                         S h effield has at all material times been of th e opinion that the attendance
them down into their constituent parts; (2 ) that the chief constable could                                   i^Of; police officers on these occasions has been necessary for the
decide which request to carry out; that duty could only be answered if                                                                                                                      club*
the services were paid for; (3) that the chief constable could take steps                                                                  . . . *           *      -                 - carrying
to prevent an event if it would be productive of disorder, other than                                     if^Sut ti?eir public duty. It is further argued on behalf of the club that even
under the provisions of section 10 of the Safety of Sports G r o u n d s Act                               " s         ’s held that “special police services” were provided at the club’s
              SsfisSsM i S M i i S                                                                          WlllliStSrSSiii                                                                                                                                               Hill
m BSM                                        MSW

 fm m m


                                                                                            The Weekly Law Reports 24 July 19557 ^             P ^ e e k l y Law Reports 24 July 1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            309
                                     308
                                                                                                                                      , J► S I S € ^ ' _                   n a r t o v.
                                                                                                                                                                           Harris    *. n u tn c .u United (C.A.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Sheffield                     Neill L .j.
                                     Neill L.J.                     Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                                    jlipffWJuR* .
                                                                                                                              U987]
                                                                                                                                          *            “such proportion of          any sum received on account of constables                                    V *Vf
                                     request b e fo re 2c- O c to b e r 1983, after that date the club has made no                                                                                                                                              'M&iM
     sm*
                                     request for th e p ro v is io n of any police services beyond those which the                    K ^ f h '**     v*ho s e services have been lent in consideration of paym ent as the                                .■
                                     police are r e q u i r e d ro provide in pursuance of their duty to the public.                     %             p d ic e authority may consider to be a fair contribution to the
                                         In the a c tio n wh5ch was instituted by the police authority the sum of                                     pension fund in respect of those constables . .
                                     £51,699.54 w a s c ia im e d as the aggregate of charges for the services of
                                     police officers at t b s club’s ground on various dates between 14 August              . -rJtei j ^ f ^ n n t Ca've L .C ., referred to this provision in the Act o f 1890 in                                            > -s«C
                                     1982 and 13 N o v e m b e r 1983. The club disputed liability on the grounds ^ ^ ^ S ^ f h s b r o o k Brothers L td. v. Glamorgan County Council [1925] A .C . 270,
                                     which I have i n d k a z s d and by way of counterclaim sought a declaration                       f t - -h e r e the legality of the paym ent for police services was challenged. He                                .. •'x.->>•"*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - -
                                     that it was n o t fisb ie to m ake any paym ent to the police authority save                 •   I  P f | i d ; at p. 280:                                                                                           -
                                     where the clu b rec~.2 £sted the attendance of officers to “fulfill roles other                                    “I find it difficult to believe that if the legislature had considered the

rnmm                                 than the po lice dizry,"’' Before the judge the counterclaim also included,
                                     inter alia, a e la te : 7 0 recover certain sums paid to “the authority before
                                     August 19S2, b u t t i n s m atter is no longer pursued and I need say no                                       Shave                                                                                                *. • “SsS
                                     more about it.                                                                                      , ^ ^ 4 'consideration of such lending to pension purposes; and it appears to
                                         The action w**- tried by Boreham J. at Sheffield in February 1986                                                       that this statutory recognition of the practice in question affords
                                     and in a r e s e r v e d ju d g m en t delivered on 26 March 1986 the judge                                             strong         argum ent in favour of its legality.”
                                     upheld the claim b y The police authority and dismissed the counterclaim.
                                                                                                                                                      little earlier in his speech Viscount Cave L.C. referred to the practice
                                     The club has ap o e jG e d to this court.
                       | 1 |v                                                                                                      i g S t t N e n d i n g ” the services of police constables in these terms, at p. 278:
                                         I shall c o m e £ d r i b later to examine the events which have given rise
                    ipri             to the p resen t l i d c i d o n but I think it is convenient to start by setting the                           jit’“Instances
                                                                                                                                                  fr.U*     av->^“ v w are the lending           c? of- constables
                                                                                                                                                                                                            *        on the occasions of* larger
                    S ill III        case in its h i s t o r i c ^ perspective and by identifying those matters which Di                          I n  g a  th   e r in   g s   in   and outside   private   premises,   as on the occasions or
                                     are com m on g r o c r c L The claim by the police authority is a claim in                                           weddings,             athletic  or  boxing    contests   or  race  meetings, and the
                                     contract. It is c o n c e d e d on behalf of the police authority, however, that                    i  S   l i c p  r  o v  i s i o  n   of   constables at  large  railway stations.”
                                     if the officers a t r e o d e d merely in order to enable the chief constable to              jfcs^i^^ T h e practice was also noticed without disapproval by Scrutton L.J. in
                                     carry out his d u ry ~o m aintain law and order no charge could or can be                     l i ^ f b e l s a m e caSe in the C ourt of A ppeal [1924] 1 K.B. 879, where he said,
                                     made to th e c iu b because any “agreem ent” to pay would not be
                                     supported by c o r p o r a t i o n .                                                         I e S E S - 890-891:
                                         It is c o n c e d e d b y th e club on the other hand that if the attendance of "M f e ^ ^ J “There is no doubt that for many years police authorities have
                                     the officers a x n o c r r e d to the provision of “special police services” then,                                   furnished for paym ent, at the request of individual citizens,
                                     subject to th e s u b s id ia ry argument as to whether these services were                   ^ S ^ S p p o l i c e m e n to perform duties in the nature of maintaining order or
                                     requested a f te r Ijt O ctober 1983, the charges are recoverable in ,5S® i ^ P f |- p r e v e n t i n g crime.                               cnm e. Instances are where valuable property -is                              Mi
                                                                                                                                                           temporarily and temptingly exposed to mixed assemblies, as at
                                     accordance w ith s e c tio n 15(1) of the Act of 1964. I turn at once
                                                                                                                           ' ^ p - ^ f . ^ w e d d i n g s , to guard the presents, or sales or bazaars; or where
                                     therefore to s e c S o c 15(1) which provides:
                                                                                                                               t m ^ ^ ^ ^ s s e m b i i e s are likely to produce disorder, as at races, or football                                 -
    im s
     's'®%                                 “The ch ie f c c x e r of police of any police force may provide, at the                                        meetings, or to regulate traffic to private festivities, such as dances.
                                           request o f arry r>erson, special police services at any premises or in , : ^ ^ ^ W f l t would take very"clear authority to persuade me this is illegal.”
                                           any locality r r xhe police area for which the force is maintained,
                                           subject to t h e p a y m e n t to the police authority of charges on such                                                 clear from the decision in the Glasbrook case that the provision
                                                                                                                             (p!p   ^ifSr-'
                                                                                                                                         J    ^    j  p   r     tectJ
                                                                                                                                                     (,^^I.VkVVV*
                                                                                                                                                             0         ■0V*ni *••»•» the
                                                                                                                                                                               in    •»* context
                                                                                                                                                                                         —      ' of an T-j        :-i dispute
                                                                                                                                                                                                            industrial  ->- *- may in *certain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                           scales as m a y b e determ ined by that authority.”
                                                                                                                                                     xcumstances constitute the provision of special police services for which
                                     The words “ spec: £. T»olice services” are not defined in.the Act, but it is 4 l f *- 5 ^ c h a r g e can be m ade. M oreover it is to be observed that in Glamorgan
                                     clear that th e sec r o r . provides statutory authority for a long-established '%W^?&TCdal Co. Ltd. v. Glamorganshire Standing Joint Committee (1916) 114
                                     practice whereb> p o lic e officers have been made available to carry out                                1 L.T. 717, 718 (not reported on this point in [1916] 2 K.B. 206)

    SlSlFKL                          functions at priv*           prem ises in return for paym ent to the relevant police         fe           VPhillimore L.J. stated in the context of a coal strike in South Wales,
     iSiK^w                          authority. T h e s . l i c e n c e of the practice before 1964 has not been                  fX ..'iwhere a colliery company had asked for 24 policemen on special duty,
                                     challenged, b u : : '^n-^rtheless, as the nature of the services provided in                                  that the request m eant “that they would have to pay the usual charge
                                     this case is at i d ; c o r e of the dispute, it may be helpful to refer to some      H    | R      ‘i  j  f  o  r police sent on special request for private protection . .
                    j **-'«• ■•% *
                     '«* *u          of the relevant, p ^ s s ^ g e s in the authorities and documents to which our          I m    . ;    r  t f  f ?   F u rth er information as to the existence and understanding of the
                   ife*» ** *        attention w as a r x s .~ .~It is sufficient to start with the Police Act 1890 (53                  ^   p   r  a c  t i c e is to be found in the report of the Shortt Committee which was
                   ®#if- s.-£-<      & 54 Viet. 27. e.                This Act was passed to m ake provision for, inter                                           »n June 1923 following the events at the first Cup Final held at
                                     alia, the p e n s io n s -End allowances to be paid to police constables in                 %      ^   X     e   m    b  l e  y Stadium on 28 April 1923 (the Report of the D epartm ental
                                     England and W L ^ s , B y section 16 it was provided that every police                          ^   ' ‘^   S   o  m   n  u  t t e e on Crowds (1924) (Cm d. 2058)). In their report the
                                     force should h a v e i T e n s i o n fund, and by section 16(l)(e) it was further                           ij-Qtmmttee                considered the existing arrangements for the control of
                      Iff-l'-l-’i
                     y-*s--'V ;      provided that t h e r e sh o u ld be carried to that fund
                                                                                                                                                      [owds in and around sports grounds. In paragraph 20 of the report they                                   W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •'•’4%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wSBk
                                                                                                                asM09 Jt'
                                                                              &&&
                                                                                                                                                                                        ®%tsp Spatss                                                 rase* ‘ '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              iileSjgfi
                                                                                                                                                        ^svasfvi**
                                                                                                           ieKiv Law Reports 24 July 19&7                       Weekly Law R eports 24 July 1987

                                                    310                                                                                                                                                                              .311
                                                    Neill L.J.                      v. Sheffield united (C.A.)                                         mm.                             Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)         Neil! L.J.            ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *•'
                                                     turned to deal with the provision of police for duty inside grounds. The                      P ^ ili'e s p•e c i. It is true, submitted Mr. Griffiths, that until the end of October             \? w m ,
                                                                                                                                                                     the club continued to request the attendance of police officers at
ass®i                                               •paragraph included these passages:
                                                                                                                                                  t * itbe ground, or at any rate must be taken to have made such requests,
'msmm                                                     “A t present the n um b er of police to be provided on any particular
                                                                                                                                                 g P g l k o t jn recent years these requests did not give rise to any legal liability
                                                          occasion is settled by consultation between the ground authorities
                                                                                                                                                             to pay f° r         attendance, because the chief constable was obliged to
                                                          and the Chief Officer of Police, and the former are charged for the
                                                          services of the police at rates fixed by the police authority. It js                  f S ^ t r r a n g e for the attendance of these officers in any event so that he could
                                                                                                                                                                    his duties to maintain law and order and to protect life and
                                                          evident that the num ber of police to be supplied cannot be
                                                          determ ined by any mathematical formula according to the size of                     ; ^ B f & f o p e r t y - Accordingly th ere was no consideration for any offer or
                                                                                                                                               ® § P i r o m i s e by the club, whether express or implied, to pav for the
                                                          the ground or the num ber of spectators which it will accommodate;
                                                                                                                                                             Attendance.
                                                          nor is it possible to say with certainty in advance that any particular
                                *iV
                                  j Wr ;s./                                                                                                      p j l l jfSfe; Placed in the forefront of M r. Griffiths’ argum ent were statem ents
                                                          num ber of police will or will not be adequate to deal with all
                                     5*i                                                                                                         ‘t l/‘T 'of principle on this m atter to be found in the speeches in the House
                                                          emergencies that may arise. The most that can be done is to form
                                                                                                                                                 i§ lf l i f e f “Lords in Glasbrook&J&rothers L td. v. Glamorgan County Council
                                                          an estimate based on previous experience and on the best
                                                                                                                                                                       A .C . 270. In that case a question arose as to the right of a
                                                          information that is available. . . . The evidence which we have
    P~Z4%                                                                                                                                                          e authority to m ake a charge for billeting a nu m b er of police
                                                          received indicates that in practice any dispute as to the number of
                                                                                                                                                 IjfP lo ffic e rs on colliery premises on th e occasion of a strike. T he House
                                                          police to be employed at private cost is of the rarest occurrence;
                                                          . . . It is true that the duty of preserving law and order is one for                                      by a majority that a charge could be m ade if the am ount of
                                                          which the local police authority and the Chief Officer of Police are                               protection requested by the ag ent of the colliery owners exceeded
                                                          primarily responsible, and it is arguable that persons w'ho cause the                         itjtfia t; which the senior police officer reasonably considered to be
                                                          assembling of large crowds in an area under their control may                                  ^n ec essary in the circumstances. B ut there are clear statem ents in the
                                                          reasonably be expected to pay the w'hole cost of any police whom                       ^ P M lp e e c h e s to the effect that if the scale of protection was no m ore than
                                                          the responsible authority consider may be required to ensure the                           S ll 't h a t £bich the police thought to be necessary no charge could properly
                                                                                                                                                     C ^ b e made. Viscount Cave L.C. p u t the m atter as follows, at p. 277:
                                                          preservation of order in that area.
                                                               “We are agreed that the opinion of the chief officer must                           '               “No doubt there is an absolute and unconditional obligation binding
                                                          ultimately prevail and that the managem ent of a ground which                     ISPp ^ g | g j | t h e       police authorities to take all steps which appear to them to be
                                                          disregards his advice must incur heavy responsibility, but we feel                     p S |! ! ||f \ n e c e s s a r y for keeping the peace, for preventing crime, or for
                                                          that the present system should be allowed to continue, by which the                    l E ^ |f ||! l ; !protecting property from criminal injury; and the public, who pay
                                                          spirit of co-operation between the parties concerned is encouraged.                    ^ g J | | f ' f o r this protection through the rates -and taxes, cannot lawfully be
    mm                                                    . . . Yet if it should prove that the ground authorities persistently                  § l S ! p C called uPon to m ake a further payment for that which is their
    msitMs                                                fail to secure provision of an adequate police contingent inside the
                                                          ground, then there should be no question that the chief constable
                                                                                                                                                                in his speech he applied this statement of principle to the facts, at
                                                          should have power to require the provision of such additional police                                                                                                                      ,AfS§|
                                                                                                                                                          p. 281:
                                                          as he thinks necessary, subject to proposals set out in the following                    Lit*''
                                                          paragrap h.”                                                                             8 1 8 8 1 1 “ If in the judgm ent of the police authorities, formed reasonably and
                                   Sim                                                                                                                               g°°d faith, the garrison was necessary for the protection of life
                                                    In the following paragraph the com m ittee suggested that as the '                                   ||§ j |a n d property, then they were not entitled to make a charge for it,
                                                    em ploym ent of the police was not solely for private advantage but also                             ’ "*v| f o r that would be to exact a payment for the performance of a duty
                                                    served a useful public purpose the rates to be fixed should be at                                                    they clearly owed to the appellants and their servants; but if
» S ^ :4,
                                                    something less than the full cost of the men concerned.                       <            i ^ ^ ^ J ^ , f h e y thought the garrison a superfluity and only acceded to [the                     -'life
                                                        It is against this background that one comes to examine the facts and '                   ' ^ ^ ^ S ’owners’ agent's] request with a view to meeting his "wishes, then in
                                                    the submissions in the instant case. It is accepted on behalf of the club,"                                        opinion they were entitled to treat, tfae garrison'duty as special
                                                    at any rate for the purpose of the present appeal, that the arrangements                   j:                duty and to charge for it.”                                                        ■•Si,
 ili& SSS                                           which were made between the club and the police authority before the
                                                    1939-45 war, and indeed until about 1970, for the attendance of police                     | t e ^ A ' nd Lord Blanesburgh (whose dissent on the facts does not affect the
                                                    officers inside the ground at Bramall Lane am ounted to arrangements                                  question of principle) said, at p. 306, that the “absolute duty” of the                   ' -.jtrtll
                                                    for the provision of special police services. It is further accepted that                  * l i i % r ° ,-Ce **t 0 afford protection to life and property was only," I think,
                                                    these arrangements were made at the request of the club and that the                          M - T * * by the extent of their available resources and by the urgency of
                                                    police authority was entitled to make a charge for attendance of the                       E C ,* ;* .^ mpet>ng claims upon their services.”
                                                    police officers; before 1964 the charge could be justified as being in                                               with these statements as to the . duty' of the police, Mr.
                                                    accordance with the decision in Glasbrook Brothers Ltd. v. Glamorgan                                              directeci our attention to the facts and to certain passages in the
                                                    County Council [1925] A .C. 270. Between 1964 and about 1970 thfl                                              6‘ ** *s common ground that until about 1970 the normal number
                                V* «
■'WimKg&                         -»*1 *             charge could be justified as being made in accordance with section 15(0                                   Police officers attending a match at Bramall Lane was 20, though a
                             } *«%            •«
                             Ii'SSi , * • , - .
                                                •
                             m J * ..: :.           of the Police A ct 1964. Since about 1970, however, and certainly in the                    I g l ^ w w 't n o r e were needed when the ground was full to capacity. In those
                                                                                                                                                                                                             * ^
                                                    last ten years, the position, it is said, has changed in a fu n d am e n ta l                                as th e 1        recorded in his judgment,    the _______
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   main concern ofr the_
                             in                                                                                                                             BE

                           R 8 W i1
                                  ;’.i-, !


■it*
liSp
-            pvmxsvsv’**
                                                   The Weekly Law Reports 24 July   19 37                  Weekly Law Reports 24 July 1987
312
Neill L.J.                 Harris v. Sheffield United {C.A.)                     [1987j                ,,, o                     Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)
                                                                                                  3   ViA -*1-
police “was to ensure that spectators were able to watch in safety and                      %.*             n u m b e r o f uniform ed officers required for each home game. Those
comfort and that both entry to and egress from the ground was smooth                                        n u m b e r s depend in part on the expected size of the crowd and m
and unobstructed.” In addition there were other subsidiary duties such                                Dart on the num ber and reputation of the visitors’ supporters. . . .
as supervision of the takings at the turnstiles and ensuring that there was                                  the beginning of each week an operation order is compiled by
no entry on to the pitch. In the 1970’s and 1980’s, however, the position                        v    t jje police and circulated within the force and to the club. Such an
changed. The crowds have decreased so that instead of gates sometimes                       I W r order is before the court. It contains detailed instructions for
in excess of 30,000 the average gate is about 12,000. But at the same                        r'~, "V policing each particular part of the ground, crowd control and foi
time the behaviour of the crowds has deteriorated with the supporters of                              the enforcem ent o f the club’s ground regulations. . . . The m anpower
some clubs being particularly unruly, aggressive and disruptive. As a                                  r e q u ir e d for these operations is, as I have indicated, considerable. It
result (a) the num ber of officers required for duty inside the ground has                    ’       cannot be provided by officers who would normally be on duty at
increased to a figure varying between about 30 and 80 or more; and                                     the relevant times, without adversely affecting normal policing
(b) the emphasis of the policing has changed so that, although other                            fZ-JV requirem ents elsewhere in the authority’s area. It is, therefore,
duties such as crowd management and the enforcement of the club’s                                   \ provided by extending the shifts of those involved and by calling on
ground regulations are still carried out, the main function of the police                              officers who would otherwise have been on rest day. This involves
inside the grounds has become the maintenance of law and order.                              C jx f    the paym ent of substantial overtim e.”
    The club itself has taken steps to deal with the changed situation.
                                                                                              '/ r    a    little earlier in his judgm ent the judge described the steps taken by
The advice of an experienced engineer has been taken and as a result a
num ber of -safety measures have been introduced including adequate
                                                                                            1 ;;- th e police to maintain law and order by keeping the supporters of the
                                                                                                 i - ’rival clubs segregated at all times. H e described the operation in these
crush barriers and the careful siting and construction of gangways. In
addition high and substantial fencing has been erected around three                               ~ terms: .•»
sides of the ground to contain the standing spectator^. The judge drew                                     “To achieve this the police have mounted a combined operation at
attention to these measures in his judgment and paid tribute to the fact                                   a;i hom e matches, between the officers on duty outside the ground
that as a result Bramall Lane is one of the safest of soccer grounds.                                       and those on duty inside. First, the club’s supporters are admitted
Furtherm ore for some years the club has employed a number of part-                                        through particular turnstiles to terracing at the end of the ground
time stewards to assist in crowd m anagement, the securing of exits and                      ^ l l s f e . known as the Kop. Secondly the visiting supporters are met at the
the enforcement of the club’s ground regulations.                                             ‘             railway station or their coach park and escorted to turnstiles at the
    Mr. Griffiths accepted that the club itself had a duty to safeguard the                                'opposite (Bramall Lane) end of the ground. A t the turnstiles they
safety of those who came to Bramall Lane, either as players or                                  “5 ? % ^ are relieved of alcohol and containers, such as bottles; those already
spectators, as well as to the club’s own staff. Mr. Griffiths also accepted                                 under the influence of alcohol are refused admittance. The rem ainder
that while on the club’s premises the police officers contributed, as they                                  are then adm itted to the Bramall Lane terraces and there overseen
had done in the past, to crowd management and safety and to the                                           rby uniformed officers. Their duty is to prevent or deter provocative,
enforcement of the club’s ground regulations. But, said Mr. Griffiths,                      'i V S 'S f o disruptive or violent behaviour. . . . The final _phase of the
such matters as the enforcement of the club’s ground regulations did not                                    operation comes at the end of the game when the visiting supporters
provide the main reason for the presence of the police. It was common                         iStffilSF.are held on the terraces while the home supporters disperse. Ihey
ground, he emphasised, that the presence of the police was necessary to                      ; ^ ^ ^ a r e then escorted by the police officers outside the ground back to
maintain law and order and to protect life and property; indeed it was                                       the railway station or to their coach parks.”
unthinkable that a league match could take place without the presence                        ^ M P r o m this description of the police operations it is apparent, submitted
of the police and it was quite plain that the chief constable would take                                    G riffiths, that bv providing for the attendance of a substantial
such steps as he could to prevent a match taking place if the club                            > ^ p u m b e r of police officers the chief constable was carrying out his public
declined to request a police presence.                                                      :^ f.##t3uty to maintain law and order. The operation was planned as a whole
    In order to demonstrate the importance which the chief constable                                   and it was impossible to m ake a satisfactory distinction between the
himself attached to the presence of the police, Mr. Griffiths drew our                       | :’i duties which the officers carried out outside, the ground and those which
attention to passages in the judgment where the judge dealt with the                              . £1 they ca rried out within it. The nature of their main function was the
arrangements which were made between the club and the police. The                                      same—the maintenance of law and order and the protection of life and
judge referred to the five clubs (including the club and Sheffield                                     property. Moreover, I t was instructive to observe that, the police placed
Wednesday) within the police authority’s area, and continued:                                              matches in three categories and that a category B match (which by
      “ In July or August of each year the senior police officer responsible                 l^fpll^efinition was less likely to lead to violence than a category A match)
      for the policing operations meets the chairmen and secretaries of                       ^S |fp¥a5 defined as being “a"match . . . where serious public disorder can be
      e a c h of th e five clubs. Together they review the policing a rran g e m en ts       ! S . ? ^ l k i Pa t e d -”
      made during the previous season, discuss problems which have                                     It will be apparent from this summary of the submissions m ade on
      arisen and consider the policing requirements for the forthcoming                      SSggfckehalf of the club that if the words used by Viscount Cave L.C. in the
      season. When the season begins the divisional commander in whose                       W & g f a b r o o k case [1924 ] A.C.'.'"270 were applied as though they were the
      area a particular ground is situated discusses with the club the                       ;l?flpfE0rcfe of a statute the case for the club would be very strong if not
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ItlP




                                                                          T5ii*iS


,*L,                                                             The Weekly Law Reports 24 July                         Law R e p o n s 24 July 1987
                                                                                                  3^87
             314                                                                                                                                                                              315
             Neill L.J.                  H a m s v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                   IfipIP':,,                                    Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)             Neiil L.J.
                                                                                              [1987]
                                                                                                §
              overwhelming. Thus it is not in dispute that at all material times since          felte- save of the law itself. No Minister of the Crown can tell him that he
              about 1970 the chief constable has been of the opinion that the                                                                                                                                   *,W
                                                                                               wy.-lrsfiff*'.- must, or m ust not, keep observation on this place or that; or that
              attendance of police officers at Bramall Lane on the occasion of league                              he must, or must not, prosecute this man or that one. N or can any
              and cup matches has been necessary for the maintenance of law and                                    police authority tell him so. T he responsibility for law -enforcement
             order and the protection of life and property. In the Glasbrook case                                   lies on him. H e is answerable to the law and to the law alone. . . .                      .'#181
                                                                                              T l T Although the chief officers of police are answerable to the law,                                           ■*'Jptp
              however, the H ouse of Lords was considering a very different situation
             from that before the court in the present case. The question before the                                there are m any fields in which they have a discretion with w'hich the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■r'w f
             House was w hether a charge could be made where the precautions I I                                    law will not interfere. For instance, it is for the Commissioner of
             taken were m ore extensive than those which the police authgyities                                     Police of the Metropolis, or the chief constable, as the case may be,
             considered to be necessary. But the emergency which required the                            r'%' to decide in anv particular case w hether inquiries should be pursued,
             presence, if not of a garrison of police officers, of at least a number of                             or w hether a n ‘arrest should be m ade, or a prosecution brought. It
             officers to watch the situation with other officers held in reserve, arose         jppf                must be for him to decide on the disposition of his force and the
             in the context of an industrial dispute and not because the colliery                                   concentration of his resources on any particular crime or area. No
             company had voluntarily chosen to invite a large num ber of people to                                : court can o r should give him direction on such a matter. H e can
             their premises to watch a football match or other spectacle.                                        ■: also make policy decisions and give effect to them, as, for instance,
                  I come therefore to the arguments advanced on behalf of the police                                was often done when prosecutions were not brought for attem pted
             authority. It was argued on behalf of the police authority that the claim               ff§S-5>:. suicide.”
             for payment could be justified on a num ber of grounds. First it was said                               r        f
             that in the Glasbrook case itself it was recognised both in the Court of 1 J l l ® Some years later in Reg. v. C hief Constable o f Devon and Cornwall,
             Appeal and in the H ouse of Lords that payments were permissible if £ | -:V                           parte Central Electricity Generating Board [1982] Q.B. 458 Lord
             special arrangements were made for police officers to attend at such ;pl jp f D e n n in g M .R . repeated part of this judgm ent, at p. 472, w here he
             events as weddings, race meetings, and sporting contests. A t Bramail ~ |T L'-^introduced the relevant passage with the words:
             Lane the police officers were in effect still carrying out the role which M m m & i t is of the first importance that the police should decide on their
            they had always carried out of crowd control and^the maintenance of fg§ " ’"'v " 'o w n responsibility what action should be taken in any particular
            law' and order, albeit that the task was more demanding than it was 50 | | |                             situation.
            or even 20 years ago. Secondly it was pointed out that though the chief j t l
            constable was under a general duty to enforce the law, the duty did not 4 |§ I p f f A n d to the sam e effect were the words of Roskill L.J. in Reg. v.
            and could not extend to providing every citizen with complete protection            |l|tC o m m is s io n e r o f Police o f the Metropolis, Ex parte Blackburn (No. 3)
            at all times and in all circumstances. Thirdly it was argued that the                                         G-B. 241, where he said, at p. 262:
            disposition of the police force was a m atter for the chief constable and jjf|                           “It is no         part of the duty of this court to presume to tell the
            that provided he acted reasonably the courts would not interfere with his             p S p S r e s p o n d e n t how     hnw to conduct the affairs of the M etropolitan Police,
            decisions. Finally, it was submitted that in any event the chief constable            S-W£Sl,:-rnQr {j0W to deploy his all too limited resources at a time of ever-
            was entitled, and indeed bound, to take account of the resources, both "f§l                              increasing crime, especially of crimes of violence in L ondon .”
            financial and in terms of manpower, which were available to him. If he |
            decided, acting reasonably, that he could not provide adequate protection         i | ; I return to the facts of the present case. I see the force of the
            without calling on officers who would otherwise be off duty and would              ' te^.:'5gument that the court must be very slow before it interferes in any
            therefore have to be paid overtime if they were used, he was entitled to ^             fe^w ayiw ith a decision o f a chief constable about the disposition o f his
            insist, in a situation such as the present, that the protection would have                      ' ' ' 'l s ; : T h e question posed in the instant case, however, is not whether                  ■tfstf
            to be provided in the form of “special police services” and not otherwise. '*$1 jfjfffthe chief constable ought to have sent officers to Bramall Lane or as to
                 In support of these arguments Mr. Bentley drew our attention to a n f t h e number of officers which were necessary; that the presence _of
            num ber of authorities in which consideration has been given to the                              officers was necessary is not in dispute. The question is whether, having
            question as to how far the courts can interfere with the discretion of a                          regard to his general duty to enforce the law, the provision of these                            ‘?i||
                                                                                                             officers can properly be considered as the provision of special police                            * is £
            chief constable to dispose of his resources as he thinks best. It is
            sufficient to refer to some of the relevant passages. In Reg. v.                              '<■services for which the police authority was entitled to make a charge. In
            Commissioner o f Police o f the Metropolis, E x parte Blackburn [196Sf 2                        f answering this question I do not propose to attem pt to lay down any
            Q .B . 118 Lord Denning M .R . said, at p. 136:                                         |p  jg   e n e ra l rules as to what are or are not “special police services,” because
                                                                                                    yigta-'m y judgment it is necessary to look at all the circumstances of the
                   “I hold it to be the duty of the Commissioner of Police of the              p^g-W dividual case. I would, however, venture «o suggest that the following
                   M etiopolis, as it is of every chief constable, to enforce the law of J |j j | | p g ;ma?ters require to be taken into account (1) Are the police officers
                   the land. He must take steps so to post his men that crimes may be                                          to attend oq private premises or in a public place? Though in
                  detected; and that honest citizens may go about their affairs in               J | § | | f^ Q sb ro o k B ro th e rs L td . v. Glamorgan C o u n ty C o u n c il [1925] A .C . 270
                  peace. He must decide whether or no suspected persons are to be                U t i l - ® feet that the garrison was to be stationed on private premises was
                  prosecuted; and, if need be, bring the prosecution o r see that it is          ’’’| | § | B<n<Seated as conclusive, the fact that the police will not as a general
                  brought. But in all these things he is not the servant of anyone.                 Mf-tw1*®. ^ave access to private premises suggests ^that prima facie their




       mm                       IB S,
                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                           f«     F    J   w eekly Law Reports 24 July 1987
                                                                               The Weekly Law Reports 24 July J9 S7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   317
                       316                                                                                                       IS®®--
                                                                                                                                                                      Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                      Neill L.J.
           j           Neill L.J.                     Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                                         f :»/, W.L.R-
                                                                                                 [1987J
                                                                                                                                            :e of the officers are m ade to guard against the possibility, and
                        presence on private premises would constitute special police services. (2 )
                                                                                                         A                          so m e ” matches the probability, of violence; the officers are not sent
                        Has some violence or other emergency already occurred or is ~jt
                                                                                                                                  (jeal with an existing emergency, nor can it be said that any outbreak
                        immediately imminent? I can at present see no basis for an argument
                                                                                                                                  v io le n c e is immediately imminent.
                        that the attendance of police officers to deal with an outbreak of *
                                                                                                               S f p & r r jn m y j u d g m e n t , llo       nno kHin
                                                                                                                                                                     n ag at at all  all these factors I am d r iv e n to the
                        violence which has actually occurred or is immediately imminent could
                                                                                                               §SlfS? c o n c l u s i o n th£rt the provision of police officers to attend regularly at
                        constitute the provision of special police services, even though officers
                                                                                                                            'B ra m a ll Lane throughout the football season does constitute the
                        who would otherwise be off duty had to be deployed. (3) W hat is the
                                                                                                              [f; g ': - ovision of special police services. Nor in my opinion is it to the point
                       ■nature of the event or occasion at which the officers are required to
                                                                                                                               • ■ the club has stated that they do not expect the police to carry out
                        attend? It is to be noted that in Wathen v. Sandys (1811) 2 Camp. 640,                                                      .* .i              * ___& A ! __   1 a ...
                                                                                                                       <r/n0 y duties other            than   to maintain              law aand order.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     rt v i h
                                                                                                                                                                                                          The   a /“% 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                              resources  Ckc f™\T t r * o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of the
                        which was referred to in«the course of argument in the Glasbrook case
                                                                                                                              police are finite. In my view if the club wishes on a regular basis to
                        in the Court of A ppeal [1924] 1 K.B. 879, 882, the sheriff was not
                                                                                                               BtW«pifflaKe an exceptional claim on police services to deal with potential
                        entitled to charge the candidates for the provision of constables at the
                                                                                                               ’"itf& rviolence on its premises, then however well intentioned and public
                        polling booth because he was under a duty to procure the peace of the
                                                                                                                            >spj[rited it may be in assembling the crowd at Bramall Lane, the services
                        county. But a distinction can be drawn between public events such as
                       elections which perhaps lie at one end of a spectrum, and private events               M    ^  ^  %     h ic h it receives are “special police services” within the meaning of
                                                                                                                              section      15(1) of the Police Act 1964.                                                                    ■' "*3Ss5
                       such as weddings which lie at the other end. A t various points in Use
                                                                                                                                    The question then remains: are these services ‘ requested by the
                       middle may lie events such as football matches to which the public are                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                       within the m eaning 0f section 15(1)? It was very strongly argued on                                  :
                       invited and which large numbers of the public are likely to attend. It
                       may also be relevant to inquire whether the event or occasion forms part
                                                                                                                                      ■If of the club that after 26 October 1983 the club made no relevant                                  ■ ;:.wSP
                                                                                                                  v           request for such services other than requests made on a without
                       of a series or whether it is a single occasion or event. Someone who
                                                                                                         nprejudice basis. In my view                                  this part of the club^s argument, unlike the
                       stages events which require the regular attendance of police officers will
                                                                                                          j M S t argument on the meaning of “special police services,” lacks any real
                       be placing an exceptional strain on the resources of the police,
                       particularly if the events take place at weekends or on public holidays. i l f ^ f f ^ b s t a n c e , If the club is to hold matches at Bramall Lane it is necessary
                                                                                                                                    ■ p 0 iice officers to attend inside the ground. T h eir-p rese n ce is
                       (4) Can the provision of the necessary amount of police protection be
                                                                                                         • l ^ p ^ & n e c e s s a r y to enable the club to meet its responsibilities to the players,
                       m et from the resources available to the chief constable without the
                                                                                                           T \                the staff”and the spectators as well as to comply with the rules imposed
                       assistance of officers who would otherwise be engaged either in other
                       duties or would be off duty? It was argued on behalf of the club that                  f  v  F  i      b y the f° o tb a 1 1 authorities- 11 is not necessary to examine what steps
                                                                                                         E           \ ^ could be taken, and by whom, to stop a match taking place if the club
                       though it was relevant to take account of the total num ber of men
                                                                                                         ’ i ^ a u t h o r i t i e s declined to allow the police to attend. But there is no
                       available it was not permissible to take into consideration the fact that
                                                                                                                              likelihood that the club authorities, who have acted with a great sense of
                       the use of “off-duty” officers might increase the payment of overtime. I
                                                                                                                               responsibility throughout, would take such a course. It mav be that the
                       am unable to accept this argument. The chief constable when deciding
                                                                                                        j g  f p  p j f ^   r a q u e s t for*. . . the 4police services can           ran onlynnlv be implied from all the
                       how to deploy his forces is subject not only to the constraints imposed
                                                                                                                               circumstances and that it is m ade without enthusiasm. But if the police
                       by the num ber of m en available, but also to financial constraints. The
                                                                                                         E * § # ^ T a tte n d in order to enable the match to take place then, in the
                       payment of overtime on particular occasions may m ean that on other
                                                                                                         # ^ ^ g a r c u m s t a n c e s existing in this case, I consider that a request is .to be
                       occasions reductions have to be made in the ordinary services provided
                       by the police or sacrifices have to be made in the provision of equipment.                             .implied.
                           Bearing these considerations in mind I return to the present case.                                           would only add this. One can feel considerable sympathy for the
                       The club has responsibilities which are owed not only to its employees                                           authorities' who are faced with falling gates and a'grave escalation
                                                                                                                J H ^ o f ' costs to m eet violence which they deplore and do their best to
                       and the spectators who attend but also to the football authorities to take
       Mb * ...        all reasonable steps to ensure that the game takes place in conditions                 K   I g ' T prevent. One can only hope that some accommodation can be reached
       life? < i’..?                                                                                                   # Perhaps on a national scale to m eet r t h r e a t to the finances of the club
                       which do not occasion danger to any person or property. The a tte n d a n c e
                                                                                                                        ■ ' and other clubs in a similar situation. But I am satisfied that as a m atter
                       of the police is necessary' to assist the club in the fulfilment of this duty.
                       The matches take place regularly and usually at weekends during about                                    of law the judge reached the right conclusion.
                       eight months of the year. Though the holding of the matches is of some                                  4-';  I would dismiss the appeal.
       |m *^r‘
             i         public importance because of the widespread support in the local                                 lr.
                                                                                                                                     B a l c o m b e L.J. The principal issue on this appeal is whether
                       community both for the game and the club, the club is not under any
                       legal duty to hold the matches. The charges which the police authority                                   services     provided by the South Yorkshire Police Authority at the ground                                 v--M
                       seek to make, and have made, relate solely to the officers on duty inside
      fljl|i’i-        the ground and not to those in the street or other public places outside.
                                                                                                             lEttlM®:-1                     A ct 1964 so that, if these services are provided at the club's
      iliM                 There is clear evidence that the chief constable would be unable to
                                                                                                                                request,       the police authority may charge for their provision. The judge
                       provide the necessary am ount of protection for Bramal! Lane and also _
                                                                                                                                         that t}ley Were special services. T h e club has appealed.
                       to discharge his o t h e r , responsibilities without making extensive use of
     IJSfls-tv         officers who would otherwise have been off duty. Substantial sums by
                                                                                                                      * g p - i The club’s argument has the attraction of simplicity. It is common
                                                                                                                                ground that it is the duty of all constables, including chief constables, to
                       way of overtime have therefore to be paid. The arrangements for the




■-
                                                                                                                                                                         ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          “ *■'




                                                                      The Wee£iy       "Reports 24 July I9g7                   'W eekly Law Reports 24 July 1987
                    318                                                      -.-'.";■..;i:i^ ■     .              -«p>SS *"e                                                                                           319         •’'-^?1                 1
                    Balcombe L.J.              Harris v, Sheffield United (C.A.)   ,                   [1987]                                              Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                Balcombe L.J.        ■•..3V*i|SlpJ
                                                                                                                       S B 3 W.L.R-
                     enforce the law and in particular to prevent breaches of the peace, u                                   In the G la s b r o o k case in the Court of Appeal [1924] 1 K.B 879                                ■
                     the course of his judgment the judge said: “It ,is accepted that at some                                c“nm ttQn L.J. gave examples of services provided by the police for
                                                                                                                             I
                     fixtures violence was almost certain if she police were not present jn
                                                                                                                             pay
                                                                                                                                   -ment at p. __ 891:
                                                                                                                                                  c m . “Instances are . . . 11-KorP     OQ
                                                                                                                                                                                 where assemblies are2 likely
                                                                                                                                                                                                       likely t o                -•■yitfl
                     substantial numbers— that was well known to the club and to the                                         • r e d u c e disorder, as at races, or fo o tb a ll m eetings .   (my emphasis).
                     police.” So, Mr. Griffiths submitted, it follows that by their presence at                              Mr Griffiths attem pted to explain away these references by submitting                              .'4*•
                     the club’s ground the police were merely fulfilling their primary function                              that whatever may have been the position in the past, today it is a sad                                *
                     of preserving public order: that is part of their ordinary duty and cannot                      iPfe fa c t'o f life that football hooliganism is virtually certain to provoke
                     therefore be “special police services.” As I said, the "argument has the                                disorder, so that the police must attend football matches in exercise of
                     attraction of simplicity'; nevertheless in my judgment it is wrong.                              Jteas ljie£r public duty to keep the peace. I do not find that a convincing                                 •. ■
                         The argument depends to a very great extent on the decision of, and                          *      explanation, particularly against the background of the R eport of the                              '' M
                    the speeches in, the House of Lords in G la sb ro o k B ro th e rs L td, v                               Departmental C om mittee on Crowds (1924) (Cmd. 2088) (“the Shorn                                   **»
    l i |l|‘i       G la m o rg a n C ounty' C o u n c il [1925] A .C . 270. It is therefore necessary to               Sfe Report”) which at paragraph 21 on p. 14 makes clear what was then
                    consider carefully what that case decided. On the occasion of a strike a                              If considered to be the function of the police inside a football or other                                  IS S I
                    colliery manager applied for police protection for his colliery and insisted                             sports ground:
                    that it could, only be efficiently protected by billeting a police force on                       ife®’          “The presence of the police at a largely attended football match or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fm         ■’ 1
                    the colliery premises. The police superintendent was prepared to provide                                       ' similar event is in itself desirable as the most effective means of                                          .      '
                    what in his opinion was adequate protection by means of a mobile force,                                          preventing disorder and of dealing with it promptly should it arise.
                    but refused to billet police officers at the colliery except on the terms of                            ^       Their employment is, in fact, not solely for private advantage but
                    the m anager agreeing to pay for the force so provided at a special rate.                               r.       Serves also a useful public purpose.”
                   The House of Lords held by a majority (Viscount Cave L.C., Viscount
                                                                                                                       sp         Accordingly I do not accept Mr. Griffiths' submission that the decision
                   Finlay and Lord Shaw of Dum ferm line; Lord Carson and Lord
                                                                                                                                  in the Glasbrook case is determinant of the decision in the present case.
                   Blanesburgh dissenting) that there was nothing illegal in the agreement,
                                                                                                                                'r    The true rule, in my judgment, is as follows. In deciding how to                                 -X$,
                   nor was it void for want of consideration. It will at once be observed
                                                                                                                       p f i t f exercise his public duty of enforcing the law, and of keeping the peace,
                   that the facts of the G la sb ro o k case are a very long way from the facts
                                                                                                                                    chief constable has a discretion, which he must exercise even-handedfv.
                   of the present case; in particular there was no suggestion there, as there                                     Provided he acts within his discretion, the courts will not interfere: see,
                   is here, that the person requiring police protection had, for his own                                          e.g., R eg. v. O x fo r d , E x p a rte L e v e y , The Times, 1 N ovember 1986. In
                   private ^purposes, organised an occasion which could only take place                                           exercising that discretion a chief constable must clearly have regard to
                   safely if special security measures were taken, and which it was his own                                       the resources available to him, and I reject as wholly unrealistic Mr.
                   duty to provide. It is against that background of fact that the quotations                        S| | § p ; Griffiths’ submission that in estimating those resources he must only
                   from the speeches in the G la s b r o o k case on which Mr. Griffiths relies                                   consider the m anpow er available, whether from his own force or from
                   have to be set; in particular the passage from the speech of Viscount                               “ ^ .a n o t h e r force under section 14 of the Police Act 1964, withoui regard to
                   Cave L.C ., where he said, at p. 277:                                                                          the cost of providing those resources, whether by way of payment of
                        “there is an absolute and unconditional obligation binding the police                           _         overtime to his own men or by payment to the other police authority
                        authorities to take all steps which appear to them to be necessary                              S o under section 14(4). As Scrutton L.J. said in the G la s b r o o k case [1924]
                        for keeping the peace . . . ; and the public, who pay for this                                  ^ • 1 K.B. 879, 891:
                        protection through the rates and taxes, cannot lawfully be called                                              “Obviously the police authorities cannot be expected to, and cannot,                          '■r&M
                        upon to make a further paym ent for that which is their right.”                              SKim              protect every citizen completely against possible, even anticipated,                                       ilN&L.
                                                                                                                           pSf         crime. The cost would be prohibitive . . . ”                                                                        p®
                   However, the House of Lords decided in that case that what the colliery
                   m anager wanted by way o f policing went beyond what the police were
                                                                                                                mi
                                                                                                                        9       See also C h in a N a v ig a tio n C o. L td . -v. A tto r n e y -G e n e r a l [1932] 2 K .B.                    v'.fSffS.S-'fct
                   u n der a public duty to provide; therefore it was a “special” service for                                   197, p e r Scrutton L .J. at pp, 212-213. In the present case there was
                   which payment coaid be required. It is the same question which has to                                        evidence of the very considerable sum which had to be paid by way of
                   be decided, on different facts, in the present case. It is, h o w e v e r ,                                  overtime for the provision of police within the club's ground, and this
H i lt i -;■•■                                                                                                           5; : was in addition to the considerable cost of policing outside the ground
    HT-I-V:        interesting to note that during the course of the G la s b r o o k case there
                                                                                                                         & . on the occasion of hom e fixtures. In answering the question w hether
                   were several references t o policing of the kind which is in issue in the                    ny      Ji-;; the provision of police within the club's ground was a special service
                   present case as being ar. example of the kind of “special” service for                       ■:f|    g f g j h e judge said:
                   which payment could be required. Thus Viscount Cave L.C. .said, at P-                        ms
                   278:                                                                                                              “The numbers considered necessary to carry out these services
                                                                                                                                     could only be provided by calling on officers who, at the material
    is  I. ■• >*       “Instances are the lending of constables on the occasions of large                                            times, would otherwise have been off duty. The scope and extent of
    mfe 3 i •
                       gatherings in and outside private premises, as on the occasions of                                            those services and their impact on the chief constable’s m anpower
     f K',-.]
                       weddings, athletic or boxing contests or race meetings, and the                                               resources put them beyond what the club, in the circumstances, was
     m ? i             provision of constabies at large railway stations.”                                                           entitled to have provided in pursuance of the chief constable's

 lira.:;;;,
                                                                 The W eakly Law Reports 24 July j 9 8 7                                  kly Law Reports 24 July 1987                                                             ■:
                320                                                                                                                                                                                            321
                Balcombe L.J.             Harris v. Sheffield United (C.A.)                       11987]                                                                                                                            .
                      public duty. He was entitled to provide those services because he                                                                          [c o u r t    of appeal]

                      was able to do so without depriving other people of police
                                                                                                                        IIP **                               R E G I N A v. O ’G R A D Y
                      protection. In other words, the services provided were withm his
                                                                                                                        ifis?8'
r,fr!                 powers; they were not within the scope of his public duty. I am
                      satisfied that they were special services as I understand that                                                  June 2; 11                         Lord Lane C .J., Boreham and McCowan JJ.
                      expression to have been used in the Glasbrook case and within the
                      meaning of section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964. It follows that he                           ^ ^ ^ W fim e —Self-dcfence—Homicide—Mistake of fact induced by voluntary
                                                                                                                                intoxication—Whether available for self-defence
                      was entitled to provide them on condition shat they were paid for.”                       B                -1   ■
                                                                                                                                          The appellant, who was intoxicated, killed a man and stated
                In my judgm ent that is a correct statem ent of the legal position which                                              to the police, “If I had not hit him I would be dead myself." H e
                cannot be faulted.                                                                                 l f t |l |l |j r was triffd on a count charging murder. The jury were directed
                    In the course of his argument Mr. Griffiths submitted that this appeal                                            that, if the appellant mistakenly believed he was under attack,
                raises grave constitutional issues in that th@vsame arguments which were                                              he was entitled to defend himself but was not entitled to g®
                successful before the judge— and in my view rightly so— could be used                                                 beyond what was reasonable. H e was convicted of manslaughter.
                                                                                                                                          <~>n anneal
                                                                                                                                          On   appeal against conviction
                                                                                                                                                              conviction, on the    rhp nupstinn
                                                                                                                                                                                        question whpth^r
                                                                                                                                                                                                 whether thp
                                                                                                                                                                                                         the
                to support an argument that the policing of political events where there
                                                                                                                          1 8 l§ |f direction should have included the possibility of mistake as to
                were threats o f disorder could be “special services” for which payment                                  a & P the severity of an attack:
                could be required. I do not accept that the cases are in pari materia and                                                 Held, dismissing the appeal, that so far as self-defence was
                I do not consider that a dismissal of this appeal poses any threat to the                                             concerned, reliance could not be placed on a mistake of fact
                political freedoms which the citizen of this country enjoys.                                                          induced by voluntary intoxication; and that, accordingly, the
                    On the other issue which arises on this appeal—whether the club                                            f t '? appeal failed (post. pp. 3 2 4 h . 3 2 6 d ).
                after 26 O ctober 19S3 requested police services at its ground— I agree                                                   Reg- v. Maiewski [1977] A .C . 443, H .L .(E .) and Reg. v.
                with the judgm ent of Neill L.J. and do not wish to add anything.                                                     Williams (Gladstone) (1983) 78 C r.A p p.R . 276, C .A . considered.
                                                                                                                                          Per curiam. A sober m an who mistakenly believes he is in
                    I would dismiss this appeal.                                                                %                     danger of immediate death at the hands of an attacker is
                                                                                                                  1 1 1 e n t i t l e d ’ to be acquitted of both m urder and manslaughter if his
                   K err L.J. I agree that this appeal should be dismissed for the                                                    reaction in killing his supposed assailant was a reasonable one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .-..■•V
                reasons stated in the judgments of Neill and Balcombe L.JJ. and there is                            : S H p t { p ° s t , p. 325a-b).
                nothing which I could usefully add.                                                                                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                                                 The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ••••

                                                               A ppeal dismissed, with costs.                           If^ y . Marshall’s Case (1830) 1 Lew. 76.                                                         r..-yj>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .,
                                                               Leave to appeal.                                         mSm'Pntmer v. The Queen [1971] A .C . 814; (1971] 2 W .L .R . 831; [1971] 1 All                  • ‘ ;■
                                                                                                                                      , E .R . 1077, P.C.
                   Solicitors: Clegg & Softs, Sheffield; W. K. Irving, Barnsley.                                                                                              90                                          ••
                                                                                                                       dSpSM**?- v- LiPman I1?70) 1 Q-B. 152; [1969] 3 W .L .R . 819; [1969] 3 All E .R .            '■ • ' * ' V
                                [R eported by H arriet D utton, Barrister-at-Law]                          ..           « g f e f i : 410, C.A .
                                                                                                                        V 0 R e g --' v- Maiewski [1977] A .C . 443; [1976] 2 W .L .R . 623; [1976] 2 All E .R .
                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                   ; 142, H L (E.)
                                                                                                                                      v. Wardrope [1960] C rim .L .R . 770
                                                                                                                        m m £ * g z .vs Williams (Gladstone) (1983) 78 C r.A pp.R . 276, C .A .                          : ',/5
                                                                                                                        jgit|*<salr -                                                                                         '■
                                                                                                                                     following additional cases were cited in argument:                                  : : i<V
            *
                                                                                                                        ^ ^ R e p ' v r S h a n n o n (1980) 71 C r.A pp.R . 192, C.A.
                                                                                                                                   v. Whyte, The-Times, 16 May 1987, C.A.
                                                                                                                        W & , Re8- v. Woods (1981) 74 C r.A pp .R . 312, C.A.
                                                                                                                                  v. Letenock (1917) 12 Cr.App.R. 221, C.C.A.                                        ■


        '                                                                                                                   t;-; A ppeal against conviction.
                                                                                                                        ./’Y? * ^ e aPPellant, Patrick Gerald O ’Grady, at the Central Criminal
                                                                                                                                      before Judge Underhill Q.C. and-a jury was tried on a count                                       wms*
                                                                                                                           ^narging murder. A fter a five-day trial he was convicted on 19 Septem ber
                                                                                                                                    of m anslaughter and was sentenced to seven years’ ■'-----;-----------*
                                                                                                                               ^ appealed against conviction on the grounds, inter, alia, (a) that, in
                                                                                                                               fe tin g the jury about a mistaken belief as to the severity of an attack,
                                                                                                                               ft judge erred in that he ought to have said further that a man who
                                                                                                                               gtakenly believed he was being attacked or who mistakenly believed
                                                                                                                         S g t t a c k to be more severe than in fact it was, was entitled to use such
        -
                              Sporting Events (Control oi Alcohol etc) Act 1985
                                                   -     (1985 c 57)     . •

   4-5243       1. Offences in co n nection w ith alcoh ol on coaches and trains.— (1) T h is
         section applies to a vehicle w hich —

            (a) is a public service vehicle or railway passenger vehicle, and
            (fc) is b eing used for the principal purpose o f carrving passengers for the w hole or part
                 of a journey to or from a designated sporting event.
           (2; A person w h o know ingly causes or permits intoxicating liquor to be carried on a
         vehicle to w hich this section applies is guilty o f an offence—
            (a) if the vehicle is a public service vehicle and he is th e operator o f the vehicle or the
                 servant or agent o f th e operator, or . . .          .
            (fe) if t h e vehicle is a hired vehicle and h e is th e person to w h o m it is hired or th e servant
                 or agent o f that person.

    -     ® A Person w h o has intoxicating liquor in his possession w hile on a vehicle to w hich
        this section applies is guilty o f an offence.
               ^ person w h o is drunk on a vehicle to w h ic h this section applies is guilty o f an

        tK(5D J r lDiS scction “publie service vehicle” and “operator” have the same m eaning as in
        the Public Passenger V chicles Act 1981.                  -            ..  .      .
        [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 1.]

  C h i c l e which1- 01101 ° n C ertai0 ° th e r v e h ic le s - ^ ) This section applies to a motor

            (a) is not a public service vehicle but is adapted to carry more than 8 passengers, and
            (b) is being used for the principal purpose o f carrying tw o or more passengers for the
                  whole or part of a journey to or from a designated sporting event.
            ® ^ person w ho know ingly causes or permits intoxicating liquor to be carried on a
        motor vehicle to which this section applies is guilty o f an offence—
         (a) if he is its driver, or                            '
         (b) if he is not its driver but is its keeper, the servant or agent o f its keeper, a person to
             w hom it is m ade available (by hire, loan or otherwise) by its keeper or the keeper’s
             servant or agent, or the servant or agent o f a person to w hom it is so made available.
        O ) A p e rso n w h o has intoxicating liquor in his possession w hile on a motor vehicle to
     which this section applies is gu ilty o f an offence.
     offen« Person w ^ ° *s drunk on a motor vehicle to w hich this section applies is guilty o f an
          (5)         In this section—
          keeper , in relation to a vehicle, m eans the person having the duty to take out a licence
             for it under section 1(1) o f th e Vehicles (Excise) Act 1971,
         “motor vehicle” m eans a m echanically propelled vehicle intended or adapted for use on
             roads, and
         “public^service vehicle” has th e sam e m ean in g as in th e Public Passenger V ehicles Act

    [Sponing Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 1A added by the Public Order Act 1986, Sch 1.]

 4-5244         2. Offences in con nection w ith alcohol, containers etc at sports grounds.—
    (1) A person w h o has intoxicating liquor or an article to which this section applies in his
    possession—
         (a)   at any tim e during the period o f a designated sporting event w hen he is in any area
             o f a designated sports ground from w hich the event may be directly viewed or
         (6; w hile entering or trying to enter a designated sports ground at any tim e during the
             period o f a designated sporting event at that ground,
   is guilty o f an offence.
   . (1A) Subsection (lX a) has effect subject to section 5A(1) o f this Act.
      (2)      A person w ho is drunk in a designated sports ground at any tim e during the period
   of a designated sporting event at that ground or is drunk w hile entering or trving to enter
   such a ground at any tim e during th e period o f a designated sporting event at that ground
   is guilty o f an offence.                                              r>             &^
   be^ng                sect*o n applies to any article capable o f causing injury to a person struck by it,

        (a) a bottle, can or other portable container (including such an article w hen crushed or
            broken; w hich —
                (i)is for holding any drink, and
  l;rn©          j_s    a      w hich , w hen em p ty , is normally discarded or returned to or left to
    . . .       be recovered by, th e supplier, or
        (b) part o f an article falling w ithin paragraph (a) ab o v e;
  but does not apply to an yth in g that is for holding any medicinal product (w ithin the
  m eaning o f the M ed icin es Act 1968).
  Sch°irt]ln^ ^ VentS (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 2 as amended by the Public Order Act 1986,


4-5244A  2A. Firew orks etc.— (1) A person is guilty o f an offence if he has an article or
  substance to which this section applies in his possession—
    (a)  at any tim e during the period o f a designated sporting event w hen he is in any area
          3 t lgnated sP °rts. 8 r° u n d from w hich the event m ay be directly viewed or
    (o) while entering or trying to enter a designated sports ground at anv tim e during the
            period o f a designated sporting event at the ground.                       '
    (2) It is a defence for the a c cu se d to prove that he had possession with lawful authority.
  not to m atches, cigarette lighters or heaters.-                                    f i , ^ nrk           -■



4-5245
  —:gi ^ S s r g 3 L                 ^ '^ ^ d                 E       =       =       ?      t ^ ^                           -
    ( «)
               J S S         S r n s u m e / i n. or . ^ n M j ™                                                            £ ■

               5ST3SK p S ^                      S o S S i ^ S ' n g" 4 K ,.*. * * > « *                               «■<»-.

     “ >S                    ^       ^           iS       S       ^       J       r t S 2 T 1 for £O“ ump,l0n ? ,ht


   court may by an order under this section provide—

     (a)
               &       T      S      r 3      S               S               ^        5      S             £          ^

     Cb)
               s g                       i i ^                            i s s s s s
               respect o f the sale or supply o f in toxicating liquor in the prem ises,
   and the justices' licence or, as th e case mas be, registration certificate shall have effect

   “ f f l S o r t e r under this section shall no, apply to any part o f t h e . P r e m i a from which




      rrson—
    person                                                                                                                  r,

               ^     i i S       ?   S   "   J        S   ^   S   ^       S       L       . has been given to the c h ie f office,
         («
               o f police.
               iiiagi<muivw court —
         (5) A magistrates’          *
                                  m ay—                                                                                          .
         (a) d w i g n a t ^ s ^ r t i n g V v e n t * a ^ , * i n ^ h e ' l a t t e r m a y ^ n particular p ro v id e * h S ^ h e
                order shall not have effect in respect o f that event, or
         (6)     revoke the order.
         (6)     A m a6 is,,» ,e s ’ c®ur, s h ^ |n o [ in r « p « t o f an ^ sp w ts g^otmd^^make^an^order un_ er



    ih s s s . ? .                                    ™                   is ■»• iikei>',o b=                      » ,he orderiy
    ^          “
             S S S ' o f f i X t h i , section is in force in respect o f any sp ort, ground and a
    police officer of rank not less than inspector is o f the o p i n i o n -


           !“> x r o r ^ r , i S ^ i i ^

           .       variation o f th e order in respect o f that e v e n t,                 .■t      : ’
     he m ay g ive written notice to the person w hose name has been given to the ch ie f officer o
     police in accordance w ith subsection (4) above.
      (8) A notice is to be treated as given to a person under subsection (7) above if it is left
    at— .                                                                         ,
       (a) the licensed premises or, as the case may be, the registered club premises, or
       (b) the address notified under subsection (4X6) above.
      (9) A notice under subsection (7) above may state that, with effect from the time when
    the notice is given, the order under this section shall, in respect of the sporting event
    concerned—
       (a) cease to have effect, or
       (b) have effect subject to such modifications as may be specified in the notice;
    and the order shall apply accordingly.
      ( 1§) A person who sells or supplies or authorises the sale or supply o f intoxicating liquor
    at any time that is excluded from the permitted hours by virtue o f this section or in
    contravention o f conditions imposed under this section is not guilty o f an offence under
    section 59n)(a} of the Licensing Act 1964 (prohibition o f sale etc outside permitted hours)
    but shall be guilty of an offence under this subsection if—
      (a) he is the holder o f the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, an officer o f the club,
          or
      (b) he knows or has reasonable cause to believe the sale or supply to be such a
          contravention.
      (11)   A person is not guilty o f an offence under section 59(1X6) o f that Act (prohibition
   o f consumption etc outside permitted hours) in respect o f any time which by virtue o f a
   notice under subsection (7) above is not part o f the permitted hours unless he knows or has
   reasonable cause to believe that the time is not part o f those hours.
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 3 as amended by the Public Order Act 1986.
   Sch 1.]

4-5246 4. S u p p le m e n ta r y p r o v is io n s a b o u t o rd er s u n d e r s e c tio n 3.—(1) Subject to
   the provisions o f this section, an order under section 3 o f this Act in respect o f any premises
   shall (unless sooner revoked.) cease to have effect—
      (a) on the coming into effect o f a further order under that section in respect o f those
          premises, or
      (b) on the expiration o f the period o f five months beginning with the day on which it
          comes into effect,
   whichever is the sooner.
      (2) An order under that section in respect o f licensed premises shall cease to have effect
   on the transfer o f the justices’ licence or on the premises ceasing to be licensed premises.
      (3) An order under that section in respect o f registered club premises shall cease to have
   effect if the club ceases to be registered.
      (4) Where an order under that section is in force in respect o f any premises and
   application is made not less than twenty-eight days before the order is due to expire for
   renewal of the order or for a further order in respect o f the premises, the first-mentioned
   order shall not cease to have effect by virtue o f subsection (1X6) above until the application
   is disposed o f by the magistrates’ court.
      (5) Applications for or relating to orders under that section shall be made to the
   magistrates’ court acting for the petty sessions area in which the premises are situated.
      (6) There may be charged by justices’ clerks—
     (а) in respect of the making (including the renewal) o f an order under that section, a fee
         of £12-50, and
     (б) in respect o f the variation o f such an order where application for the variation is
         made by the holder o f the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, the club, a fee o f
          £4>
  notwithstanding anything in section 137(1) o f the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (Fees).
     (7) An order under section 29 o f the Licensing Act 1964 (fees chargeable in licensing
  matters) may provide that subsection (6) above shall have effect as if, for either or both o f
  the amounts mentioned in that subsection, there were substituted such other amount or
  amounts as may be specified in the order.
    (8) Section 197 o f the Licensing Act 1964 (Service o f notices) applies for the purposes o f
  this Act as it applies for the purposes o f that Act.
    (9) The Schedule to this Act shall have effect, but subject to any provision that may be
  made by rules o f courts--^- •>->—                                       •
  [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 4.]
4-5247 5. A p p e a ls .— (1) Any party to the proceedings who is aggrieved by a decision o f a
   magistrates’ court on an application for or in respect o f an order under section 3 o f this
   Act other than an application in respect o f a particular designated sporting event or
   particular designated sporting events, may appeal to the Crown Court on such grounds as
   may be specified in his notice o f appeal.                ,
     (2) In the event o f such an appeal, any other party to the proceedings shall be party to
   the appeal.                       -                      —       „ '     ,
     (3) The judgment o f the Crown Court on any such appeal shall be final.           ,
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 5.]

4-5247A 5A . P r iv a t e f a c ilit ie s fo r v ie w in g events.'-—(1) In relation to a room in a
   designated sports ground—
      (a) from which designated sporting events may be directly viewed, and              ;
      (b) to which the general public are not admitted,
    sections 2(1 Xa) and 3(l)(a) o f this Act have effect with the substitution for the reference to
    the period o f a designated sporting event o f a reference to the restricted period defined

  ' ^ (^ S u b je 'c t to an v order under subsection (3) below, the restricted period of a designated
    sporting event for the purposes o f this section is the period beginning 15 minutes before
' the start of the event or (if earlier) 15 minutes before the time at which it is advertised to
    start and ending 15 minutes after the end o f the event, but—
r     (a) w here an event advertised to start at a particular time on a particular day is postponed
          to a later day, the restricted period includes the period in the day on which it is
          advertised to take place beginning 15 minutes before and ending 15 minutes after
          that time, and                                                        .
      (b) where an event advertised to start at a particular time on a particular day does not
          take place, the period is the period referred to in paragraph (a) above.
      (3) (4) Secretary o f State m ay make order specifying shorter, or no, restricted period
    [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985,s 5A, added by the Public Order Act 1986, Sch 1.]

4-5247B 5B . O c c a sio n a l lic e n c e s .—(1) An occasional licence which is in force for any
   place situated in the area o f a designated sports ground, and which would (apart from this
   section) authorise the sale o f intoxicating liquor at the place during the whole or part of the
   period o f a designated sporting event at the ground, shall not authorise such sale.
     (2) Where the sale of intoxicating liquor would (apart from this section) be authorised
   by an occasional licence, its holder is guilty o f an offence if he sells or authorises the sale of
   such liquor and by virtue o f this section the licence does not authorise the sale.
     (3) A person is guilty o f an offence if he consumes intoxicating liquor at a place, or takes
   such liquor from a place, at a time when an occasional licence which would (apart from
   this section) authorise the sale o f the liquor at the place does not do so by virtue o f this
   section
    [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 5B, added by the Public Order Act 1986, Sch 1.]

4-5247C 5C . C lu b s.—(1) Subsections (3) and (5) o f section 39 o f the Licensing Act 1964
   (clubs), and subsection (4) of that section as it applies to subsection (3), shall not apply as
   regards the supply o f intoxicating liquor in the area o f a desginated sports ground during
   the period o f a designated sporting event at the ground or as regards the keeping of
   intoxicating liquor for such supply; but subsections (2) to (5) below shall apply.
      (2) During the period o f such an event at the ground, intoxicating liquor shall not be
   supplied by or on behalf o f a registered club to a member or guest in the area of the ground
   except at premises in respect of which the club is registered.                .
      (3) A person supplying or authorising the supply of intoxicating liquor in contravention
   of subsection (2) above is guilty o f an offence.                                  . . .
      (4) A person who, during the period o f such an event, obtains or consumes intoxicating
   liquor supplied in contravention of subsection (2) above is guilty o f an offence.
      (5) If intoxicating liquor is kept in any premises or place by or on behalf o f a d ub for
   supply to members or their guests in contravention of subsection (2) above, every officer o f
   the club is guilty o f an offence unless he shows that it was so kept without his knowledge or

    [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 5C added by the Public Order Act 1986, Sch 1.]

4-5247D 5 D . N o n - r e ta il s a le s .—(1) During the period o f a designated sporting event at
   a designated sports ground, intoxicating liquor shall not be sold m the area o f the ground
   except by sale by retail                                  .           • *.
      (2) A person selling or authorising the sale o f intoxicating liquor in contravention of
   subsection (1) above is guilty of an offence.                  ~               . . .
      (3) A person who, during the period o f such an event, obtains or consumes intoxicating
   liquor sold in contravention o f subsection (1) above is guilty of an offence.
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 5D, added by the Public Order Act 1986, Sch 1.]

4-5248 6. C lo su re o f b ars.— (1) If at any time during the period o f a designated sporting
   event at any designated sports ground it appears to a constable in uniform that the sale or
   supply o f intoxicating liquor at any bar within the ground is detrimental to the orderly
   conduct or safety o f spectators at that event, he may require any person having control of
   the bar to close it and keep it closed until the end o f that period.
     (2) A person who fails to comply with a requirement imposed under subsection (1)
   above is guilty o f an offence, unless he shows that he took all reasonable steps to comply
   with it.
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 6. J      •

4-5249 7. P o w e r s o f e n fo r c e m e n t.— (1) A constable may, at any time during the period
   o f a designated sporting event at any designated sports ground, enter any part o f the
   g r o u n d for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this A c t

       (2) A constable may search a person he has reasonable grounds to suspect is committing
   o r h a s committed an offence under this Act, and may arrest such a person.

        (3) A constable may stop a public service vehicle (within the meaning o f section 1 o f this
   Act) or a motor vehicle to which section 1A o f this Act applies and may search such a
   vehicle or a railway passenger vehicle if he has reasonable grounds to suspect that an
   offence under that section is being or has been committed in respect of the vehicle.
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 7 as amended by the Public Order Act 1986,
   Sch 1.]

4-5250 8. P e n a lt ie s for o ffe n c es.—A person guilty of an offence under this Act shall be
   liable on summary conviction—
      (a) in the case o f an offence under section 1(2) or 1A(2), to a fine not exceeding le v e l 4

      (b) in the case o f an offence under section 1(3), 1A(3), 2(1), 2A(1), 3(10), 5B(2), 5C(3),
          5D(2) or 6(2), to a fine not exceeding le v e l 3 on the standard scale or to imprisonment
          for a term not exceeding th r e e m o n t h s or b o th , and
      {c) in the case of an offence under section 1(4), 1A(4) or 2(2), to a fine not exceeding
          lev el 2 on the standard scale.
      (d) in the case of an offence under section 5B(3), 5C(4) or 5D(3), to a fine not exceeding
          le v e l 3 on the standard scale, and
      (e) in the case o f an offence under section 5C(5), to a fine not exceeding le v e l 1 on the
          standard scale.
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 8 as amended by the Public Order Act 1986,
   Schs 1 and 3.]

4-5251 9. I n te r p r e ta tio n .—(1) T h e following provisions shall have effect for the
   interpretation of this Act.
     (2) “Designated sports ground” means any place—
      (a) used (wholly or partly) for sporting events where accommodation is provided for
           spectators, and
      (£>) for the time being designated, or o f a class designated, by order (a) made by the
           Secretary of State;
   and an order under this subsection may include provision for determining for the purposes
   o f this Act the outer limit of any designated sports ground.
      (3) “Designated sporting event”—
      (a) means a sporting event or proposed sporting event for the time being designated, or
          o fa class designated, by order (a) m ade by the Secretary o f State, and
      (b) includes a designated sporting event within the meaning o f Part V o f the Criminal
          Justice (Scotland) Act 1980;
    and an order under this subsection may apply to events or proposed events outside Great
    Britain as well as those in England and Wales.                .         .        ,      . ,
       (4) T he period o fa designated sporting event is the period beginning two hours before
    the start o f the event or (if earlier) two hours before the time at which it is advertised to
    start and ending one hour after the end of the event, but—
    ' (a) where an event advertised to start at a particular time on a particular day is postponed
           to a later da}’, the period includes the period in the day on which it is advertised to
           take place beginning two hours before and ending one hour after that time, and
      (£>) where an event advertised to start at a particular time on a particular day does not
           take place, the period is the period referred to in paragraph (a) above. •
      (5) “Registered club premises” means premises in respect of which a club is registered, _
      (6) This Act does not apply to any sporting event or proposed sporting event—
      (a) where all competitors are to take part otherwise than for reward, and
      (£>) to which all spectators are to be admitted free o f charge.
     (7) Expressions used in this Act and in the Licensing Act 1964 have the same meaning
   as in that A ct, and section 58(2) o f that Act (meaning o f chief officer of poll'ce) applies for
   the purposes of this Act as it applies for the purposes o f Part II of that Act.
     (8) Any power to make an order under this section shall be exercisable by statutory
   instrument subject to annulment in pursuance o f a resolution of either House of Parliament
   [Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985, s 9.]

     (a)    The Sports Grounds and Sporting Events (Designation) Order 1985 has been made and is
   contained in P a r t V : S t a t u t o r y I n s t r u m e n t s .


   Section 4                                    SCHEDULE
                                                  P rocedure
4-5252 1. An application for or in respect of an order under section 3 of this Act shall be made by
   complaint to a justice of the peace acting for the petty sessions area for which the magistrates’ court
   having jurisdiction in the matter acts.
     2.—(1) A complaint for the making or variation of such an order may be made—
     (a) in respect of licensed premises, by the holder of the justices’ licence, and
     (ft) in respect of registered club premises, by the chairman or secretary of the club.
     (2) The justice of the peace to whom the complaint is so made shall issue—
     (a) a summons directed to the chief officer of police, and
     (ft) a summons directed to the local authority,
   and each summons shall require the person to whom it is directed to appear before the magistrates’
   court to show why the order should not be made or, as the case may be, varied.
      (3) A summons directed to a local authority under this paragraph shall not have effect (and
   accordingly the local authority shall not be party to the proceedings/ unless there is in force in respect
   of the sports ground concerned a certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
      (4) A copy of any order made on a complaint made by any of the persons mentioned in sub-
   paragraph (1; above shall be sent to the chief officer of police and (where the local authority are party
   to the proceedings) to the local authority.
      3.—(1; A complaint for the variation or revocation of such an order may be made—
     (a) by the chief officer of police, or
     (ft) where such a certificate is in force in respect of the sports ground concerned, by the local
          authority.
     (2) The justice of the peace to whom the complaint is so made shall issue a summons directed to the
  holder of the justices’ licence or, in the case of registered club premises, to the chairman or secretary
  of the club requiring him to appear before the magistrates’ court to show cause why the order should
  not be varied or revoked.
    (3) A copy of any order made on a complaint made by any of the persons mentioned in sub-
  paragraph (1) above shall be sent to the holder of the justices’ licence or, as the case may be, to the
  chairman or secretary of the club.
    4. Where a complaint is made for a new order u nder section 3 of this Act—
     (a) there shall be delivered to the justice of the peace at the time the complaint is made a plan of
         the sports ground showing the premises within that ground where intoxicating liquor would
         be sold or supplied in pursuance of the proposed order, and
     (b) the hearing shall not take place before the end of the period of 28 days beginning with the day
         on which the complaint is made.
     5. On any complaint made to a magistrates’ court for or in respect of an order under section 3 o f
  this Act, or appeal to the Crown Court in respect of such a complaint, to which a club is a party, the
  club, if not represented by counsel or a solicitor, shall be heard by the chairman or secretary, by any
  member of the committee having the general management o f the affaire of the club or by any officer
  of the club duly authorised.
    6. In this Schedule, local authority* has the same meaning as in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
  1975.                               .   .                .              .              • ■
 Our Ref:     POL/88 850/4/12(S)



                                                              -1 MAR 1989


                          I CA^VX
      ^ You wrote        to me on 27 July and 18 October last year, asking whether
I had pursued the       points which you and Denis Howefl raised when we met on 24
May to discuss         charges for policing football matches and, if so, what
conclusions I had       reached.

        I am sorry that it has taken so long to reply but, as you know, I,
thought it right to bring these issues to the attention of the Association
of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) and it has taken much longer than I expected
to obtain their views.

        Briefly summarised, the points which you raised were as follows:

            (a)   the problem of violent behaviour by young people was
                  not confined to football matches:    it was a national
                   problem, for which football was being penalised;

            (b)   there were cases in which football grounds in r.5Hps
                   witn bad records for violence were virtually incident
                   free.   The  clubs had, nevertheless, to pay high
                   charges for policing;

            (c)   charges for policing    football grounds had increased
                  by four times the       rate of inflation since 1984.
                  This had happened       since the Football Trust had
                   agreed to pay 35% of   the policing charges;

            (d ) the levels of charges and the way in which they were
                  calculated varied widely from one club to another.
            y    Millwall's policing charges amounted to 36p per
                 spectator, while Blackburn's amounted to only 7p;
                 and

        (e)       the police were including in their charges the costs
                  of certain policing activities outside the grounds.

        My conclusions, with which ACPO agree, are set out below.

        I accept that violent behaviour by young people is not confined to
football matches and that much of it has nothing to do with football at all.
The police are in no doubt, however, that football matches often provide the
focus for the organisation of violence.   Much of the trouble does not occur
inside the grounds:  it occurs on trains, in the approaches to the grounds,
and elsewhere in towns where a match is taking place. Even on days when no




                                                 1   ^


Tom Pendry, Esq., MP.                                                /      /over...
match is taking place, many incidents of violent behaviour have been found
 to involve hooligans who band together solely because of their allegiance to
 the same football club.  The incidence of violent behaviour inside football
.grounds does not accurately reflect the serious problem of football-related
violence.

        The level of policing needed for any particular football match is
determined by the chief officer of police, in consultation with the club.
This will be affected by a number of factors, such as the location of the
ground, the physical aids to crowd control, the nature of the match (e.g.
cup tie, local derby), the expected size of the crowd and the past record of v'
home and visiting supporters.    Where football grounds in cities with bad
records of violence are virtually incident free, it would appear that the
police presence inside the ground is having the effect of controlling the *
hooligan element.   If the club feels that the number of police officers
deployed inside the ground is -unnecessarily high, it is always open to them
to discuss with the chief officer of police the possibility of a reduction.

          It has been the policy of successive Governments since 1968 that the
 charges for special services should be set at the level required to cover
 the full cost of providing those services. This applies to the provision of
 police officers inside the ground at football matches and I see no reason why
 the community as a whole should be expected to meet, or to contribute to,
 these costs.    A study in 1983 indicated that the charges set by a number of
 police authorities fell a long wav short of recovering tbs cccts of
 police officers for duty inside the ground at football matches and steps have
 since been taken to rectify this.       This overdue move to fully economic
 charging policies, together with increases in police pay, which have been
 well above the level of inflation, accounts for the substantial increase in
 charges over the past five years.      It has nothing at all to do with the
 Football Trust's decision to contribute to the costs of policing at football
 matches.

         As I have explained, the number of police officers needed for duty
 inside the ground at any particular ffiatch will be determined by a number of
 factors and not simply by the expected size of the crowd.         A club like
 Millwall, which attracts comparatively small gates but has a bad record of
 hooliganism, will inevitably pay more in terms of costs per spectator than
 larger clubs, such- as Arsenal or Tottenham, with good crowd facilities, or
 comparable clubs like Blackburn, where lower levels of policing are required.

          Police authorities have no power to include in their charges any
 element of the costs of policing outside football grounds.     Some would no
 doubt like to do so and I can understand the reasons for that.         But in
 practice it would be very difficult to draw a distinction between policing
 outside football grounds and policing outside other private premises, such
 as pubs and drinking clubs in city centres, where hooliganism presents a
 problem.   So policing outside football grounds is regarded as normal police
 duty and the costs have to be met by the police authority.         Many clubs
 derive an additional benefit from this free service:        where, as often
 happens, police officers on duty outside the ground move inside once the
 game has started, no charge is made for this additional manpower.




                                                                  /cont...
        The real answer to the problem of increasing charges for      policing
lies in the hands of the football clubs themselves.    If they were   prepared
to take positive action to eliminate the hooligan element, as         we have
constantly urged them to do, the need for a massive police presence   would be
substantially reduced and policing costs would fall accordingly.

        I am sending a copy of this letter to Denis Howell.
