                                                                                            MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised              HhUi                 Number
                                                                                                                                  <?

Title
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —urgent action - yds/Uo   /k A   eci ® )     9-            'I
                                                                                                                   Receiver

                                                                                                                    r?rq
Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                           Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader’s instructions     C)                   ^                              ^                     Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                               Indexer

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                           H \{        ■
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                    SIO
                                                                                                              &


Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                             £
                                                                                 /9g&

                                                                 Liverpool




                                                                 16th April, 1989




Dear Sir,

I am writing to you regarding the disaster at Sheffield's Hillsborough stadium
which I witnessed yesterday.

After arriving at the ground at approximately 2.20 p.m. we walked down towards
the North Stand entrance. As we approached this entrance it soon became apparent
that thftce was a large amount of people all trying to -gain entrance to different
parts of the ground through one main gate.   There was no organised queue for any
one of the turnstiles.   The only way to gain entrance was to join the back of the
group of fans and to wait until people in front of you managed to get through into
ground.   Inevitably, there was considerable crushing at this point with the
organisation and policing of the turnstiles nowhere near as good as last year when
we were all able to get in comfortably and safely. As we finally reached the
turnstile, I was pushed into the police officer manning this particular turnstile.
At this point, he turned to his colleague at the next gate and asked if he knew
where the Sergeant was.   It was as if the police on the gates already knew that
all was not as it should have been. Another problem seemed to be that actually
getting through the turnstiles seemed to take longer than usual which had the
eifeet ot increasing the number of people waiting to get in.

On taking our seats in the North Stand,      I glanced over towards the Leppings Lane
end where the Liverpool supporters, were     gathering. It way immediately apparent
that the centre section behind the goal       was extremely full whereas the two ends
of the enclosure, at either side of the      goal, seemed to be comparatively empty.
In ta c t , I can remember pointing out to   the people I was with how empty the sides
seemed,

At 3.00 p.m. the game started.   Some five minutes into the game, the play was in
the Liverpool half of the pitch and we could see supporters beginning to spill out
of the terracing. At first we thought it was the type of spillage which often
happens at big football matches. Soon though; supporters started running onto the
pitch to tell the players what was happening and that was when a police officer
ran onto the pitch to ask the referee to take the players off. Even then, we all
thought that it would be a temporary stoppage.     Indeed, certain sections of the
Nottingham Forest supporters began singing and chanting, not realising what v/as
happening.  It soepfcd tc take a 1 ong. time before supporters were able to escape
from the affected areas. This, in retrospect, would seem to be due to the slow
opening of^the gates in front of the enclosure and the apparent iacK of understanding
of the situation by the authorities.
After five to ten minutes, about thirty to forty police reinforcements arrived
and inexplicably took up positions in front of the North Stand. Even after a
day has passed since this tragedy I, and many other supporters who were in the
North Stand, am unable to understand the reason behind this positioning. Behind
them, Liverpool supporters were ripping up the advertising hoardings to use as
stretcher::; to carry out the dead and injured Liverpool supporters. Still the
police stood there not helping. People around me in the stand were screaming at
the police to help and yet they would not.

Another   apparent problem during this time was the lack of public announcements
to tell   the crowd what was happening.  This could so easily have caused more
trouble   as fans became more and more impatient.  In fact, it is to the credit
of both   sets of supporters that there was no trouble at all.

It will probably be a while before the cause of this tragedy is known, but one
suggestion that must be thought of is a re—think of the way the fans were "penned
in” and the way that the so-called "security" fence could not be removed therefore
trapping people and inevitably killing them.

In closing this letter I would just like to thank the people, shops and businesses
of Sheffield for allowing supporters such as myself to use their telephones to let
our loved ones back home know we were safe.

I cannot comment on the opening of the exit gate which apparently contributed to
thifa disaster as I did not personally see the incident. All the events I have
recounted in this letter are incidents I personally witnessed.

Nothing like this must ever be allowed to happen again.  In this country it always
seems that we only ever learn from disasters.  The enquiry must be used to establish
what went wrong dnd why, and any recommendations must be implemented immediately.

I hope ihat this letter may in some way be used to help piece together the events
of that terrible day.

Yours sincerely,
