IAN HARDY                                                        /
POLICE SERGEANT 1127                                                   ^ ^
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, HAMMERTON ROAD, SHEFFIELD.


At 9.00am Saturday ^jth April 1989 I commenced duty and attended at Hillsborough
Football Stadium where I took up duties in the Police Room.    My allocated duty
for the day being that of Custody Serheant along with Sergeants 838 Long and
1164 Colley.
Once the Police Room was prepared for prisoner reception there was little for the
staff to do unless someone was arrested.
A Police UHF radio is normally in the Police Room and on this day I heard several
messages from officers on duty outside the ground relating to large groups of
people on the footpath outside public houses drinking.    I particularly
remember one message which named the ’Royal* Public House, Penistone Road,
According to records, the first   prisoner who was brought to the Police Room had
been arrested at 1.40pm for attempting to enter the ground whilst in possession
of alcohol.
From that time onwards, prisoners started arriving at the police room, initially
in ones and twos but, at about 2 . 15pm the number of prisoners arriving at the
Police Room increased dramatically and, between 2.15pm and 3.15pm when any
attempt to process any other prisoners was abandoned, 25 prisoners were brought
to the police room.    This number does not include those brought to the Police
Room prior to ejection.
These prisoners were from both ends of the ground and so were both Nottingham
Forest and Liverpool fans.
The one thing I did notice about the vast majority of these prisoners was that,
even if they had not been arrested for alcohol related offences, they had been
drinking alcohol, some in very large quantities and most of them were very
verbally abusive and agressive.    One prisoner assaulted the arresting officer
whilst being booked in by the custody sergaent and had to be physically restrained.
Outside the police room and to the rear of the North Stand it is usual practice
to have a mobile cell unit parked and for prisoners to be transferred from the
Police Room onto the cell unit and, when that is full the prisoners are taken to
Hammerton Road Police Station for verification of identities and for other
enquiries to be completed.
On this occasion, there were two cell units and one or two Personel Carriers
parked outside the Police Room for prisoner transportation.    We managed to send
a small number of prisoners to Hammerton Road before the large influx of
prisoners but were prevented from sending any more because of the sheer volume
of prisoners arriving at the Police Room.    Shortly before prisoner process was
abandoned, I felt we were approaching the stage where the numbers of prisoners
would overwhelm our facilities, a situation I have never before known.
IAN HARDY. rS 1127


At about 3.15pm a female member of the St. John Ambulance Brigade came into the
Police Room, explained that there were large numbers of casualties outside and
requesting adhesive labels for casualty identification.    These labels were
supplied and I then accompanied this lady outside the police room where I was
met by a scene of pandermonium.   There were people lying all over the floor ,
on strechers and in chairs.
I then went towards the ramp which leads from the pitch to the area near the
Police Room.   This ramp is situated between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.
As I reached the ramp, I was met by numerous football supporters, many of whom
were carrying stretchers or advertising hoardings being used as stretchers to
carry injured people off the pitch.     Along with other officers, I directed the
apparently less badly injured to areas which would not obstruct access for
ambulances and I directed the badly injured to the gymnasium#
One man who wae brought on a makeshift stretcher appeared very badly injured
and seemed to have stopped breathing.     I accompanied this man and his friends
into the gymnasium   where I administered mouth to mouth resucitation.    A
police woman administered external heart massage.     We kept up this resucitation
attempt for approximately 15 minutes until told by a doctor (details unknown)
 that the man was dead.   His body was then placed in the area set aside in the
gymnasium for bodies and I returned to the area outside    the gymnasium where
 I generally assisted with First Aid both to fans and police officers until I
was asked to take an ambulance with a badly injured fan to hospital.     I
 drove the ambulance, accompanied by PC Adams ('D' Division) to the Royal

 Hallamshire Hospital.
 On completion of that duty I returned the ambulance to the waiting area at Herries
 Road bus garage and then returned to the stadium.
 I then assisted generally in the gymnasium with security, body labelling and

 various other duties.
 I also assisted Sergeant Long in administering verbal cautions to all those people
 who had been arrested but had not Deen transported from the ground.
 I was released from duty at 10.00pm that evening.


 I have worked at Hillsborough Football Stadium regularly for the two years I have
 been posted to 'F' Division and, although I am aware that other officers have
 much more experience of policing the ground, I am able to state that, during the
 times I have been on duty at the ground both as Custody Sergeant and on crowd
 control duties, I have never come across a more aggressive, abusive and drunken
 group of prisoners as those who were processed on 14th April 1989.
