r              ■7$




    y


    0 -1c/?/
                                      ,V
                                       —? 7 W
                      Kenneth Edward Hirst      Over 21. Police Constable 2.6k
                      £2 Community Constable , Woodseats Police Nation ,Cheste#ield Road Sheff

    I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, and I aa presently stationed at

Woodseata Police Station ,Sheffield %

    At 8.^5pm Saturday 15th April I commenced duty in full police uniform at Woodseats Police

Station Sheffield % in relation to a football duty at Hillsborough football ground, for the

Semi Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest.

   I was then transported with other officers by police Transit mobile to Hillsborough

football ground • A briefing then took place in the North Stand area and officers were given

some packed refreshments. My duties were that of serial 7» which was supervised by Police

Sergeant 752 Batty.

   At approximatly 10.30am that day    together   with the serial of 10 plus the sergeant I

v^pt onto the Spion Kop area of the ground .A short time later we were joined by a second

serial being supervised by Policd Sergeant 1203 Marples . Both serial positioned themselves

to the right of the Spion Kop nearto the the main gangway      and close to an open aired section

of the kop.

   At 12,noon the turnstiles were open     and a steady flow of fans entred the Spion kop .

   As time passed the kop filled up   and several hundred Liverpool supporters who had

entered this side of the ground were positioned in the open aired section of the Spion Kop*

A full police serial supervised by Police Sergeant Marples had positioned themselves in a line

between the Liverpool and Notts Forrest supporters . At approximatly 2.30pm several of my

serial including Sergeant Batty had occasion to arrest several Nottingham Forrest supporters

f^offences of drunkeness . A short time later and prior to the kickoff Police Sergeant

Marples directed the rest of my serial     to *$cist his serial to strengthen the police wall

between the Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest supporters . At 3pm the game kicked off

At 3«06pm an attacking move from the Liverpool team resulted in one of the players     hitting

the woodwork of the Nottingham Forrest goal. At this time I saw a large number of Liverpool

fans who were standing on the* terraces at the back of the goal at the Leppings lane end of

the ground surge forward . I then saw several supporters attempting to climb over the

perimeter fence . Foe several minutes I was unable to ascertain the reason for their actions.

It then came apparent that a serious incident was taking place ,I could see that police officers

who were positioned round the perimeter track were assisting fans over the perimeter fence.
     m^gjbers of the police   St Johns    Brigade and supporters    were   assisting   supporters

who were layed out on the playing surface. Numerous bodies were being carried out         off the

playing area   on stretches   and makeshift advertising board which had been removed from around

the perimeter of the ground • Because~of the aggresion been shown by the Nottingham Forrest

supporters towards the small section of Liverpool supporters on the Spion Kop          we were directed

to stay in our original positions .      At approximatly ^.Opm   the supporters began to leave the

the stadium . When the stadium had been emptied of supporters       we were directed to the North

Stand for a further briefing. At appcoimatley 5»0pm     and following briefing together with other

officers of serial 7 I took up my duty on gates at the rear of the North Stand .My duties

consisted of   keeping the press at bay     and assisting relatives of the deceased      and directing

them to the    gymnasium   for identification purposes. At 5*30p® Sunday 16th ApriH989 together

with other members of serial 7    I terminated my duties and returned to Woodseats Police Station

a'^^.Opm.
