                                                                &o£5b(
                  LEONARD
                            mv-'1
                            ARTHUR   BATES,   POLICE   SUPERINTENDENT




I am a Police Superintendent of the South Yorkshire Police Force, presently

performing duties as the Acting Divisional Commander of 'D' Division.            I am

forty-three years of age, being born on




On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I was the senior officer on duty within 'D' Divi­

sion on the occasion of the semifinal football match between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest, a game that was taking place at the Hillsborough Football

Stadium, which is in 'F' Division.




At 8.30 a.m. that morning, I commenced duty at West Bar Police Station and at

9.00 a.m., I attended a briefing that was held in the Gymnasium at West Bar

Police Station.     That briefing was conducted by Acting Superintendent King

(now Superintendent) and was in accord with a 'D' Divisional Operation Order,

Reference 3/89.     That Order had been prepared by Police Sergeant Jones (now

Inspector), who had acted as Liaison Officer between 'D' and 'F' Divisions

and also other interested parties, and was authorised by me some time prior

to the match.




In simple terms, the emphasis of that Order was that 'D' Division responsibi­

lities were to ensure that fans arriving at the Midland Railway Station,

within the city centre, were escorted to Hillsborough on service buses and

that every assistance was to be given to the Road Traffic Division to ensure

that fans, travelling by road, were assisted as freely and quickly as pos­

sible through the city area.




                                                                        Continued.
                                                                    Page 2 of 7




Following that briefing, in company with Police Sergeant Jones, who was to be

my Staff Officer on that day, I did a tour of the city centre and spent some

considerable time at Midland Railway Station, Sheffield, ensuring that sup­

porters, who were arriving at that location on special trains, were effect­

ively escorted to a fleet of service vehicles and then escorted through to

the ground by officers who were actually travelling on the buses.    That

aspect of the operation went without any particular problems.




I then did a tour of the major routes, within the Division, checking on the

general traffic flow towards Hillsborough.   The traffic, whilst heavy, was

flowing freely and, during this route inspection, I had a discussion with

Chief Superintendent Nesbit, who was carrying out a similar exercise.




At 2.50 p.m., I returned to West Bar Police Station satisfied that supporters

were moving through the city area, towards Hillsborough, without any particu-

lar problems an<ythere had been very few incidents of public disorder.      Offi­

cers had responded to a number of public houses following reports of rowdy

and unruly behaviour by supporters but matters were well contained by the

resources available within my Division.




After checking with the Control Room, I made my way to my office on the third

floor of West Bar Police Station and was in my office, a little after

3.15 p.m., when Sergeant Jones came and told me that 'Operation Support' had

been implemented due to Liverpool supporters having invaded the pitch at

Hillsborough and there was, apparently, large scale public disorder taking

place.   I was aware, from the Sergeant, that other resources from 'D' Divi­

sion had been deployed and we travelled immediately in a patrol car towards

Hillsborough, arriving there a little after 3-20 p .m.



                      ,                                         Continued.....
                                                                                 cry y
                                                                                 D o   /

                                                                     Page 3 of 7




On arrival at the ground, we made our way round to the Penistone Road ent­

rance and I saw a large number of officers milling around the gymnasium and

also the point between the North Stand and the spion kop.     I there saw Ins­

pector Sewell and Superintendent Marsh of the Operations Division.     I made my

way to these officers in an attempt to establish exactly what was taking

place and to ascertain what assistance I could be.




Inspector Sewell advised the Control Room of my arrival and also the fact

that other officers from 'D' Division were available for deployment.     I

looked towards the West Stand and could see a large number of officers being

deployed and I could also see both civilians and police officers carrying

people, who were obviously injured, towards us.




Simultaneously, an officer, whose identity I am not sure of but believe him

to be Police Constable 773 Adams of D2 Sub-Division, approached and told me

that there were a number of casualties in and around an ambulance by the

Penistone Road entrance, adjacent to the spion kop.     I went immediately with

that officer and saw a number of casualties milling around an ambulance and

also a number of people lying on the ground, obviously distressed.     I then

became even more aware of the number of casualties and extent of those

injured being carried towards that end of the ground.




At that location, I also saw two male bodies.     There was an officer present

with these bodies, which were, in fact, being overlooked by fans from the

spion kop gallery.   I instructed an officer to shield the bodies and remain

with them.




                                                                Continued.
                                                                                  C$& f
                                                                    Page 4 of 7




At that point, because of the difficulties we were having communicating with

the ground Control, I instructed Sergeant Jones to contact West Bar Police

Station and implement the Force Casualty Bureau.    By this time, fans were

running towards our location carrying injured, and people who were obviously

dead.    Obviously, many of these fans were distressed, even bordering on the

hysterical.




I was made aware, very quickly, by an officer whose identity I am not aware

of, that the gymnasium was being utilised as a temporary mortuary/first aid

reception area.    I was aware that there were ambulance officers near my loca­

tion checking these casualties, who were being carried on makeshift stret­

chers.




However, there was a distressing situation quickly escalating.    Casualties

were being dropped or laid down on the ground in the access area to the play­

ing surface and there were also many people congregating in the area outside

the gymnasium, which was obviously preventing ambulance staff getting through

to the West Stand.    I moved quickly towards the gymnasium, realising that

people could not get casualties into it.    I instructed officers to form a

clearway towards the entrance doors and also to prevent obstructions being

created between the gymnasium, ambulances and Penistone Road.




I moved into the gymnasium, there was obviously a lot of confusion, people

were distressed and, in fact, I witnessed a number of skirmishes breaking out

involving supporters.    In the gymnasium, I saw a number of senior officers,

including Superintendent McKay of 'F' Divisior




                                                                    Lnued
                                                                                  So /
                                                                    Page 5 of 7




I called for a loudspeaker and microphone and asked that casualties be divi­

ded.   Those that were in need of medical attention were congregating to the

left-hand side of the gymnasium (when standing with your back towards the

North Stand), and people, who were apparently dead, were being laid on the

floor to the right-hand side of the gymnasium.




I instructed officers, who were accompanying these bodies, to remain with

them for identification purposes and also called for medical assistance to

the gymnasium to examine the casualties.   Additionally, I took steps to bring

some sort of order to the situation and very quickly witnessed the number of

bodies increasing.   The injured were clearly being identified, prior to

entering the gymnasium, and transported to hospital by the Ambulance Service.




I saw a number of Inspectors in the gymnasium and allocated them tasks.     I

was approached by an Inspector, who was in company with a number of doctors.

I recall allocating doctors to individual Inspectors and asking them to

quickly move along the casualties, determining those that were fatal and

those that required urgent medical attention.




Inspector Cooper (now Chief Inspector), Chief Inspector Creaser I believe,

Inspector Martin and also Inspector Charles (now Chief Inspector) were allo­

cated such duties.   I saw Inspector Tingle and instructed him to

obtain the major incident equipment and mobile communication systems, and

then deployed a number of other officers to assist with casualties outside

the gymnasium.




                                                              Continued.
                                                                                      <So   I


                                                                     Page 6 of 7




I recall liaising with Mr. Hopkinson, the Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer, on

a number of occasions in relation to the supply of body bags, treatment of

the injured and, ultimately, the transportation of the dead.     I also had

regular consultations with a number of doctors, whose identities I am not

aware of, but I gave instructions that their details be recorded by the

respective Inspectors.




Some while later, I was approached by, I believe, Inspector Sewell, who

advised me that a further eleven bodies were located in an area at the rear

of the Leppings Lane entrance and that these bodies were being supervised by

officers who were attempting to provide cover for them.     I gave instructions

that these bodies, together with their police escorts, should be moved, at

the earliest opportunity, into the gymnasium.




After some short time, accompanied, I believe, by Inspector Sewell, I made my

way towards the Leppings Lane perimeter fence, where I saw a number of offi­

cers supervising, I believe, eleven bodies.     I recall that these were all

males.   There was a van already at that location and I recall that some bod­

ies were being loaded into it.




I made my way to the Police Control Room, which was nearby, and, on reaching

the steps, I met a colleague, Superintendent Mordew, from D2 Sub-Division.        I

approached the Control Room but was met, at the top of the stairs, by Super­

intendent Murray.   After a very short conversation, I returned to the tempo­

rary mortuary in the gymnasium, where I was joined fry Detective Chief Super­

intendent Addis and Chief Superintendent Mol(




                                                                     mued
Mr. Addis advised me that he would continue with enquiries in relation to the

temporary mortuary, assisted by Mr. McKay.   Whilst we were speaking, I was
           V.
being advised that there was apparently outbreaks of public disorder, involv­

ing supporters making their way back towards the city centre.




Conscious of the fact that I was the senior Divisional Officer on duty that

day, I arranged, with Mr. Addis, to leave the temporary mortuary and return

to the city centre to co-ordinate events there.   As I was leaving Hillsbo­

rough, I recall deploying Inspector Dews (now Chief Inspector) and his units

to the city centre to quell any outbreaks of disorder.   I then made my way,

with Sergeant Jones, to the city centre to co-ordinate events.




I then spent some considerable time visiting junior officers of my Division,

de-briefing them and counselling those that were in obvious need of counsel­

ling.   I returned to West Bar Police Station later that evening, where I had

a discussion with my Commander, Chief Superintendent Broomhead [presently

performing duties as the Acting Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)].




Further de-briefings took place and I retired from duty at about 9.00 j
