>I7th May 1989 .           iNc 0 H?   S                     ANDREW HUDSON. POLICE CONSTABLE
                                                            2817 HUDSON.
                                                            HAMMM3RTON fiOAD POLICE STATION,
                                                            HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD.

                                                                           qM.


I eua a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, Currently stationed at Hamnerton
Road Police Station t Hillsborough, Sheffield.Since 1986 I hare regularly worked at the
Hillsborough Football Ground and at different times hare worked within all areas of the
ground*

At 9»-ra. on Saturday 15th April 1989 I was on duty at Hammerton Road Police Station for
the F.A. Cup Semi Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs*
kt 10.00a.nu that date I attended at Hillsborough Football Ground, together with other
Officers for the match briefing.At this time I was designated part of Serial 3 under the
direct supervision of Police Sergeant 577 Gardner.After the briefing, together with other
^pbers of the serial Imade a search of the Upper Deck of the South Stand and then reverted
to duties on turnstiles 29 to 32 which was for the sole use of Nottingham Forest supporters.
This duty was in the dompany of Police Constablesl9^9 Storey,261 Cooper, 33^1 Mitchell, with
occasional supervisory visits from Police Sergeant Gardner. From midday to approximately 1.30
a slow trickle of supporters entered through these turnstiles and from 1.45p.m. this became
a steady stream but at no time did I see more than five or six people having to queue at
any turnstile.Pr&orto 3p»m. I did not leave this area but remained there in the Company of
P.c. 19^9 Storey for any late comers attending the match, but there were veiy few.
At approximately 3 .1 0p.m. it was quiet enough to resume to the upper deck . Together with
P.C. Storey I went to the Upper Deck and on entering the stand above the pitch I could see th
that there appeared to have been a pitch invasion in front of the Leppings Lane stand and
1 could see Police Officers, supporters and pressmen massed around that end of the pitch.
I could seethat a number of supporters were hanging on the goalposts and causing them to
i£)e quite violently.
Prior to entering the stand I was not in contact by Police radio.I remained in the same
stand for at least another ten minutes during which time I saw a large number of Police
Officers come on to the pitch, intially lining down the length of the pitch in front of
the North Stand and then moving in a line across the centre of the pitch. % this time I
could see several supporters using advertising hoardings as stretchers and several peaople
receiving first aid tratment on the pitch by supporters, Police Officers and St Johns
Ambulance Brigade*
At approximately 3»3Qp.m.,, ngrself and P.C. Storey left the stand and made our way to the
bar, where a number of Nottingham Forest supporters were leaving the ground. We then made
our vay to the rear of the South Stand and walked to the Leppings Lane area. Alongside the
railings and wall I saw approximately a dozen apparently dead people with their faces covered
and persons receiving first aid . I then went immediately to the rear of the West Stand
where I assisted in the evacuation of the stand together with other officers.
At approximately 6.00p.m. together with other Officers, I made my way to the North Stand
and a short time later was released from duty.




Police Constable 2817 Hudson.
