               Sheffield Archives Ref: f t u ^jl jb22.(ef                              M IR .15
                                                                                                            H i
                                                                                                                      V
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised                        Number


T itle
                       W j& \          L ' (b O L fc ~
(Include sourceand any document number i f relevant)                                              L-i

Receiver's instructions — urgent action         hQm„   -r     Qfer f-/Q                                         Receiver
         ~ r( st               if-                _____________j______
                                                                                                                  Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                ?!
No(s) o f actions raised   ^     i ^        ^                                                                        12
                                                                                                            Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions        y fjo Q i^   /\fQ

         \w*A Lull fti iti/mU                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                            O/M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                        1
                                                               Liverpool,




                                                        19th April, 1989


Dear Sir,

     I would be grateful if you could forward the enclosed letter to
Lord Justice Taylor who is leading the enquiry.  I am sure you will have
a better knowledge of his whereabouts than me.

                                     Yours sincerely.
                                                           L i verpool,


                                                      19th April, 1989

 The Secretary,
 Liverpool Football Club Ltd.,
 Anfield Road,
 Anfield,
 Liverpool,
 L4 OTH



Dear Sir,

   , As a supporter of Liverpool Football Club for the past 32 years, I would
likft'to express my feelings about the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough.

     We left Liverpool at lO-30a.m. on Saturday and, fortunately, did not follow
the suggested route.   Had we done so, our journey would have taken longer and it
is possible that my husband, son and myself would have been caught up in the
melee outside the ground.   We parked near the signs showing, 5 mins to ground.
This, surely,JSiia not mean on foot, as it took us 20 minutes.   During this journey
we passed two public houses whose windows were boarded up, but we also passed a
large Gateway supermarket doing a roaring trade in alcohol.    Did this justify
delaying some of the traffic to search for the dreaded alcohol? this, coupled
with the roadworks and volume of traffic must have contributed to the late arrival
of so many people at the ground.

     The road alongside the ground by the North Stand and the Leppings Lane entrance
was, at 2p.m., still open for the regular use of traffic.  This seemed very odd to
us at the time.

      We entered the ground at 2-10p.m.  Everything was fairly quiet, and there was
very little evidence of police around.   This was a very different situation from
the 1988 Semi-Final when there was, at the same place, a very heavy police
presence.   The entrances at this corner of the ground seem rather inadequate to
cater for spectators to enter two sides of the ground if they arrive in any numbers.
We experienced the problem in.reverse last year when we tried to leave the ground.
By nature of the shape of the area, everyone was condensed and swept along on the
tide.

     Yet again, like at the Heysel Stadium, where I witnessed what happened, the
whole tragedy seems to have resulted from bad organisation, mismanagement and lack
of co-ordination rightfrom the beginning.  At Heysel, the police appeared to be
completely ineffective.  Were they rather too complacent at Hillsborough, and
resting on their laurels from 1988? No two occasions ever run in exactly the
same way.

     This was another dreadful event to witness.  I felt problems would occur at
Heysel as soon as I entered the ground and vowed that this would be my last visit
to a European game.  How right I was.  I had similar feelings at Hillsborough
when I saw the crowded centre section behind the goal so long before the kick-off.
Where was the co-ordination between those inside the ground and those outside?

     It has been suggested that part of the problem on Saturday was caused by
people turning up at the game without tickets.  I know that many people have
complete tickets and it would be an interesting exercise to collect these and
see just how many there are.
 Liverpool Football Club Ltd.                                    19th April, 1989




     I am now certain that I will not visit any other football ground in England.
I have not yet decided whether to visit Liverpool’s ground again.  I feel so sorry
for Liverpool Football Club   which has always been such a friendly andgood—humoured
place to be. When will the Club's views, ideas and suggestions ever be listened
to?

      I had been giving great thought as to whether I would participate in the
proposed membership card scheme, about which I have many reservations.     I am not
a hooligan, and have only ever been treated with great respect wherever I have
travelled with Liverpool supporters.     I think all the people who were involved
at Hillsborough who have spoken on radio and television have shown themselves
not -to be in any way hooligans, but ordinary, decent, articulate and erudite
people who do not need to be controlled by computerised identity systems.     I am
torn between loyalty to the Club and succumbing to the whim of the Government,
or reluctantly parting from football. I will make my decision about this if it
becomes necessary, but make a plea that this will not have to happen. My mind
is made up about the fact that the game at Hillsborough was not well organised,
and identity c^jrdjfc would not have prevented the disaster.

     It goes without saying how sad I am at the unnecessary loss of so much life.
Some of those that died were known to me.  This was only a game of football!

                                     Yours sincerely,




This letter has been written on behalf of myself, my husband               and
my son




Copies to

Mr. Colin Moynihan, Sports Minister.
Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister.
Mr. Malcolm Thornton, M.P. for Crosby.
Lord Justice Taylor, Hillsborough Enquiry.
