.
STATEMENT OF:-      Stuart Leech
                    Police Constable No.390
                    South Yorkshire Police
                    Police Headquarters
                    Legal Services Dept. (Prosecutions)



Serial     63   Sqt Johnson


On duty at 9.45 am, patrol in transit vehicle.      Patrol area:-

Langsett Road, Infirmary Road, Holme Lane and surrounding area.


At about 12.00 noon the area was busy with football fans milling around a
number of Public Houses and although busy and rowdy were in a good
humour.    Pubs visited about this time included the Queens Ground Public House
on Langsett Road and the Freemasons Arms on Walkley Lane.


At 13.10 we received a radio message to attend a serious disorder at the Royal
Hotel on Penistone Road.      Upon arrival a crowd was shouting, singing outside
and there were glasses and bottles on the pavements.      The Public House was
overflowing and we had to shove our way inside through the crowd who were
shouting, singing etc; the scene inside was chaos with broken glasses,
bottles, tables and chairs overturned.       90% of the customers were football
fans, both Notts and Liverpool.     There was no fighting taking place when we
arrived.    Due to the state of the premises and the customers who were quite
obviously well plied with drink the Sergeant ordered the closure of the
Public House which was complied with..


At 14.50 hours a message was received to attend at the Horse and Jockey
Public House, Wadsley Lane, fighting on the premises.      Upon arrival,
approximately four minutes later, I saw that a very large crowd of fans
(mainly Liverpool) had gathered on the fore court of the premises,
approximately 60, several were sat or laying on the pavement or in
surrounding gardens.    Glasses, bottles, and food cartons littered the area.
We entered the Public House and found it packed to capacity.        Fans were still
drinking, shouting, and singing, mostly in good humour, broken bottles and
glasses littered the premises, but no actual fighting was taking place.
Again this Public House was requested to close up, this was done.
                                                                                  \Zo
 Shortly after attending to this incident we assisted officers at the bottom
 of Wadsley Lane who had arrested a football fan, we provided transport to
 Harrmerton Road Police Station.


 At 15.10 we were sent to Leppings Lane to assist other officers.     Upon
 arrival at the Main Gate to the Football Ground I saw a large crowd of
 football supporters milling around the gates and into the roadway.     Several
 ambulances were arriving followed by Fire Tenders.   I assisted other Officers
 to keep the main gate clear for the Emergency Services, which was extremely
 difficult due to the crowds of crying and shocked supporters who were leaving
 the ground by this gate, others were then attempting to gain re-entry to
 search for missing friends. At this time I had no knowledge of what had
 taken place inside the ground, but assumed a major accident of sane sort due
 to the arrival of more Bnergency Service vehicles.   I continued to assist at
 the main gate for approximately 1 hour until instructed by a Police Inspector
 to guard a small wicket gate leading to the Terrace immediately behind the
 Police Control Post and prevent unauthorised persons (mainly press and TV
 reporters) from entering the ground.


 At approximately 16.30 I was stood down frcm that post and instructed to take
 up my original patrol duty with 63 Serial.   This I did.


  18.00   Meal
  18.30   Continue Patrol
  21.00   Stand by at Niagra
  22.00   Off duty




^STUART LEECH
