                                                                                               M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               D ate and tim e raised      fllj^ O          /i+Z<Q       Number


Title                                                                                      HL^£fi£gjbt^Zl a&euA
                       n^/MjrvtAn^number
(Include soufvdand any document   nnmA<li>i/'
                                            f#relevant)
                                              m /n■/»nAI                                                   *

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — )feS7No
                                                                                                                         Receiver


                                                                                                                     s7?r&
                                                                                                                          Indexer
D o cu m en t reatstered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     %2Q>
                                                                                                                     Statem ent Reader
S tatem e n t reader's instructions
                                                                                                                     sjtxg

                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                              9 ^ 3         fc
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




F u rth er action No(s)                                                                                                  Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse o th er D o cu m en t Master Num ber Form
                                                                  DRF/DB/SPEARRITT

                                                                  JMJ/AES

                                                                  2nd November 1990

  Silverman Livermore
  Solicitors
  11/13 Victoria Street
  Liverpool
  L2 5QQ


  Dear Sirs,

  ADAM SPEARRITT

  I have been shown a letter dated 25th October 1990 from you   to Mr K S ANDERSON, QPM,
  Assistant Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police by him in   respect of the above
  named.  I have also been shown a letter from Mr ANDERSON to   you dated 4th September
  1990 which, in my opinion, amounts to an apology although I   am far from sure that
  such an apology was necessary.

  I do remember that Mr SPEARRITT did contact me by telephone recently, on Tuesday
  18th September 1990 in fact, when, he raised the issue. At that time Mr SPEARRITT
  said that he had had the letter read to him and that he was dissatisfied with the
  outcome. He said at that time he thought there was a "cover up" about the
  circumstances.   I responded by saying that I failed to see that there was any kind
  of cover up or why there should be a motivation for one especially in the light of
  the apology which it seemed to me on what Mr SPEARRITT was saying dealt with all the
  detail.   However, I pointed out that if he was unhappy about the outcome he should
  raise the matter with his solicitor who in turn should raise the matter with Mr
  ANDERSON.   That, in sum, is my knowledge only to add that I have spoken to the West
  Midlands Police Officer who was in contact with Mr SPEARRITT and he has advised me
  that whilst the criticism was raised he never understood that Mr SPEARRITT was
  making a formal complaint; had he done so the Officer would have properly recorded
  the fact in accordance with P.A.C.E.

  It seems to me that the matter needsclarification for the benefit of Mr ANDERSON
  who is responsible in South Yorkshire for recording such complaints.   Perhaps you
  would be so good as to establish this from your client and advise Mr ANDERSON.

/ I hope this is of assistance to you. I have copied this letter to Mr ANDERSON for
  his information.
         ^     Jovvjto 5 !; -250

  Yours faithfully,




  J M JONES
  Deputy Chief Constable
                                                         -t                 1-

            SilvermanLivermore
            S        O            L            I          C             I            T           O           R      S
                                   1 1 1 3 V i c t o r i a S t r e e t . L i v e r p o o l 1.2 5 Q Q
            T e l e p h o n e : 051 2 2 7 1871.                DX: 141W .                        F ax: 051 25? 0 2 1 6


                                                                                    O u r ref:
                                                                                                                     DRF/DB/SPEAKRITT

                                                                                                                   ACC/AF/CJD Corr
Mr K S Anderson                                                                                                  , 246/90
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY


25 October 1990


Dear Sir

RE: ADAM SFERRITT

We have disclosed the contents of your letter of the 4 September at length
with Mr & Mrs Spearitt.

Our client's have spoken previously about this matter to Mr Mervin Jones
with whom we anticipate you will be familiar and Mr Mervin Jones has
suggested that if you contact him in his new post he will be able to give
you a great (teal of background information which may assist your further
enquiries in this matter.

                                                   A


SILVERMAN LIVERMORE




                                                                                    S O U T H YORKS. POLICE


                                                                                                 2 9 OCT 1990

                                                                               DISCIPLIN (                               I




              \ t                  \ t. n . r v . s n u . v n     i.i      n . u k. v-k a m h. j i      w
                                •A';. '            v •! M'-:i i.iN 1: P..K W;^;
                p.      « h- - . ■ - *    ^   •;    ^       . *! ••• - •     -a v      -   i•• ■       - ;
(Discipline I Complaint®)
                                              Your reft    DRF/DB/SPEARRITT/HILLSB

                                                Our ref:   ACC/AF/CJD Corr 246/90

                                                                  4 September 1990


Silverman Livermore
Solicitors
11/13 Victoria Street
Liverpool
12. 5QQ




Dear Sirs

ADAM SPEARRITT                                                                       x

On 17 August 1990 I wrote to say that I had received from the West Midlands
Police your letter to them of 9 August concerning the mistake that appears
to have been made during the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster in that
the name Adam Spearritt was read from a list of names of persons believed to
be safe when actually that was not the case.

This was the first intimation that 1 had had of this allegation and so,
regrettably, no investigation as far as I an aware has been made to clarify
what occurred. I consider it absolutely unbelievable that anyone would
deliberately relate false Information of this nature and would ask you to
accept, as I do, that given that the naae was read out from a list it was done
in good faith and that the mistake will have been made when the list was
compiled. Whether the list was compiled by hospital staff, social services
staff, other helpers or by police will probably never be known. What led to
the erroneous Inclusion of the name will also probably never be known.

I am loath at this stage to contemplate an investigation being mounted which
will lead to further distress and which will probably be inconclusive and
wonder in the circumstances if you would consider the possibility of your
speaking with members of the family and conveying my views.

Without anyone being certain of all the circumstances I know you will
appreciate the difficulty in which your request for an apology places me since
anything I say must be conditional on the the true facts. But clearly 1 can
say that, accepting the erroneous list was read out, no admission that it was
read out has previously been given because the circumstances were unknown and
for the same reason no apology has ever been given.

I apologise now, bearing in mind what I have said above, for the distress
caused by the reading of the erroneous list. I regret that no such apology
has been made before for the reasons I have already explained.
'?
 4 September 1990

 Silverman Livermore


 ,   .   ,, .              vou would aive your personal consideration to these
 I should t» f . M f u l lf^ reu w O d « »X    ^ r l . t<! conv„ « , view. to the
 C
 fS T     T     »                     clrcuM tanC M .h o u ld not M   to t t . l » « . t r . . .
 and your good offices In this respect would be welcomed.

 Yours faithfully




 AssistantN^iiep^Constable
 (Discipl IneTrComplaints)
