                 Sheffield Archives Ref: <pot-|c! |i /hiMO                                  M I R . 15



OTHE R DOCUMENT FORM                    .^     g ^     ate and tim e raised                                  Number
                                                                                                                      CDWO
T itle

fInclude source and any C
                        document
                         FQCU    number i f relevant!


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y e s /N c f                 -V   e*                                                Receiver
                                                   ^        \a -/U .             hJrugh*

Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                          ML  Indexer

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                                  35CL
Statem ent reader's instructions                                                                                          Statement Reader




Indexed as indicated                                                                                                          Indexer




Examined - fu rth er action to be taken
                                                                                      p a s *

                                                                                      f h   jj I r*
                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                      <r
                                                                                                                                    SIO


                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                      i   “S 31
Further action No(s)                                                                                                          Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
                                        Manchester,


                                         18th April 1989.


The Rt Hon. Mrs. Thatcher, MP
10, Downing Street,
London.



Dear Mrs. Thatcher,

     I was one of the thousands of spectators at the ill
fated Liverpool V Nottingham Forest soccer game on
Saturday 15th April 1989.
     I have followed soccer as a player, administrator,
official and spectator during my fifty two years.
     I would like the following points brought out at
the enquiry, which I am sure you will insist on taking
place.

     1.   Who was responsible for selecting Hillsborough
          as the venue for the game and why?
     2.   Who was responsible for providing stewards inside
          the ground.    I saw none before TiHe game started
          and none on the field during the time I remained
          in the ground.    (i left at 1 5 . 4 5 hours).
     3.   Who was responsible for making public announcements,
          I heard no announcements by way 'of 'an"'explanation
          as to the horrific happenings at the other end of
          the ground.
     4.     Why was the area directly hehind theLiverpool end
          goal so densely populated       when to the left and
          right, particularly the right, the areas were
          so extremely underused.    (i was looking from the
          Forest end).

     My   question two, I regard as of extreme importance.
I have worked as a steward at Wembley Stadiumat International
games and Cup-ties and we were well briefed as to our duties
and distinctly dressed in reflective waistcoats and armbands
marked 'STEWARD' amd I saw no such thing at Hillsborough.
The only 'officials' I could find when trying to locate my
area named on my ticket was the individual on the turnstile
and three programme sellers.
     I sympathise with the families, friends and relatives
of the dead and injured, but I would like to make the point
that the poor souls who made the effort to get to the ground
early and take up a good position were the same poor souls
who were killed and injured, and the late, under the
influence of drink, non-ticket holders were the ones who
compounded what was a very difficult situation for those
magnificent policemen on duty.

                                                 Continued
     I am sure that the 'gate' was opened in the assumed
knowledge that the 'stewards' inside the ground would
filter the spectators in, which is the job of the steward
if, indeed, any were on duty.

     I apologise for this lengthy letter, but I love
the game of football and I am so upset that so many lives
especially young lives, have been lost due to such a
lack of basic administration.

              Yours sincerely,
