  Other Document Form                       Date and time raised                       I—   jL J r.            Number




  Title _____ _____ L 3 .L L £ t v n o ^ i                                        i-    H ,r /        '____ ______________
  (Include source and any document smmbd if relevant}              l \ 7r   ,s   c.


  Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No




  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  Nols) of actions raised

  Statement raaasrs instructions




  Indexed as indicated

  Nots) of   actions raised

^^namined       further action to m taken




  Further action no s)


  W hin satisfied all actions 'raised Office Manager to tnitarsa other Document Master Number Form
                         SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                        SUMMARY OF 1988 SEMI-FINAL

                          Video tapes 1-1, 1-2


These tapes viewed to ascertain position of portable barriers and
stewards. To ascertain if stewards were involved in any control of the
crowd in Leppings Lane.


TAPE 1-1

Initial views show the outer perimeter gates closed with one exception - a
snail gate near to the riverside and leading to the service road, which
appears under the control of stewards wearing tabards and other persons.
They have control of persons entering the service road.

1123 hrs    -    temporary barriers being placed across the service road
near to Gate 'C'f by a Police Officer.        Stewards in control of the
opening in the outer perimeter gates leading to the service road.

1153 hrs    -    views of the service road with 3' high portable barriers
across which isolate gate 'C' (see Appendix 'A').        Groups of Police
Officers are by both barriers and stewards are by one barrier. Some outer
perimeter gates are open. On other occasions just Police Officers are by
the portable barriers. Stewards are by the outer perimeter gates leading
to the service road.


TAPE 1-2

There appears to be a 3' high portable barrier across the outer perimeter
gates leading to the service road (see Appendix 'B').    This causes fans
to file through an open outer perimeter gate nearest the large dividing
fence. Stewards are by this portable barrier.

1330 hrs    -    The 3' high portable barrier is still across the outer
perimeter gates leading to the service road. The outer perimeter gates
leading to the 1 - 1 6 concourse area appear to be open and fans are
entering. Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards are visible.

1343 hrs    -   3' high portable barrier across service road by gate 'C'.
There is a 3' high portable barrier in the West Stand enclosure by gate
'C' which creates a possible sterile area about 10' wide by the boundary
wall.   It appears programme sellers are in this area.

The barrier across the service road by gate 'C' has stewards present.

A number of Police Officers are in the 'sterile area' between the portable
barriers by gate 'C' and the outer perimeter gates.
1347 hrs    -   Shows the service road has two sets of portable barriers
either side of gate 'C' which in effect steriles the area of gate 'C'
outside in the service road.

Stewards are by one barrier.   A number of Police Officers are by the other
barrier.

1347.47 hrs   -   A steward is closing the outer perimeter gate on the
riverside by the service road.  Police Officer of rank appears to be
present.

1353 hrs     -    Access to the A-G concourse area is by the open outer
perimeter gate by the large dividing fence.

1355 hrs   -  The outer perimeter gate leading to the service road is now
closed but a steward opens it and allows a person access.    Gate is then
closed.

There is an assumption that an obstruction is preventing persons entering
the service road from the A-G concourse area as the service road is
reasonably clear.   However, at this stage no barrier can be seen.

1400 hrs   -    Fans are approaching along Leppings Lane and the concourse
areas are beginning to fill.    On approach to the A-G concourse area the
outer perimeter gates by the service road are closed and fans are gaining
access by the gate nearest the large dividing fence. Mounted and foot
officers are present and stewards can be seen.

1408.30 hrs    -   Shows clearer views of stewards in attendance by outer
perimeter gates.

1409.46 hrs   -   Stewards closing outer perimeter gates after allowing a
vehicle to leave.  Foot Officers by gates.

1411 hrs   -   Gates are opened for a short time.

1411.40 hrs    -  The central outer perimeter gates leading to the service
road ajre opened and fans walk through at a leisurely pace. Stewards are
operating these gates.

1414-05 hrs   -   The central outer perimeter gates leading to the service
road are now closed.

1430 hrs    -   The outer perimeter gate is open near the large dividing
fence leading to the A-G concourse turnstiles and fans are filing through.
The central gate and the one by the riverside which both lead to the
service road appear to be closed with stewards nearby. The service road
remains clear.

1431 hrs     -    Outer perimeter gates leading to the service road are
opened slightly and fans go through into the A-G concourse area. Stewards
are visible by the outer gates. Persons in the serviceroad are prevented
from gaining proximity to gate 'C ' by portable 3' high fencing.
                                    - 3 -



1433 hrs      -   The outer perimeter gates leading to the service road are
closed.

1441 hrs    -    There appears to be visible a 3' high portable barrier
partly dividing the service road from the A-G concourse area (see Appendix
C).

1450 hrs     -    Only the one outer perimeter gate leading to the A-G
concourse area is open.     There appears to be free access to the 1-16
concourse area with free movement of fans.


CONCLUSIONS

Stewards appear to have some physical control of the outer perimeter gates
leading to the service road. They are either closed or have a 3' high
portable barrier in place preventing access.     Only selected persons or
vehicles, and on occasions fans, are allowed to enter.

The service road appears to have been isolated from the A-G concourse
area, by use of portable barriers.

Gate 'C' is isolated by portable barriers.

There is no evidence of a filtering of fans outside the outer perimeter
gates.     This does not take into account any individual advice or
directions which may have been given.
                                    APPENDIX 'A




                                                  WEST

                    \                         STAND
                         gangw ay
           , cI*.           2
                                    a
                        ^STANDING

portable

barriers




                                           CCTV
                                                     C C T ,V
                    APPENDIX 'B'




portable

'barrier




                               WEST


           gangway
                              STAND
               2
                    A
           NSTANDING

           \

                           CCTV
                                   CCTV
    *      *'




                                    APPENDIX 'C




                          0


                                        u
                                                  WEST


portable
                \     gangway
                                             STAND
barrier
                    x B             A
                          TANDING




                                            CCTV
                                                     CCTV
