                                                        |                             M IR .15
                       Sheffield Archives Ref.

                                                                     2 3 > fo ls 9     2 - iQ    n
                                                                                                                 P /3 0
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                and time raised                                   Number
                                          Ml
 1tle KSLXXJlM
Title
(Include source and any document humoer i t reievanij


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Ye*/No
                                                                                                                  Receiver

                                                                                                                ^39
                                                                                                                  Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                              Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions

                                                        tevre’ZJS. of
                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                         From:
                                         Derbys hire.
                  Telephone:

                                          Thursday, April 20th, 1989

Dear Sir,

     I feel I must write to you to offer my sympathy regarding the
terrible events at Hillsborough last Saturday during the FA Cup
semi-final match between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool FC.

    I speak as someone who is indirectly affected by the events as
my daughter is a young policewoman and was on duty. She is also a
registered midwife and a RGN nurse andshe applied her knowledge
along with other colleagues in an effortto resuscitate victims and try
to get them breathing again and hopefully save their life.

     She chose to go into the police force knowing it is not an easy
job and expecting criticism even when you knowyou are in the right
and have tried your best. Following Saturday’s events I know she
will never forget those terrible scenes that she witnessed, not
through the detached medium of the television or the newspapers
where she could switch it off or put it down if it appeared too
distressing, but she was caught up in the nightmare of the situation.

     I would suggest that the criticism of the police is insensitive and
no matter how well organised a body is there is bound to be a time
lapse before some sort of order can come out of such chaos. The
people who were on the front line helping the victims will I am sure
need a lot of help and support in the future to overcome this terrible
event. Underneath the uniform is a human being with the same
emotions and fears as the next person and I am sure that the
criticism that has been levelled at the police will not help those
involved but will add to the problems of them getting over it.

     As far as my daughter is concerned, my wife and I hope thatshe
will recover from the event and that it will leave her with no lasting
problems. It will be as difficult for her to come to terms with the full
horror of it all as for the bereaved families and other affected people.

     I would implore all football clubs to strongly advise their
supporters not to attempt to attend games if they have no ticket and
the ones that do go please have a responsible attitude to gaining
entry to the stadium. I feel the burden of responsibility must be laid
at the feet of the irresponsible people who gained entry without
tickets and who tried to gain entry without tickets thus taking up
spaces that were not there for them and so created the unstoppable
events of last Saturday.

     It is to be hoped that changes will be made from the lessons
learned from these terrible events and that this really will be the last
time people have to suffer in a way which even last Saturday could
have been completely avoidable with some consideration and
patience being shown by some supporters.

                           Yours faithfully,
