     Sheffield Archives Ref:        | ■^ f1 j t>\£ 4                                  M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised   2-7/Cf.(S9 6 -IQf>        Number
                                                                                                          X>D3
• <e
       6.T-       P                              l-h/UdkxwtrugfVA M cuun
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action   -YssjNo^.
                                                                                                               Receiver


                                                                                                          S72Q
                                                                                                               Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                           >Q<4 1
                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                          s'   sre-G
Indexed as indicated
                       #                                          rlM
                                                                                                                Indexer


No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             39fir
                                                                                                          O/M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                         f T f


                                                                                                                Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                      1
British Transport Police
            r     e     p     o    r     t




                F.A. OTP SEMI-FINAL

       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                       HELD AT

  TTTT,T,ST¥)-RnUGH FOOTBALL GROUND.

                 SA.TIJKDA.Y 1 5 . L . 8 9
            British Transport Police



                                   REPORT



               LIVERPOOL V NOTTS FOREST : F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL
            SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL, 1989 AT HILLSBORUGH, SHEFFIELD




      PLANNING

      1.1   In 1987 a meeting took place between the then Divisional
            Commander, Chief Superintendent LEY, Superintendent
            NICHOLAS and senior officer's of the South Yorkshire
            Police regarding the reception and disposal of football
            supporters arriving and departing from Sheffield Midland and
!•          Wadsley Bridge Station, particularly with regard to the regular
            football semi finals being held in Sheffield. . The existing
            arrangements were discussed, refined and agreed without
            major changes.

      1.2   The procedure at Wadsley Bridge Station is that supporters
            arriving by special train are passed from the British
            Transport Police to the South Yorkshire Police and walked along
            Penistone Road to Hillsbrough, a distance of about half a
            mile.

      1.3    Supporters arriving at Sheffield Midland Station are placed on
             South Yorkshire Transport buses and taken to Hillsbrough by
             road.

      1.4   The procedure for returning fans is as at paras. 1.2 and 1.3 but
            in reverse.

      1.5   On the build up to 15th April, 1989, the District Inspector at
            Sheffield, Inspector MABBOTT, liaised with his counterparts at
i*          Liverpool and Nottingham, British Rail and officers of the South
            Yorkshire Police in addition to discussions with his own local
            senior officers.

      1.6   A short order was issued and circulated    (copy attached)
            (Appendix A ) .

      1.7   In the planning stages the only problem which was envisaged
            was that of conveying a large number of supporters by rail.

 2.   ARRIVAL OF SUPPORTERS BY TRAIN

      2.1   During the morning prior to the match 3319 identifiable football
            supporters arrived at Sheffield.

                                       cont..............




                                                                               3
       British Transport Police




                               -   2   -




2.2    As far as can be established 1932 were Nottingham Supporters
       and 1337 were Liverpool Supporters.  There were also a number
       of fans who had no affiliation but only came to watch the
       match.

2.3    Four special trains from Nottingham conveyed 1241 supporters
       into Sheffield Midland Station.

2.4    One special train from Liverpool conveyed 430 supporters to
       Wadsley Bridge Station.

2.5    Three additional service trains from Liverpool conveyed 395
       supporters to Sheffield Midland Station.

2.6    All other supporters arrived at Sheffield Midland Station by
       service train.

2.7    On arrival at Sheffield Midland Station, all supporters were
       separated and the Nottingham Supporters left the station via
       the North Gate where they boarded buses which conveyed them
       directly to the ground.

2.8    Liverpool Supporters left the Station via the South Luggage
       Entrance where they also boarded buses and were conveyed to the
       ground.

2.9    The 430 Liverpool Supporters arriving at Wadsley Bridge by
       Special train were walked from the Station to the ground.  This
       journey takes about 15 minutes.

2.10   The Special Train arrived at 13.55hours, about 5 minutes early
       and after the fans had detrained they were handed to an escort
       of South Yorkshire Police who immediately escorted them to the
       Hillsbrough football ground.

2.11   For all train arrival times see Appendix B

2.12   No problems were encountered with the fans travelling on
       the inward journeys and on the whole they were happy, good
       natured and looking forward to an exciting days football.
       Very few arriving supporters showed signs of intoxication.



                                           cont
       British Transport Police



                              -3-



2.13   A Yorkshire Television programme about the 'disaster'
       suggested that one of the factors contributing to the
       excessive build up of fans outside the ground was the fact
       that fans arriving by Special trains at Wadsley Bridge
       Station had been held there for an excessive length of
       time before being walked to Hillsbrough.  This is a
       complete fabrication.  Estimates from B.T.P. Officers at
       Wadsley Bridge indicates that from detraining to moving
       the fans off under escort by South Yorkshire Police took a
       maximum of 10 minutes, see reports from Sergeant       ~|
       (Appendix E) and enclosed statements from Officers at
       Wadsley Bridge.

INVOLVEMENT AT MATCH

3.1    Following arrival of the train at Wadsley Bridge and
       consequent of messing facilities having been arranged for
       the B.T.P. Police Officers in the Gymnasium at the Football
       Ground the following Officers made their way there in full
       uniform.
                            ................. Liverpool   M.S.U.
                            ................. Liverpool   M.S.U.
                            ................. Liverpool   M.S.U.
                            ................. Liverpool   M.S.U.
          1883 M A S O N   ...................Leeds

       arriving at 14.25 hours

3.2    After they had dined Sergeant           and P .C .     left
       the ground to return to Wadsley Bridge.      The otner
       Officers were standing in the tunnel entrance to the
       Gymnasium when the emergency occurred.      They were asked by
       a South Yorkshire Superintendent to assist w ith crowd
       control. At the time S e r g e a n t a n d P.C.        )ieard of
       the problems at Hillsbrough and they returned to the
       ground to assist.  At the request of Senior Officers of
       the South Yorkshire Police British Transport Police were
       involved in crowd control, public order situations, the
       administration of first aid and the removal of bodies to
       the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.

3.3    P.C. MASON was asked to assist in the removal of a body to
       the mortuary and on arrival there he was directed to
       remain with it until it was identified.   This
       occurred at 04.30 hours Sunday, 16th when PC MASON stood
       down, travelled back to Leeds. He signed off duty at
       0630hrs after working for 20 hours.


                                            cont
       British Transport Police


                              -4-



BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE REACTION TO EMERGENCY

4.1    As soon as it became apparent that an emergency had
       occurred and the game was about to be abandoned, Acting
       Chief Inspector CRAGGS who was in overall command of the
       B.T. Police operation immediately took charge and
       co-ordinated the urgently needed reorganisation of the
       return arrangements for the travelling supporters.

4.2    Arrangements were made for the Special train to return to
       Wadsley Bridge Station, which it did, arriving at 16.00
       hours.  This train departed at 17.15 hours, 10 minutes
       later than scheduled, with 450 passengers.

4.3    The Nottingham Specials were brought to Sheffield Midland
       Station and the first one placed at Platform 1 prior to
       fans arriving.  This train and the following trains
       departed as follows when laden:-

       1)   17.25   hours                500   passengers.
       2)   18.05   hours                600   passengers.
       3)   18.34   hours                550   passengers.
       4)   19.04   hours                150   passengers.

4.4.   All Service trains to Nottingham and Liverpool were
        monitored and policed where necessary up to 20.30 hours.

4.5    In all, a total of 18 trains conveyed an estimated 3,600
        Football Supporters to their various destinations.

4.6    In all 10 trains were policed by 41 Officers.

4.7    For all train departures see appendix C

CONCLUSIONS

5.1    The conveying of Supporters to and from Sheffield by
        British Rail was carried out swiftly and without problem.

5.2    There was no build up caused by fans arriving at the
        Ground after travelling to Sheffield by train.

5.3    British Rail reacted with speed and efficiency when faced
       with the emergency.

5.4    The attitude of Supporters returning from Hillsbrough was
        that of shock and, in many cases, disbelief. A number of
       them were blaming the Police for the disaster and because
       of this showered abuse on any Officer they saw.

                                          cont
           British Transport Police


                                    -5-




    5.5.   Only one B.T. Police Officer highlights any aspects of the
           operation that could be construed as a 'criticism' and
           these are contained in the last paragraph at page 2 of
           S e r g e a n t s r e p o r t . (Appendix E) .

    Details are

           5.5.1 Communications - he adversely comments on radio
           communication between Wadsley Bridge and Sheffield Midland
           Station.

           Comment - This is not disputed and the problem which has
           been reported on previously is highly prevelant in the
k          North East of England.  However, communications were not
           such that they in any way hampered the transmission of
           messages through to Wadsley Bridge as is evident by the
           fact that it was possible to redeploy additional Officers
           from Sheffield Midland Station to Wadsley Bridge to assist
           in the returning operation as a direct radio request from
           a Sergeant at that location.

           5.5.2 Sergeant       comments that whilst his Officers
           were to all intents and purposes 'missing' for some 2 hours
           at the ground no Senior Officers of this Force visited the
           scene to find them.

           Comment - It was known and pre planned that Officers
           arriving at Wadsley Bridge Station would be authorised to
           attend at Hillsbrough to take refreshments under South
           Yorkshire Police arrangements and they were not under
           instructions to return to Wadsley Bridge other than to be
           in good time for the returning special train.  Hence it


f
           would be quite normal for them to remain at Hillsbrough
           for up to 2 hours. Additionally once the scale of the
           disaster began to unfold Senior Officers quite rightly
           concluded that our Officers would use their initiative and
           give all possible assistance to the South Yorkshire Police
           at the ground hence there was no reason at that point in
           time to be unduly concerned over their whereabouts.

           5.5.3.   S e r g e a n t f i n a l l y makes adverse comment as to
           the fact that when he eventually returned to Wadsley Bridge
           to all intents and purposes P.C. MASON was still
           'missing'

                                                 con t .........




                                                                                7
      British Transport Police


                            -   6-



      Comment - The previous comments made in 5.5.2 in this
      apply up until the time that the special train departed
      from Wadsley Bridge Station. What Sergeant           /ould
      not know was that after that departure Acting u m e f
      Inspector CRAGGS made arrangements for checks to be made
      with the local hospitals and the South Yorkshire
      Police Control in order to ascertain if P.C. MASON had
      come under notice as being an injured Officer in any way.
      These enquiries proved negative and it was rightly
      concluded that he was still assisting at Hillsbrough. This
      assumption proved correct as illustrated in paragraph 3.6.
      No senior Officer of this Force was able to attend at
      the ground because of

        a) They were totally engaged in commanding and
        co-ordinating the urgently needed return arrangements,
        and
        b) It was not physically possible due to traffic and
        pedestrian conjestion to make any practical effort to
        attend at the ground.  Indeed to have done so would have
        been unwise taking into account the needs at Sheffield
        Midland Station at that time.


5.6   The British Transport Police Officers should be praised
      for their cheerful forebearance in the face of extreme
      difficulty when dealing with this type of situation.


ATTACHMENTS

      Please find enclosed reports from the following Officers

      APPENDIX A                     Publication of local order and
                                     anticipated trains.

      APPENDIX B                     Factual details of arriving
                                     trains and plans.

      APPENDIX C                     Factual details of returning
                                     trains and fans.

      APPENDIX D                     Report from Inspector BROWN, B.T.
                                     Police, Liverpool re: pre planning
                                     train departures from Liverpool.

      APPENDIX E                     Report from Sergeant         B.T.
                                     Police, Liverpool M.S.U. re:
                                     duties at Wadsley Bridge Station
                                     and at Hillsbrough.
     British Transport Police

                              -7-




     APPENDIX F                 Report from P.C. MASON, B.T.
                                Police, Leeds, re: duties at
                                Wadsley Bridge Station and at
                                Hillsbrough.

     APPENDIX G                     Report from Acting Chief
                                    Inspector CHAPMAN re: returning
                                    fans arriving at Liverpool.



In addition the following have made statements which are
separately bundled.

      Sergeant
      Constable
      Constable
      Constable ___________
      Constable 1883 MASON
f




    10
