                                        sffieid Archives Ref:         I                          MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                   oil A &7                Number
                                                                                                                       'birs<i
Title
(Include source and any document number i t relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —J^</No                           Ia a a k   (>   A jO M ^ ^ T   Jt                   Receiver




                                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated             j   (      _                3

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                       S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                                        /
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                  O /M         S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                       ’H imex#


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
           ♦
           *

V




                                                      Netherton,
                                                      Merseyside


                                                      4th May, 1989


    Dear

         I was present at the F.A. Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and Nottingham
    Forest on the 15th April, 1989.  I was accompanied by
    and              (both fire fighters for Merseyside Fire Brigade)

         We approached the ground along Halifax Road, as we got nearer to the
    ground we noticed that there were a large number of people gathered around the
    entrance.  I noticed that there were no queues and very little Police present
    apart from a few mounted Policemen.

         As we neared the turnstiles the crush got increasingly worse. However, we
    were informed by a Policeman that the kick-off was to be delayed, which seemed
    to ease the crush.  It was around this time I noticed that the Blue Concertina
    Gates were opened and many fans surged through it, nevertheless, we entered the
    ground through Turnstile B. Once in the outer enclosure we realised that the
    match had begun, so we made our way to the middle terracing through the tunnel.

         As soon as we reached the top of the terraces we noticed that there were
    people on the path surrounding the pitch and there were others being helped
    over the fencing at the front who were in abvious distress.  At the same time
    we started to help other fans around us who were also upset to climb into the
    balcony and the North Bank Stand.

         It was at this point that we noticed a casualty being carried out past u s ,
    he had a purple face and was obviously dead. We realised then that there was
    a very serious problem and we made our way back out through the tunnel to see
    if we could assist.

         As we got out of the tunnel there were bodies lying everywhere. We
    immediately decided to help the casualties, however, due to the numbers hurt
    there were many who were unaided even though there seemed to be Policemen around
    watching what was going on.

         At one point, I was trying to revive an unconscious person and when I
    requested the help of Police Officers they were either unwilling or unable to
    do this. This in particular sickened me as I was in a very distressed state
    myself. At the time I though that there were more qualified people than me to
    do the job I was doing, inspite of this, the casualty became conscious and I was
    able to move to the next one.




                                                                       Cont
    *
    t
%
                                -   2   -




     It was at this point I noticed that the emergency services had arrived
at the Leppings Lane back enclosure. However, I was surprised at the length
of time it took for them to arrive.

     Obviously, the ambulancemen and firemen were overstretched.  There was
a lack of professional help in ferrying the injured people to the ambulances
even though I still noticed Police Officers standing around - shocked though
they may have been.  In fact, as we were attending the casualty a Policeman
approached us and forcefully asked us to leave the area.  He left us alone only
when my friend told him we were all firemen.  I became even more horrified when
my friends repeatedly requested that a Policeman remove his plastic over-jacket
to cover a dead body to shield him from onlooking fans.  He repeatedly refused.

     As the ambulances arrived we moved the casualties to the Leppings Lane to
be taken away.  It was now well over an hour since the game was stopped.

     When the last of the critically injured were taken away I then
concentrated on the less seriously injured people who were lined up along a wall
on Leppings Lane. On the opposite side of the road I noticed the dead bodies
lined up next to each other, some still uncovered.

     Before we left the scene we sought out a High Ranking Officer who we
understood to be an Inspector. We made it clear to him that we though the
actions of the Policemen present at the scene were unprofessional and uncaring.
Then we made our way back to our transport.

     I hope this report will help the inquiry and I will be willing to further
any more information if requested.




                                                 Yours faithfully,
