                                                                                                                            i\ ^
                                                                                                                                  7<;
SoVieUCoo ^ef^ac^vC^cj,                                       Si SHP •-                                                 ^                 Z.
                                                                                                                        £         N>      £
I                                                                                                                       0         v/\](   ^
VvJ l nJCLKw o R t h          +        f>£>/\6e<^ro«0                                                                             —        £

3 5      O ftS fln r    (R fte*^ S 'n e .c c r

 V vieST m w ^sT ^rt                                                                                                  II!                 3^
 L O i4 ^ ^ ^
                                                                                                                                     it
 s« » f      ^ t.e                                                                                                                  >
                                                                                                                      (P

  T>yc a -2,1^ v                                                                                                       (A
                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                       ©
  feJL       OH I           5 <?3S o o o
                                                                                                                        G
  f& Y       o n    I       S lz s o q l



  CHp«a            Porfeeu*
  N tc & e C®-> O ssr«B *j



  A'l/’u*-   UeJlA^j               VI //   ^4-^V^ev</   -&/   <y*XicL*~,       C,f         ^BMut




  A u                                                                 ^ -7     J 1^ tC ^ - J x - X •




                                                                                              WlNCKWORTH
                                                                                               P em berto n
                                                                                            in c o r p o r a t in g   S herw ood & C o.
                                                                                        SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS


                        ? '* * L                                           3 5 G REAT PE TER STR E E T. W ES TM IN S TE R . LO N D O N SW1P 3LR
                        /ifel-
                        ■ & * -■ -.                                   PAX: 0171*593 5 0 8 9 DX NO: 2312 VICTORIA

                           * '*    "                                          TELEPH O N E: 0 1 7 1 -5 9 3 5 0 0 0


                                                                                             NICHOLAS A. F. OWSTON
                                                                                                             PA R T N E R
Ailsa Lawrence                                            Your Ref:
Solicitor
Winkworth Pemberton                                       Our Ref:        D&C/AMH/NJT
35 Great Peter Street
West Minster                                              Date:           20 November 1997
LONDON SW1P3LR




HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Following our telephone conversation of yesterday I enclose copies of the letter from the
Hillsborough Family Support Group to the Home Secretary and a copy of our response, also to the
Home Secretary.

This morning the transcript of Trevor Bichard's meeting with Lord Justice Stuart Smith arrived and I
am also enclosing a copy of this.

Finally I have also completed my audit trail of the preparation and amendment of officers
recollections and copies of my letters of 5 and 14 November to the Scrutiny Team together with
copies of correspondence between Lord Justice Stuart Smith and Peter Metcalf of Hammond
Suddards are enclosed to bring you up to date.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




                                                          The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                          Superintendent Hepworth
                                                          Extension Number 0114 296 3084
WINCKWORTH & PEMBERTON                                                                                                                    I N C O R P O R A T IN G   SHERWOOD & Co

SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                                          35 GREAT PETER STREET
                                                                                                                                          WESTMINSTER
Our ref:                        NAFO/22278-1                                                                                              LONDON SW1P 3LR
Your ref:
                                                                                                                                          DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                                          FAX       0171-593 5099
                                                                                                                                          TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000


                                                                                                                                         12 November 1997
Superintendent Alan Hepworth
South Yorkshire Police
Discipline and Complaints Department
Hillsborough Scrutiny
50 W indsor Road
Heeley
SHEFFIELD
S8 SUB


Dear M r Hepworth

Hillsborough Scrutiny
                                                                         \
I am enclosing a note o f my firm ’s fees to date in dealing with this matter. You will see that
I have attached a billing narrative showing that the time included in the bill is that recorded up
to 20 October. This does therefore not include the work done in relation to the interview of
Trevor Bichard by the Hillsborough Scrutiny.

Thank you for providing me with all the information concerning the Inquest and the various
statements, all o f which have been sent to the Scrutiny Office. Both I and Ailsa are in the
process o f collating this information and familiarising ourselves with it.

Once you have received a copy o f the transcript o f the interview with Trevor Bichard, I should
be grateful to receive it.
Yours sincerely


     %

N A F




PARTNERS
N ICHOLAS OW STON                   M IC HA EL TH ATC HER              HUGH M A C DOU GA LD              CH RISTO PH ER VINE               ROBERT BOTKAI                 CONSULTANT
FRANK ROBSON OBE                    ALISON GORLOV                      JOH N REES                        RO GER FITTON                     SIM ON EA STW OO D            AN TH O N Y TA YLO R
BRIAN HOOD                          STEPHEN W IG GS                    PETER W IL LIAM S                 PAUL IRVING                       H E A D O F TAX
PAUL M ORRIS                        NICHOLAS W ELCH                    ANDREW MURRAY                     RO NA LD FARRANTS                 GEORG E BULL*

The firm is a m ember of E u f 6 « » a U   an international network of lawyers. *Non-s®Kc»tor. The firm is regulated by The Law Society in the conduct of investment business.
  WINCKWORTH & PEM BERTON                                                                               IN C O R P O R A T IN G   SHERWOOD & Co

  SOLICITORS A N D PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                        35 GREAT PETER STREET
                                                                                                        WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                        LONDON SW1P 3LR

                                                                                                        DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                        FAX       0171-593 5099
                                                                                                        TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000




TO:        South Yorkshire Police                                            INVOICE NUMBER:                                         7 0 7 4 3
           Windsor Road
                                                                                 d a te   & ta x    p o in t:      27 October 1997
           Sheffield S8
                                                                                               o u r re f:         NAPO/AML/22278-1

                                                                                             y o u r re f:


                                                                                             v .a   .T. REG.NO. 238 6725 35
r ef   :
           Hillsborough Stadium Scrutiny

                                                                                                      V.A.T.
       PERIOD:   INTERIM A000UNT                                                COSTS                  RATE
                                                                                                                         V.A.T.            TOTAL

TO PROFESSIONAL SERVICES




           Please see attached narrative




EXPENSES INCURRED

            Train fares
            working lunch
            HMS0
            Oourier charge
            Photocopying charges
            Incidental expenses including
            telephone, faxes etc




                                                                        /

 WITH COMPLIMENTS
                                                                                    TOTAL DUE £             _________________
 SETTfc£M£NTlfERMS
 This invoice is payable on receipt. Interest at 1.5% per calendar month is chargeable on any balance outstanding after 30 days.

 Notice o f your rights is set out on the back.


                                              A LIST O F PARTNERS IS AVAILABLE AT EA CH O F FIC E

                         TH E FIRM IS RE GUL ATED BY TH E LAW S O C IETY IN TH E C O N D U C T OF IN V E S T M E N T BU SINESS
                                       NOTICE OF RIGHTS

You (or w e) have the right to refer to the Court for remedy for an alleged breach o f contract.

Where a specific agreement exists between the firm and an entitled person, the rights and remedies
available w ill be in accordance with that agreement.

Where w e have provided non contentious legal services which are not governed by a specific agreement
the follow ing will apply:-

3.1    If you are not satisfied with the amount o f our fee you have the right to ask us to obtain a
       remuneration certificate from the Law Society.

3.2    The certificate will either say that our fee is fair and reasonable, or it will substitute a lower fee.

3.3    If you wish us to obtain a certificate you must ask us to do so within a month o f receiving
        this notice.

3.4    W e may charge interest on unpaid bills and w e will do so at the rate payable    on judgment debts,
       from one month after delivery o f our bill.

3.5    (i)    If you ask us to obtain a remuneration certificate, then unless w e already hold the money
              to cover these, you must first pay:

              (a) half our fee shown in the bill;

              (b) all the VAT shown in the bill:

              (c) all the expenses we have incurred shown in the bill

       (ii)   However, you may ask the Law Society (at 8 Dormer Place, Royal Leamington Spa,
              Warwickshire CV32 5AE) to waive these requirements so that you do not have to pay
              anything for the time being. You would have to show that exceptional circumstances apply
              in your case.

3.6    These rights are set out more fully in the Solicitors (non-Contentious Business) Remuneration
       Order 1994.

You may be entitled to have our charges reviewed by the court. (This is called “taxation”.)
The procedures differ from the remuneration certificate procedure and are set out in ss.70,71 and 72 o f
the Solicitors A ct 1974.
                                   BILLING NARRATIVE
                                 AML/22278-1 - Bill No: 70743


Re: Hillsborough Stadium Scrutiny

Period: July 1997 - 20 October 1997


TO OUR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES

  receiving your instructions to act on behalf o f
  South Yorkshire Police in relation to the scrutiny
  by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith being conducted
  into the Inquiry Inquest and discipline
  proceedings which took place in relation to the
  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster; attending at a
  briefing meeting with you; preparing for the
  meeting by reading the interim and final report
  prepared by Lord Justice Taylor; preparing a
  detailed letter to Alan Walker setting out our
  instructions and the matters in need o f
  clarification and investigation both by us and by
  you.

  Reviewing further documentation provided by
  you and also reviewing videos o f the
  drama/documentary which gave rise to Dr
  Walker coming forward; considering proposed
  letters drafted to the scrutiny office and advising
  you o f our comments thereon; receiving the
  Inquiry Report prepared by J D Phillips; reading
  the report and advising you as to its status; also
  speaking to Peter M etcalf o f Hammond Suddards
  who had some involvement with the original
  inquiry and who was able to confirm the
  evidential status o f the Phillips report.

   Attending you at our offices in the company o f
   Superintendent Hepworth and PC Greenway;
   receiving a detailed update from you as to the
   progress o f this matter; receiving further
   information from you, specifically information
   relating to the inquest, all such information
   having also been passed to the Scrutiny.
Giving this matter all due care and attention
througout. This matter is continuing.
Mr N Ouston                                           Our Ref:   D&C/AMH
Winckworth Pemberton
Solicitors                                            Date:      28 October 1997
35 Great Peter Street
Westminster
LONDON
SW1P3LR




HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I enclose for your information copies of correspondence generated in the last week between
ourselves and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny. The letters are:

21.10.97         Policy and procedure for release of documentation.
22.10.97         Civil actions relating to Hillsborough.
22.10.97         Video material of the disaster obtained by South Yorkshire Police.
23.10.97         Exhibits lists and video material.
23.10.97         24 body files and requests for statements of 4 persons.
24.10.97         Video material and letter of 23.10.97.
24.10.97         Research into provision of video tapes to Yorkshire Television.
28.10.97         Video stills from the mortuary video.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent


                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Superintendent Hepworth
                                                   Tel (0114)296 3084      Fax (0114)2963113
WINCKWORTH & PEM BERTON                                                                                                                I N C O R P O R A T IN G   SHERWOOD & Co

SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
   ^                          ________ _                                                                                               35 GREAT PETER STREET
   Our ref:                 NAFO/22278-1                                                                                              WESTMINSTER
   Your ref:                D&C/AMH/EMR                                                                                               LONDON SW1P 3LR

                                                                                                                                       DX                          2312 VICTORIA
   Superintendent A M Hepworth                                                                                                        fa x                         0171-593 5099
   South Yorkshire Police                                                                                                             te le p h o n e             0171-593 5000
  Discipline & Complaints Department
   W indsor Road                                                                                                                      14 October 1997
   Sheffield S8 SUB
                                                                                H & fi-

  Dear M r Hepworth

  Hillsborough Scrutiny                                                                           1


  Many thanks for your letter o f 10th October and for the enclosures.

  It is difficult to judge whether this Scrutiny will go to an Inquiry and it is equally difficult
  to predict what directions Lord Justice Stuart-Smith may make. In the meantime I think we
  have to keep as closely abreast o f the dissemination o f material and learning curve that the
  Scrutiny is privy to. Ailsa and I already have a fairly good view by rapid learning with
  hindsight but as I remarked to you when you came to the office, the problem with rapid
  reading and rapid learning is that as the weeks go by one very easily loses the detailed
  knowledge which somebody who has lived with this case for a long time finds easier to
  remember because it forms part o f their long term memory. Equally re-reading documents
  which one read six weeks or three months ago is a particularly boring and cost ineffective
  way o f keeping the brain cells informed and keeping the information going in. A better
  way, and one that keeps abreast o f the information going into the Scrutiny is to read and
  look at the information they are sent at the same time.

  Therefore, on reflection, I think we should see the transcripts o f at least a sample o f the
  Inquests both mini and main. PC Greenway might well know which ones would be most
  instructive that we should see. If the bulk o f sending all of them would be both
  unnecessarily expensive in copying and unduly tim e consuming in reading then I think we
  should avoid that but a few sample inquests giving a flavour o f how they were conducted
  are actually necessary.

 I note that at the meeting on 24th September a number o f verbal requests were made and
 by your letter o f 10th October to M r Bone you have attempted to set out what you thought
 the seven points were o f further information/research.

 In the interests o f South Yorkshire Police, which is after all my brief, we must be certain
 that we monitor and are aware o f all the information that the Scrutiny is provided w ith both
 on behalf o f South Yorkshire Police and any agency connected with them and, as far as this
 is possible, from any other source also. Therefore I think we ought to see a note or be told
 what Peter M etcalf o f Hammond Suddards supplies otherwise there could be problems in



PARTNERS                                                                                                                                                               H EAD O F TAX
NICH O LA S O W ST O N         M IC H A EL T H A T C H E R        HUGH M ACDOUGALD                  C H R IST O PH E R VINE             R O B ER T B O TK A I         G E O R G E BULL*
F R A N K RO BSO N O B E       A L ISO N G O R L O V              JO H N RE ES                      R O G ER FITTO N                    PET ER G E RM AIN
B R IA N H O O D               ST E P H E N W IG GS               PET ER W IL LIA M S               PA U L IR V IN G                    SIM ON E A ST W O O D         CONSULTANT
PA U L M O R RIS                NICH O LA S W ELC H                ANDREW MURRAY                     RO N A L D F A R R A N TS                                         A N TH O N Y TA Y L O R

The firm is a m em ber of            an international network o f lawyers. ‘ Non-solicitor. The firm is regulated by The Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business.
                                            -   2   -




the future about the relative state o f information provided or said to have been provided by
South Yorkshire Police and there could also be problems about evidence, privilege and the
status o f certain information and its associated effect on admissions and liability etc.

Ailsa returns from holiday on 20th October and I am attempting to take a week o ff around
the 21st to 28th o f October or so. As soon as I have returned I think we ought to have a
further visit to Sheffield when we are taken round the sports ground itself and we can go
over the changes which have taken place. We do not need to see a football match as such,
particularly as it is now all seater, and any crush at the turnstiles is therefore unlikely to
repeat itself in the same way. As far as the noise and difficulty over communications are
concerned, we do genuinely take that on board anyway. However a look at the physical lay
out and an understanding o f the view from the control box (which I know has now been
enlarged) would be extremely useful and would keep the learning process roughly in step
with events and with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s understanding o f the position.

Yours sincerely




N A F OWSTON
                                                        Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                        Hillsborough Scrutiny

              POLICE
              JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                        50 Windsor Road
                                                        Heeley
                                                        SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 2963113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:

For the attention of:

Comments:




                     & /3 t)              ~*s /
                                                                 a e J ^




From:

Telephone Number:                    D tfi+       2.?rb 2)CrT2^-

Number of Pages (including this page)                H* *

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
SS   OCT    ’ 97   1Z:Z7           FROM    I   DISTRICT     COMMPNDER                                        P P G E . 001




            Facsimile Cover Sheet
                                      To: Supt Hepworth
                                  Company: Complaints and discipline
                                      Phone: Heeley
                                        Fax; 3020


                                      From: D.S. 1370 Trevor Bichard
                                  Company: C.I.D. Rotherham West
                                    Phone: 2264
                                      Fax: 2257

                          Date: 28/10/97
            Pages including this
                    cover page: 4

           Comments:

       w     .     <   h      M   W    T   h    o   f   e   d   .     r   a   u   o    n   areprovWi n8
       Home Office direct.                                          ©sent at the meeting I wifi inform the

       . f you wish to speak to        m niaet on 0402 39193?



       i revor Uichard




26   OCT     97    1£ : £ I                                                                                  r ’ P tjE . 0 t ! i
28   OCT    ’ 97      12:27                FROM          I      DISTRICT   COMMANDER                           PAGE. 0 0 2




                        THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                        Room 1106
                        50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9A T
                        Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



      Del- -five Sergeant T Bichard                                                    Your reference:
      Sot      orkshiie Police
      Main Street                                                                      Our reference:
      ROTHERHAM
      S60 1QY                                                                          Date:   V   S     October 1997




       We spoke, and I am grateful to you tor agreeing to meet Lord Justice Stuart-Smith at our
       office here. I confirm that the time and date for this meeting will be 2 p.m. on Friday 31
       October.


       The scrutiny


       2.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been asked by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny
       o f evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium in April 1989. His
       objective is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence about the disaster
       which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to tbp
       prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities,

       3.      If there is significant new evidence, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith intends to see \ v,
       it mir ' have affected the outcome o f any o f the proceedings. He hopes to report his
       findings 10 the Home Secretary by the end o f the year.

       4.          You may wish ic see Lord Justice Stuart-Smith5s terms o f reference* and I attac
       copy




       5.     There are a number o f issues on which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would like your
       help. First, you have said that police CCTV camera 5 - the one mounted on the scoreboard
       near the police control box, giving a view, in cffcct, from the rear comer oi the Leppings
       Lane terracing * was not up to scratch. In what way was it not up to scratch? I should add
       that Roger Houidsworth, the club video engineer, has said it was working perfectly.

       6,          Second, the Judge would like to know where camera 5 was trained after 2.20 p.m.,

       Q : | H J L L S B O R |M A I i r \ B I C H A f t O . 3




£8   OCT    >97       12: ££                                                                        PAGE
£8   OCT     ’ 97    1£ : £ 8   FROM   I   DISTRICT   COMMANDER                               PAGE. 0 0 3




       when it recorded a group o f people in pen 2. Was it then readjusted so that it showed pens 3
       and 4?

       7.    Third, were you looking at the screen showing output from camera 5 at all before
       1502-1503, when the video recording which we have shows shots from camera 5 o f people
       climbing over the perimeter fence onto the pitch?

       8.     Fourth, were cameras 2 or 3 trained onto the Leppings Lane terraces before 3.05, and
       if so why?

       9.     Filth, you have described seeing people being pulled into the West Stand seating area
       from the terrace, and climbing over the perimeter fence. Were you talking about what you
       could see through the window o f the control box or about what you could sec on the video
       screens?




       10.    There will be a shorthand note o f your meeting with the Judge, o f which we will let
       you have a copy. We will also send a copy o f it to Superintendent Alan Hepworth.

       11.     You may wish to be accompanied by other people, including your legal
       representative. That would o f course be perfectly acceptable, although it would help if you
       could let us know in advance who these people might be.

       12.          We look forward to seeing you next week.

                         VM



       c v Bum
       Secretar r« the Scrutiny




       G: [B'M-L&Mm [MAIM\BICHAKD. 1 2 4




£8   OCT     ’ 97    12:£2                                                                    PAS
£8   OCT    ’ 37    12:28     FROM    I   DISTRICT   COMMANDER                             PAGE.0 0 4




       Terms o f reference


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


                   (a)   to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                   (b)   to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                   General for the purpose of discharging their respective
                   statutory responsibilities; or


                         to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation
                   to police disciplinary matters;


       and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
       is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
       the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
       (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
       which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
       is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.




           a.-1bullsbqR IM A m m ciiA m


                                                                             * *   TOTAL   PA G h. 0B4      * *
26   OCT    ’ 37    1                                                                      p n hi F , 004
2 8 - O C T . ' 9 7 ( T UE )     13:08                                        TEL:01142963113       3113      P. 0 0 1




  **    CONFIRMATION              RE P O R T   **




  T R A N S M I S S I ON
  TRANSACTION(S )                COMPLETED




    NO,       DATE/TIME                DESTINATION                  DURATION         PGS   STATUS     MODE


    053       OCT. 2 8         13:07                 901713935099   0* 0 1 ' 3 8 *   004   OK         N ECM
             South Yorkshire
©
             POLICE                                     Ian Dairies,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                               Assistant Chief Constable
             JUSTICE      with     COURAGE




Mr N Owston                                                       Ref: ACC/ID/NMH
Winckworth Pemberton Solicitors
35 Great Peter Street                                             9 September 1997
Westminster
LONDON
SW1P 3LP


Dear Mr Owston

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Scrutiny

Thank you for your letter of 3 September 1997.

I am grateful to you for your opinion that the Phillips report is not relevant to any current
litigation. That being the case, we can now consider whether we wish to release it to the
Hillsborough Families Support Group (HFSG).

The HFSG are aware of the existence of the Phillips report and have asked for its release.
They might misconstrue a refusal as evidence that we were suppressing material. That is
not the case and I have, therefore, instructed Constable Greenway that the Phillips report
be forwarded to the HFSG.

You asked the role of Brian Alderman; he works in the legal section of the South Yorkshire
Police Authority and has a knowledge of legal issues surrounding the disaster. In view of
what Peter Metcalfe has told you, I do not think we need to trouble Brian at this stage.

On 3 September 1997 Mr Chris Bone, Secretary of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny,
spent the day with Constable Greenway and I at Heeley Police office. In order to brief you
on that meeting, I have arrange to come to your offices at 11.00 am on Wednesday 17
September 1997. I will be accompanied by Ken and Superintendent Alan Hepworth.
Perhaps the most significant thing to emerge from our meeting with Chris Bone was that
they have received almost no submissions which suggests that fresh evidence has been
uncovered. The only real exception to that is my letter dated 8 August 1997 to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith (copy attached) of which I advised you in my letter of 8 August 1997.

See you next week.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines

             Police Headquarters
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                                         Direct Line: 0114 2523405
             Tel: 0114 2202020                                           Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
                                                        Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) DiP.Ed.
                                                              Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/ID/NMH

8 August 1997


The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 528
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




Dear Sir

Hillsborough Scrutiny

On 23 July 1997 the Chief Constable, Mr Richard Wells, wrote to you (copy letter attached
for ease of reference). On Page 2, Paragraph 4, he referred to a planned visit to
Hillsborough Stadium. Things were said during that visit which Mr Wells is keen that you
should know of (Mr Wells began a period of leave on 30 July 1997).

Mr Wells and I met Constable GREENWAY and Inspector CALVERT at the stadium.
Constable Greenway fulfils a role as archivist and librarian for our Hillsborough material.
Inspector Calvert worked on a number of football matches before the disaster and was
involved in planning events.

Constable Greenway had prepared an album of photographs, taken at the time of the
disaster, which allowed Mr Wells and I to picture the stadium as it was then. We walked
around the inside and outside of the ground and re-familiarised ourselves with what had
happened.

During this tour, Inspector Calvert said that officers, who had been on duty on the day of
the disaster, were instructed to write their own statements and to include anything that may
have been relevant. Inspector Calvert said that when these statements came back from
typing they had been altered in a manner that some officers had found unacceptable, but
they had nonetheless signed the statements.

Inspector Calvert said that officers were coached in evidence to give to Lord Taylor’s
enquiry but that practice ceased part way through the enquiry when it became apparent
that officers were unable or unwilling to adhere to an unacceptable version of the truth.




                                                                        Direct Line: 0114 2523405
            Tel: 0114 2202020                                           Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
The Chief Constable and I were concerned at the implications of Inspector Calvert’s
comments. We did not question him nor comment lest any such action be misconstrued.
At the conclusion of our visit, Mr Wells and I discussed what we had heard.

Mr Wells said that in the seven years he has been Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, he
has not previously heard such things, nor have I in my 12 months with South Yorkshire.
Nonetheless, we resolved to act upon Inspector Calvert’s comments.

Our store of Hillsborough Disaster material is held in the Discipline and Complaints
Department at Heeley Police office. The acting Head of that Department is Superintendent
Alan FOSTER. Mr Wells and I discussed with Superintendent Foster the action to be
taken. Superintendent Foster said that he had been a member of the team of officers who
had worked on the enquiry that followed the disaster. Part of that team’s role was to liaise
with the officers of West Midlands Police and to facilitate their work. Superintendent Foster
recalled that officers on duty at the disaster were instructed to write their “recollections” and
to put down anything they felt, as well as what they believed to be true. He said that, on
legal advice, the recollections were then converted into statements of evidence. He was
unsure of the source of that advice as he was relying upon his memory of events some
eight years ago.

Superintendent Foster recollected that officers who were to give evidence to Lord Taylor’s
enquiry were prepared in the sense that they were briefed. Lord Taylor’s enquiry was
conducted differently to officers’ experiences of giving evidence in a criminal court. It was
an enquiry not a trial. The nature of giving evidence, and questions on that evidence, were
not as in a criminal case. The event itself was traumatic for many officers in a way that is
rare in criminal trials.

As discussed with Mr Wells and Superintendent Foster, I examined our archive of
Hillsborough Disaster material. The “recollections” of officers are systematically filed there.
Some are handwritten. Some are typed in a manner that suggests to me that the officers
did the typing (spelling mistakes, poor type alignment, etc). All that was written in the
recollections was then typed into the HOLMES computer. HOLMES (Home Office Large
Major Enquiry System) was launched in 1987 and the Hillsborough Disaster was one of the
first major uses of it in South Yorkshire.

The typed recollections have been annotated by indexers, police officers who identifying
salient points to be entered in the HOLMES index. For instance, if Constable 123 SMITH
refers to being on duty in serial 21 under the supervision of Sergeant 456 JONES, the
indexer would highlight “serial 21” and “Sergeant 456 JONES” as cross references. Actions
would be raised to ensure that a statement was obtained from Sergeant 456 Jones and
other officers in serial 21.

Some of the typed recollections show pencil lines through some sentences.                 These
statements are in a box marked “Amended Statements”.

I examined a small number of randomly selected amended statements. One officer’s
statement contained a page of information about the writer’s feelings the following day
(shock, distress etc) and the reactions of his colleagues. That part of his statement was
deleted no doubt because it was not relevant to the causes of the disaster. Another
statement referred to the duties performed by Special Constables on the day of the
disaster. The officer expressed opinions to the effect that Special Constables should be
confined to traffic point duties. That part of his statement was deleted, no doubt because it
was opinion not evidence. One statement has a note attached which says that the officer
declined to delete parts of it.

Also in the archive is a letter dated 7 June 1989 from Mr Mervyn JONES, Assistant Chief
Constable, West Midlands Police, to Mr David BRUMMELL, Treasury Solicitor. Mr
Brummell was one of the team who assisted Lord Taylor in his enquiry. I attach a copy of
Mr Jones’ letter. The opening sentence is pertinent to this matter and I quote it in full;

       “You will recall that in the early stages, because of the slowness of the supply of
       written recollections from South Yorkshire officers, it was agreed that we would take
       from them their initial submissions which would be later superseded by their signed
       final versions, after they had been checked by the appropriate legal advice”.

I attach a copy of Mr Brummell’s reply, also dated 7 June 1989. Mr Brummell recognises
that “expressions of opinion were removed from the first versions”. He also says, “it would
not be appropriate to use the original statement for the purpose of the inquiry when this has
been superseded by a subsequent statement”.

The conclusion I draw from this is that the existence of the “recollections” was known to
Lord Taylor’s team and there was no aspect of suppressing evidence. It is a matter for
your Lordship to decide whether Inspector Calvert has “fresh evidence” to offer but my
opinion is that Inspector Calvert was not conversant with what happened and has
misunderstood a perfectly open and proper procedure.

I hold a similar view of Inspector Calvert’s statement that officers were coached in the
evidence to give. In chapter 18 of his interim report, Lord Taylor comments specifically on
the evidence of police officers (paragraphs 279 and 280). Lord Taylor said, "... I must
report that for the most part the quality of their (police officers) evidence was in inverse
proportion to their rank ... the senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
witnesses ... neither their handling of problems on the day nor their account of it in
evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their rank.”

As a police officer, it gives me no comfort to say that Lord Taylor clearly found some police
witnesses lacking. He was more than capable of determining the truth of what he heard
and had good lawyers to help him.

I think it naive of Inspector Calvert to confuse briefing with coaching. To even attempt to
manipulate witnesses, about to face such a rigorous process with so much hard evidence
(videos, photographs), would have been foolish as well as criminal.
In the spirit of openness that is the hallmark of Mr Wells’ style, he briefed Her Majesty’s
Inspector of Constabulary, Mr John STEVENS QPM, LLB, MPhil, CIMgt, on these
developments. I am sending this letter to him to bring him up to date.

The Chief Constable is determined that any report which even hints at new evidence
should be put before your Lordship and that such notifications should be made at the
earliest opportunity. For this reason I report these matters to you with only very limited
research. I am confident that additional research would shed further light on Inspector
Calvert’s comments. If you wish me to undertake that research, or to assist your staff in
that work, I will be glad to assist.

Yours faithfully




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
WINCKWORTH & PEM BERTON                                                                                                              INCORPORATING            SHERWOOD & Co

SOLICITORS A ND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                                     35 GREAT PETER STREET
  Our ref:                  NAFO/22278-1                                                                                             WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                                                     LONDON SWIP 3LR
  Your ref:                 ACC/ID/NMH
                                                                                                                                     DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                                     FAX       0171-593 5099
  M r I Daines BA(Hons) Dip. Ed.                                                                                                     TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
  Assistant C hief Constable
  South Yorkshire Police
  Police Headquarters
                                                                                                                                     3 September 1997
  Snig Hill
  Sheffield S3 8LY


  Dear M r Daines

  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Scrutiny

  M any thanks for your letter o f 29th August. 1 have now had an opportunity o f talking to
  Peter M etcalf o f Hammond Suddards. He was extremely useful and gave me all the
  necessary information about the provenance o f the Phillips Report.

  He convinced me that it was indeed an expert report produced with litigation in mind. It
  was referred to in evidence and it was disclosed in proceedings which were eventually
  settled. As such its status was potentially privileged in the sense that, until it was put in
  evidence, it would have been possible for South Yorkshire Police to claim legal professional
  privilege in relation to it. Now that privilege has been waived by its disclosure in those
  initial proceedings it is a relevant document which would have to be disclosed in any future
  proceedings.

  I have read it in detail now. Incidentally when I spoke to M r Davies I had not had time to
  read it and I apprehended from the way I had been instructed that it may have contained
  material which would be damaging to South Yorkshire Police. Instead, o f course, it contains
  a good deal o f fairly robust defence material on behalf o f the police.

  A t the moment you are minded not to produce the document to Ms Adlington and whilst
  you would be perfectly entitled not to produce it in the sense that she has no right to
  documentation, that stance is contrary to your expressed policy on the material which you
  are holding and it is my legal opinion tlwt there is no viable privilege which would protect
  this document.

  Ms Adlington now knows o f the existence o f the document and she will probably continue
  to press for it until a copy is made available. As 1 know little about Ms Adlington and
  precisely w hat she stands for I do not want to express a view on whether tactically it would
  be sensible to let her have the report now or later.

  I do not think the background documentation relating to the Phillips Report is nearly so
  important as I had previously thought it was but if there are any letters commissioning him
  to do this work then I should, in fullness of time, be provided with copies of them.


PA RTN ERS                                                                           H E A D O F TA X
N IC H O LA S O W STON         M IC H A E L TH A TC H ER        HU GH M A C D O U G A LD       C H R ISTO PH ER V INE                R O B E R T BO TKA I           G E O R G E BULL*
F R A N K RO BSO N OBE         A L ISO N G O RLO V              JOH N REES                     R O GER FITTON                        PETER GERM AIN
BRIA N H O O D                 STE PHEN W IG GS                 PET ER W IL LIA M S            PA U L IRVING                         SIM ON EA STW O O D            CONSULTANT
PA U L M OR RIS                N IC H O LA S W ELC H             A N D R EW M URRAY             RO N A LD FA RRA NTS                                                AN TH O N Y TA YLO R

The firm [s a m em ber or          , an international netw ork of lawyers. *Non.solicitor. The firm is regulated by The Law Society in the conduct of investment business.
                                            -   2   -




The other aspect which I am not quite clear about is the role o f Brian Alderman who was
also listed as one o f the people I should contact in your letter. I did ask M r M etcalf what
his relevance was and he did not think that I would benefit from talking to him on the
subject o f the status o f the Phillips Report.

Yours sincerely




N A F OWSTON
                                                       M N DAVIES,            OBE LLB BA
                                                               Assistant Chief Constable




J D Phillips QPM BA (Econ)                                                     ACC(SS)/EMP
Chief Constable                                                               19 August 1997
Kent County Constabulary
Sutton Road
Maidstone
KENT
ME15 9BZ




Dear Mr Phillips

Hillsborough Disaster Scrutiny

Following our conversation yesterday, I enclose a copy of your report, together with a letter
received from our Solicitor, Mr Owston, explaining how he feels about any privilege that
would be attached to your report.

Additionally, I have been in touch with the solicitors to the apportionment action to which
your report was germane. Their view is that it would be possible to claim privilege but that
there is nothing contained in your report which is prejudicial to South Yorkshire any more
than is already known and it could be released. This would be in accord with Richard
Wells' statement on openness and assisting Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny.

Yours sincerely




                                                                            Tel:
                                                                    Direct Line:
                                                                    Direct Fax:
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                       CONFIDENTIAL

                                                      REF:           LS/APW/LCP

FROM: Alan Walker, Force Solicitor                    DCU/DEPT:      Legal Services

TO:      ACC (Staff Services) Mr Davies               EXT:          8780

                                                      DATE:          19 August 1997



SUBJECT:              HILLSBOROUGH - THE PHILLIPS REPORT




I refer to the telephone conversation on Monday. A request has been made by the solicitor to the
"families support group" for a copy of this report.

I understand that the Phillips Report was commissioned at the request of Mr Peter Wright. Mr
Phillips was the secretary of the Football Hooliganism Committee. I understand that it contains
professional expert opinion instead of or perhaps rather more than it summarises matters of fact.
It was envisaged that the report might be used in connection with civil proceedings.

Whether a document of this kind is to be accorded legal professional privilege depends upon the
character of the document and the purposes for which it was brought into existence at the outset,
i.e. whether it was directly in contemplation of pending litigation. The courts had recognised that
the public interest in the proper administration of justice may well demand disclosure of vital items
of evidence, so that privilege may only be claimed where the preparation for the purpose of
litigation can be shown clearly to be " the dominant purpose" for the preparation of the report.
Moreover the High Court has a residual discretion to investigate what is the dominant purpose and
decide accordingly upon the merits of disclosure in the public interest. Furthermore it is not
conclusive, as a matter of law, that a document purports on the face of it to have been prepared
for such a purpose. Considerable care needs to be given to whether the Phillips Report might
genuinely qualify as a document of legal privilege or on the other hand whether the public interest
prevails.

The possibility that the Phillips Report would attract such privilege was addressed in a meeting with
Mr Daines last week. As indicated I should be pleased to research this matter further and contact
Peter Metcalfe, should it be necessary.




Alan Walker
Force Solicitor

cc     Mr Daines, ACC (L& T)
WINCKWORTH & PEM BERTON                                                                                                                      IN C O R P O R A T IN G   SHERWOOD & Co

SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                                             35 GREAT PETER STREET
                                                                                                                                             WESTMINSTER
  Our ref:               NAFO
                                                                                                                                             LONDON SWIP 3LR
  Your ref:
                                                                                                                                             DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                                             FAX       0171-593 5099
 PC Ken Greenway                                                                                                                             TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
 South Yorkshire Police
 Discipline and Complaints
 50 W indsor Road
                                                                                                                                             18 August 1997
 SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


 Dear M r Greenway

 H illsborough D isaster Scrutiny

 I refer to our telephone conversation on Friday afternoon and the two earlier conversations
 I had with M r Davies.

 The subject o f this letter is the status o f the Inquiry and Report by J D Phillips BA (econ)
 dated August 1990, then Deputy Chief Constable o f Devon and Cornwall constabulary and
 now Chief Constable o f Kent. It is also written in the light o f M r Daines’ letter o f 8th
 August 1997 when he tells M r Bone o f the Scrutiny unit at the Home Office that I am
 advising South Yorkshire Police on whether the Phillips Inquiry and Report should be
 available to Ms Adlington.

 M r Phillips’ Report does not say on the face o f it that it was compiled for the predominant
 purpose o f dealing with actual or anticipated civil actions against South Yorkshire Police.
 It does present M r Phillips as an expert in policing public order events and dealing with
 large crowds and at clause 1.3 it states

 "as Secretary to the ACPO Sub-Committee I prepared and presented Police evidence to both
 the Inquiry conducted by M r Justice Popplewell and the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice
 Taylor".

 There is nothing on the face o f the Phillips’ Jtaquiry which would obviously make it
 privileged. Nevertheless the task which M r Phillips was commissioned to undertake and his
 letters o f instruction might well have this effect. I have also now seen a letter from M r
 Phillips, as Chief Constable o f Kent, to M r Daines dated 30th July 1997. In that letter he
 says that he was asked to write...

 "a professional expert opinion which might be relied upon in the civil proceedings which
 were anticipated."

 Legal professional privilege would mean that the document could be withheld even if the
 anticipated litigation did not materialise, if the case itself was adjudicated on, judgement was
 given or if the case was settled o r compromised. Once the privilege is established it
 continues to run.                                    ~


PARTNERS                                                                                                                                                                       HEAD O F TAX
N IC H O L A S O W STON            M IC HA EL T H A T C H E R          HU GH M A C D O U G A LD            CH R IST O PH E R VINE              R O B E R T B O TKA I           G E O R G E B U LL*
F R A N K RO B SO N OBE            A L ISO N GO RLO V                  JOH N REES                          R O G E R FITTO N                   PET ER GE RM A IN
BR IA N HO OD                      S TE PH EN W IG GS                  PET ER W ILLIAM S                   PA U L IRV IN G                     SIM ON EA STW O O D             CONSULTANT
PA U L M ORRIS                     N IC H O LA S W ELC H               A N D R EW M U R RA Y               RO N A L D FA RRA NTS                                               A N TH O N Y TA Y LO R


The firm is a m em ber of S S E £ £ E 5 i2 > an international network of lawyers, *Noft<solicitor, The firm Is regaiated by T he Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business.
                                             -   2   -




I have read the Phillips Inquiry and Report in detail over the weekend and its tenor is very
much that o f a specialist piece o f expert "police" evidence. I now understand its context
very much better. Provided you can show it came into existence to support South Yorkshire
Police in any civil proceedings I am confident that you can and should claim legal
professional privilege in relation to it.

I think I need to have a reasonably thorough understanding o f what litigation was threatened,
what litigation has been adjudicated on or settled and what litigation is still pending. I f the
Phillips Report is treated as a privileged document, then when discovery was given in
whatever litigation has taken place, the Report should have been referred to and it should
have been listed as one o f those documents in respect o f which privilege was claimed.

It may be that the existence o f this Report was not disclosed because it is always possible
that your Solicitors were unaware o f its existence. That situation probably could be
explained. W hat could not be explained is if the Report had been disclosed and no claim
to privilege had been made.

It may be that the Solicitor to the Police authority who was responsible for the conduct o f
any o f this litigation and/or the partner or person dealing with the matter in Hammond
Suddards would be the correct person to brief me.

I do not yet feel sufficiently informed o f all the surrounding circumstances to advise on a
formal response to Ms Adlington. The sort o f factors outlined in this letter are amongst my
concerns but there could be others. Are there any other Reports or Inquiries which I should
be aware o f and are there other categories o f evidence which you treat as privileged?

The other element that I am concerned about is the interaction between my role on behalf
o f South Yorkshire Police and the Scrutiny and the advice and steps that you have already
had and that you are already taking where Messrs Hammond Suddards are acting and where
your insurers are involved. Obviously if I advise or do something which conflicts with a
policy point which has been taken by those acting for your insurers, a material consequence
could result as far as the insurer’s liability is concerned I would not want to be interfering
or advising in any way that could effect that liability or in turn damage the conduct o f cases
already being handled on your behalf.

Yours sincerely,




N A F O W tun
            : Qd d               660SSGS                 I i 10




    WINCKWORTH & PEM BERTON                                                                                                                                         IN C O R K M A T IN G         SHERWOOD & Co

    SOLICITORS A N D PARLIAMENTARY AG EN TS
                                                                                                                                                                    35 GREAT PETER STREET
         Our ref:                     NAFO                                                                                                                          WESTMINSTER
         Your ref:                                                                                                                                                  LONDON SW1P3LR

                                                                                                                                                                    DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                                                                    FAX       0171-593 5099
         PC Ken Greenway                                                                                                                                            TELEPHONE 0171-593 5004)
         South Yorkshire Police
         Discipline and Complaints
         .50 W indsor Road
         SHEFFIELD SB SUB                                                                                                                                           IS August 1997



        Dear M r Greenway

         Hillsborough D isaster Scrutiny

        I refer to our telephone conversation on Friday afternoon and the two earlier conversations
        I had with M r Davies.

        The subject of this letter is the status o f the Inquiry and Report by J D Phillips BA (econ)
        dated August 1990, then Deputy Chief Constable o f Devon and Cornwall constabulary and
        now C hief Constable o f Kent. It is also written in the light o f Mr Dam es’ letter o f 8th
        August 1997 when he tells M r Bone of the Scrutiny unit at the Home Office that I am
        advising South Yorkshire Police on whether the Phillips Inquiry and Report should be
        available to Ms Arlington,

        M r Phillips Report does not say on the face o f it that it was compiled fo r the predominant
        purpose o f dealing with actual or anticipated civil actions against South Yorkshire Police.
        It does present Mr Phillips as an expert in policing public order events and dealing with
        large crowds and at clause 1.3 it states

        as Secretary to the ACPO Sub-Committee I prepared and presented Police evidence to both
       the Inquiry conducted by M r Justice Popplewell and the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice
       Taylor”.

       There is nothing on the face o f the Phillips’ Inquiry which would obviously make it
       privileged. Nevertheless the task which M r Phillips was commissioned to undertake and his
       le tte r o f instruction might well have this effect. I have also now seen a letter from M r
       Phillips, as C hief Constable o f Kent, to Mr Daines dated 30th July 1997. In that letter he
       says that he was asked to write...

        a professional expert opinion which might be relied upon in the civil proceedings which
       were anticipated,"

       Legal professional privilege would mean that the document could be withheld even if the
       anticipated litigation did not materialise, if the case itself was adjudicated on, judgem ent was
       given or if the case was settled or compromised, Once the privilege is established it
       continues to run.


    Partners
    M C H I X A 5 OW STON               M ICHA EL T H A TC H ER                                                                                                                                           BEAD O F T a *
                                                                              HUOH M AC D O U G A M 3                    C H R IS T O P H E R V I S E               ROBERT B O T K A i                    G E O I tO £ HULL*
    FRANK RO BSO N O&E                  A LISO N G O RLO V                    JOH N R £ £ £
    B R IA N MOOD                                                                                                        K O GER FITTO N                            FETEfe G eR M A EH
                                        STE PHEN W I 0 0 5                    PET&R W IL LIA M S                         PA U L m V r N O                           Si m o n e a s t w o o o              CONSULTANT
    PAUL M ORRIS                        N ICH O LA S W ELC H                  Andrew Murray                              R O N A L D F A R R A N tS                                                       A N TH O N Y TAYLOK
    Tbu ft .-on t* * n e a t e r of          tlr iaicr nallna*1 network at i a w y f n   'W i - l e l k i t a r . Tfc? flfM is fenolam d l)» TS* L A t S u d a ij !n Ok w i d i l S d T i b n f t H H t IHUtotlL

-0/T0'd              £S8£S£St7lT06                                          01                                   CaSQ’SDD HiiO'i>ON I['1 WOdd                                                     £1 :£T           L6 bX-0 nb~8 I
   3 0 0 ' 3 0 Wd   BG0SS6S        I£ I0                                                                     0 n U 81
£ 0 'd -piOI




                                                      _2



           have read the Phillips Inquiry and Report in detail over the weekend and its tenor is very
         much that o f a specialist piece o f expert "police" evidence. I now understand its context
         very much better. Provided you can show it came into existence to support South Yorkshire
         Police m any civil proceedings I am confident that you can and should claim leaal
         professional privilege in relation to it.

         I think I need to have a reasonably thorough understanding o f what litigation was threatened,
         ™ t litigation ^ keen adjudicated on or settled and what litigation is still pending. If the
         Phillips Report is treated as a privileged document, then when discovery was given in
         whatever litigation has taken place, the Report should have been referred to and it should
         have been listed as one o f those documents in respect o f which privilege was claimed.

         If may be that the existence o f this Report was not disclosed because it is always possible
         that your Solicitors were unaware o f its existence. That situation probably could be
         explained. What could not be explained is if the Report had been disclosed and no claim
         to privilege had been made.

         It may be that the Solicitor to the Police authority who was responsible for the conduct o f
         any o f this litigation and/or the partner or person dealing with the matter in Hammond
         Suddards would be the correct person to brief me.

        I do not yet feel sufficiently informed o f all the surrounding circumstances to advise on a
        forma! response to Ms Adlington. The sort o f factors outlined in this letter are amongst my
        concerns but there could be others. Are there any other Reports or Inquiries which I should
        be aware o f and are there other categories o f evidence which you treat as privileged?

        The other element that 1 am concerned about is the interaction between my role on behalf
        of South Yorkshire Police and the Scrutiny and the advice and steps that you have already
         ad and that you are already taking where Messrs Hammond Suddards are acting and where
        your insurers are involved. Obviously if I advise or do something which, conflicts with a
        policy point which has been taken by those acting for your insurers, a material consequence
        could result as far as the insurer’s liability is concerned. I would not w ant to be interfering
        or advising in any way that could effect that liability or in turn damage the conduct o f cases
        already being handled on your behalf

        Yours sincerely,




        N A F Ot     J A \J F I1




 20/20‘d       SS8£2S2l7lT06               Oi          CGSD1303   H id Q !t> O N Ii¥!   WQdd   PI =£1   ib6I-my-8T
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 528
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028



Superintendent J J Charles                                     Your reference:
Discipline and Complaints
South Yorkshire Police                                         Our reference:
Windsor Road
SHEFFIELD S8 8UB                                               Date:              15 August 1997




                                   C v /f,



HILLSBOROUGH




Thank you for your recorded delivery letter o f 14 August covering photograph and video
material and Mr Phillips’s report. I confirm receipt o f all this as itemised in your letter.


                    stitwcAOAU




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G:\HILLSBORWAIN\SYORKS.057
HILLSBOROUGH

NOTE FOR FILE

At the request of Mr Owston of Winkkworth I contacted him at 11.20 am Friday 15 August in
response to his letter of the 14 August expressing concern over the legal professional
privilege attached to the Phillips Inquiry. He had no knowledge of its status or use and was
concerned by whether or not, in line with the policy of openness, it should be released to
Ms Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


We had a brief discussion about its relevance and in order to qualify its status I agreed to
speak to Mr Metcalfe of Hammond Suddards who had looked at this matter.


At 11.30 am I spoke to Peter Metcalfe. He pointed out that the Phillips Report never had
any need with the cases of litigation against us but was set to establish the element of fault
and liability between the force, Sheffield Wednesday and the engineers.            It was never
claimed as privilege and made available to the solicitors for the club and the engineers.
Mr Phillips was never called in evidence as the matter was settled outside court and
therefore never became public knowledge. In terms of the report it could be considered as
expert and therefore there was no obligation to produce this to the other side.           Whilst
knowledge of it existed that situation could still pertain in relation to the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.


At 11.40 am I rang Mr Owston again and indicated the position to him. It was obvious from
my conversation there was some confusion on his part and he acknowledged a lack of
understanding, having only read the Taylor report and now the Phillips report and felt he
needed to see the whole matter in context. He did see the Phillips report as pressing and
requiring attention and asked that arrangements be made for him to receive a full briefing
from Constable Greenway.


Ken Greenway was left to arrange this as soon as possible.




M N Davies


ACC(SS)/SW
15 August 1997
                                              v cr'              OosrWv>_                "             i^jcvK-

             L-                  1       j\       1 0       \h            ^       <s c

....   V ..D .       f~ ..                          ""
v><2.                                e^vx^. 4




                                                                              '    V     7 .u r f y r ^




             ^       v




         f       V           ^       y        ^         ^        ' ...i       -    f
                                                                                                  /V
I llllllllll'llllp illlllll
    j               puts*

            r        ^
                I    m >vo a           *-> ^                  cn               o                 ... ..^ ''~L |

        > N?         * *-.             *        lj   \        /        f           ^                \       ^

        ' Vj ’ 0 ^ ' /                          ~                                      ~~L Ss«.
        ^           /I ,       lo          /V                              v \,            /-V          '   V '

. _ . y L             V j   , . .„ „   s/~                    '" * "       f                   1 / y : ._       <j



__L— P_. / V                    0                    .^                                ^          . v_."C .          ._..


    \                                                     V            ^               ^                             X
                    £.$     ). /^r._.v. y? _ ^                                 *!T5^       K                *______
   . . . . . . . . . . . .


 WINCKWORTH & PEM BER TO N                                                                                            CTcoaPOJUTtNG SHERWOOD & Co
 SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                     35 GREAT PETER STREET
    Our ref:            NAFO                                                                                         WESTMINSTER
    Your ref:                                                                                                        LONDON SW1P3LR

                                                                                                                     ox        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                     FAX       0171-593 509S>
                                                                                                                     TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
    PC Ken Greenway
    South Yorkshire Police
    Discipline and Complaints
    50 W indsor Road                                                                                                 14 August 1997
    SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


   By F ax: 0114 252 3855

   Dear M r Greenway

    Hillsborough D isaster Scrutiny

   I am acknowledging receipt o f M r Daines5 letter o f 8th August enclosing a copy o f the
   Inquiry and Report by J D Phillips, Deputy Chief Constable o f Devon and Cornwall m
   August 1990, and two ring binder volumes amounting to a response to H om e Office
   enquiries resulting from the drama/documentary and three videos.

  I also note the contents o f M r Daines’ letter to M r Bone in the Home Office o f Sth August.
  O f course the Phillips Inquiry Report had been supplied to the Scrutiny team but M r Daines
  is concerned as to whether that documentation should be made available to Ms Ann
  Adlington on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group,

  I have only looked at the very beginning o f the Phillips Inquin/ Report but it does not
  introduce itself in a way which would firmly suggest that it could be the subject o f legal
  professional privilege. As mentioned on the telephone, legal professional‘privilege is
  available where any document or evidence comes into existence with a predominant purpose
  o f its being used in legal proceedings.

              ';rth e PMmPs lflcluiry Report does not proclaim legal professional privilege at its
  outset o; u die whole tenor o f the Report does not put it .in that category, the only other
  possibility is that the letter or correspondence commissioning the Report m ight give it that
  status^ Can you therefore please investigate how the Phillips Report came to be
  commissioned so that I can decide whether there might be a claim o f legal professional
  privilege m respect o f it,                                                       v


  Although it is not strictly part o f my instructions, I also need to consider the s ta t e o f the
  Phillips Report in any litigation which is under way. I understand from you that there are
  two sets o f litigation which are current, one involves a test case o f six claims b y "rescuers"
  and th e n case is subject to an appeal to the House o f Lords, I do not think the Phillips
  Report would be relevant to that case because presumably the test case relates to claims for
  compensation for suffering, shock and trauma in the rescue process as rescuers,


PAkTN ZXS
NICHOLAS* O W ST O N
FRAMK RO B SO N OBF-
                             MIC H -,ki. T H A T C H f ft
                             A U S O N OORJ.OV
                                                            urr-
                                                            i:     ^CDQUOaUJ           Ch r is t o p h e r v in e   B O B E R ? BfJTKA I
                                                                                                                                                  H E A D O F TA X
                                                                                                                                                  GEORGS 6 a i ‘
BfciAM HO OD                                                                           R O G ER M T T O N           ’      " G E R M A S fs
                             S TE PH EN W?r,(35             r■       '■L i A M i       P     i, IRVING                     ■: t s ( ; y W ClQVi
PA UL MGftHJS                N IC H O LA S W ELC H                          'r:A
                                                                   - -.I . F.    v     5.T.'-lLDFA5fRAN7‘,                                        C D F f fiU L tA K T
                                                                                                                                                  A N T H O N Y r A Vi.OR
 ? n>’_a if «      uf
                                                                                     - ,          ?w T i r     ;•

                2S8£ZSct?r:~'6                              01                                      ~;.dun                 WOdrd                  :ST       I b b T - Q H U - F i-
    3 0 0 ' J.. Jd   660SS6S      KiI0                                                            8 I : S I i6<       Bfib t? I
5 0 'd "IblO l




                                                      -   2   -




         The other litigation is apparently being pursued by a firm in Liverpool called W akeman
         Rutherfords and if 1 understood the position correctly from M r Daines, it is being defended
         on your behalf by Messrs Hammond Suddards. Even if legal professional privilege had been
         claimed in relation to the Phillips Report in that civil litigation, its existence should have
         been disclosed, It therefore follows that its existence should have been disclosed to
         Hammond Suddards. Can you confirm that is the case?

         I notice, in passing, that Ms Adlington was not aware o f the existence o f the Phillips Report
         until recently and it she was liaising closely with the active litigation which is going on and
         being pursued by W akeman Rutherfords, I would have expected her to have been aware of
         the existence o f that Report, It was because o f this that I thought I should contact you to
         see vi hat the state o f disclosure o f that Report really was.

         ^ there are good grounds for withholding the Phillips Report on grounds o f legal
         professional privilege, then the advice in that direction from me will be clear. I f there axe
         no grounds for withholding it then South Yorkshire Police will have to operate according
         tn th e ir nAhnj/ pin thic       pnWjo^+    "k'fy n-*^^, ^ * * . - < 4 - * , - . -prnliv-r -mho tlicit. I~uJ;|
         disclosure o f all material you were holding' and all the material which had been made
         available to Lord Justice Taylor would be disclosed to any interested party once they
         established that they had an interest which was more than just frivolous. If that is the case
         and in the absence o f any claim for privilege, I would have thought that it should be
         disclosed. However 1 can quite see that begs the question o f why it has not been disclosed
         in the past when you have adopted a policy o f full disclosure.

         Yours sincerely,




         N A F OWSTON




                SS8£2S217TT06            01               CGS3;       :dOl'i>DMin      WGfcid     S£:£T      i66T-9nu-1?T
  **    Tx   CONFIRMfiTION    R EP OR T   **    ri o    r     15   fllJG   ’ 97   16:17   P A G E . 01

                                                                    P




DATE     TI ME               Tn/FROM           MODE         MI N/ SEC      PGS     STATUS
 8/15    16:18 9 0 1 7 1 5 9 3 3 0 9 9         G3 — S        0 1 “ El       02       OK
                                    South Yorkshire

                                   POLICE
                                   JUSTICE                      with           COURAGE


                 DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                             50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                                   S8 8UB

                                      TELEPHONE. (0114)2500700
                                         FAX: (0114)2523855


TO:                                                                  .................................




FOR THE ATTENTION OF:                       R i e K .. Ounf ev




COMMENTS            tJbckA                          <K          <*J fa .                  ( lit * / if c l          7

. IfS M e .AM. 0 ^ * 0 ...............................................................................................




FROM.



 NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE):

 IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT. (0114) 2523861
           S o u th York
           POLICE                                        Ian Daines, BA(Bons) Dip.Ed.
                                                               A ssisicm t Ch ie f Const ah Ie
           JUSTICE       with     COURAGE




Mr N Owston                                                                   Ref: ACC/ID/NMH
Winckworth Pemberton Solicitors
34 Great Peter Street                                                         8 August 1997
Westminster
LONDON
SW 1P3LP




Dear Mr Owston

Hiilsborough D isaster S crutiny


i attax:h a letter dated 6 August from Mr Chris Bone, Hillsborough Disaster Scrutiny, I also
attach my reply to it.

( enclose a copy of the Phillips report and the other material to which I refer in my Setter I
would be obliged to receive your advice on what may be properly released. As discussed
on 8 August, I would be pleased for you to retain Counsel as you think suitable.

Yours sincerely




tan Daines
Assistant Chief Constable


Enc




           Police H eadquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                                           Direct Line: 0114 2523405
            Tel: 0114 2202020                                              Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
                                                         Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                               Assistant Chief Constable




Ref: ACC/I D/NMH/HD114

1 August 1997

Mr N Owston
Winckworth Pemberton Solicitors
34 Great Peter Street
Westminster
LONDON
SW1P3LP




Dear Mr Owston

Further to your visit on Monday 28 July 1997, please find enclosed a copy of the video
drama documentary shown on Granada Television on Thursday 5 December 1996.

If you require any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable




                                                                          Direct Line: 0114 2523405
            Tel: 0114 2202020                                             Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
Mr C Bone                                                                  ACC/I D/NMH
Room 528
Home Office                                                                23 July 1997
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr Bone

Report bv David Phillips on Hillsborough Disaster

I attach a report dated August 1990 by Mr David Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of
Devon and Cornwall Constabulary, now Chief Constable of Kent.

The provenance of the report is a little unclear. At paragraph 2.1, Mr Phillips says;

       “On 20th October, 1989, I was asked to consider documentary material emanating
       from the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice TAYLOR into the disaster at
       Hillsborough. I have confined my research to a consideration of documentary
       evidence although I have spoken to other senior police officers, serving and retired,
       in relation to this match and other issues in general, (none of whom had any direct
       involvement in the game at Hillsborough).”

In response to your request for “fresh evidence” to be submitted to you, I forward this
document. I do not believe it represents fresn evidence but is principally another
perspective on pre-existing evidence. However, as with all similar material, the Chief
Constable would prefer to lay material before you rather than pre-judge the material’s
freshness. I will cause enquiries to be made into the background that led to this report and
will contact you again as soon as I have more information.

I would be obliged if you could acknowledge receipt of this letter.

Yours sincerely




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable
                                                           -
           S °u th Yorkshire
                                              ~ V ix jK ^ J i                Io l^ ' s                  ( jo
           POLICE
                                                                    a q jl


                                               \% J ^ S L 0 7          ^SV      a sp U L A      6 V ^ o M m jiA
           JUSTICE       with    COURAGE
                                               if    L /CAA        m    Q JU AJJL^        C X A jy   fV \ C M X

                                              } tu i A A           a jls u iI     't 'f o c o    /ju p b y     c i/)

Wi t h   C o m p l i m e n t s                 Ck                                       L eM Z z^        -


           Ian Daines B.A. (Hons.), Dip Ed.
           Assistant Chief Constable
           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY                         Direct Line:
           Tel: 0114 276 8522
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                  SNIG H IL L
                                                                                                  S H E FF IE L D S 3 8LV
                                                                                                  TELE PHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                                                  T E LE X 547996



       A L L C O M MUNICATIO NS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
       "T H E CHIEF CONSTABLE"

                                                                                                  VOUR REFERENCE

                                                                                                 OUR REFERENCE

                                                                                                  DATE




L                                                                          J

h                v«rr i

     P U a^ * .        *                 ^                                                        L ^e       j/r—




    (rv^ Cy(-^a^ct *L




                                <V„                       2    f * * * '- *             r *      ^


                                                    l~ /»-**firt^L                 V M r ffx    ffr ro r *        9 - +■

                                                    tfL ^ o                        V                              '<■ ¥ • $ f

                                                    /_C-£vt-s>                                                    ^              ^7-
                                                                       /

                                l ”e.<c£^                                          cM -'VlC'Cn-c-t^^




                                                                               t




                                         0                      £) .
            T HE OFFICER D EA LIN G W IT H THIS CORRESPONDENCE I S ................................................. EXTENSION

    ADM/1
                                                                                                                                      ■ y- v
                                                                                                                                           ; ••




                                                                                                            00/AT                V.      '
                                          Chief Superintendent Denton                                          JkM t t a M i l in mt—
                                                                                                            tfA M
                                                                                                            nilQqalfvtrt
                                          Deputy Chief Constable                                            16                          1989
                                                                                                                                                          •; ;•

                                                       MR D PHILLIPS - POLICE ADVISER TO MUNICIPAL MUTUAL INSURANCE


                                          You are aware of the appointment of Mr Phillips, Deputy Chief Constable,
                                          Devon and Cornwall, as adviser/assessor to our Insurers with regard to the
                                          football ground policing aspects of our case re. Hillsborough. I have
                                          been approached by Peter Metcalf to assist in arranging, at Mr Phillips'
                                          request, a visit by Phillips to the Hillsborough ground in order that he
                                          can familiarise himself with the lay-out. He would like to be accompanied
                                          by someone who has knowledge of the ground but who was not involved in the
                                          policing of the Seal-Final.

                                          Permission has been given for this ground inspection in negotiation between
                                          Peter Metcalf and the Sheffield Wednesday solicitors.

                                          Mr Phillips has indicated to Peter Metcalf that he would like to come on
                                          Saturday18 November, meeting his escort at 10.30 am at Snig Hill and
                                          arriving at the ground at 11.00 am. I have arranged for Superintendent
                                          Sleath to accompany Mr Phillips who does not require anyone else to be
                                          present. He is wishing to take photographs and measurements both inside
                                          and outside Leppings Lane and discuss normal policing arrangements for
                                          different areas of the ground. Superintendent Sleath, who was not involved
                                          in the arrangements for or the policing of the Semi-Final and who was not
                                          at the ground on the day, is ideally suited to accompany Mr Phillips,
                                          particularly as he is able to explain current policing practices for the
                                          ground.
                             •        .
                                          I have confirmed these arrangements with Mr Phillips.




                                          Chief Superintendent
                                          (Management Services)
                                 ..           ' ••'   •v ' :

                                                •- •   ..




               .
                     ■; '=




                                                                                                                  '   7                           ■       ;■




                                                                                                                                                      .    :
                                                       jr0         fe fc   tfi



■         -   .• .
                                                                                                  ,=                      7 :7/^                7 7 ;
    • ■                                                                                                                    - 'V- ;                 7
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                        •   -
                                                            • •-                                                                                           ■’
                                                            .
                                                                                                                          ■" V           ^: ,                  ;■
               *t e *




3END CONFIRMATION

                                                                DATE/TIME
                                                                                   1 4 -1 2 -8 9   1 1 :29AM
                                                                LOCAL I.D.
                                                                                              0742523409
                                                                LOCAL NAME
•** SEND ***                                                                  SYPOI— C. C. ’S_OFF ICE. ¥

     REMOTE STATION i .d .
                                      START TIME
                                                               DURATION
                                                                               COMMENT
                    744 340     1 4 -1 2 -8 9   1 1 :07AM       21’28”

                                                            TOTAL PAGES :

                                                                             XEROX TELECOPIER 7010




                                       <>w3

                              y fi^        PO u't», h e
                                                            U M 7



          <0            &>- r~c*-^-
TELEPHONE:                                                                    SOITH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                                        POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                                                    SNIG HILL

FAX: (0742)   523409                                                                SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE
CHIEF CONSTABLE



                                         FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION




DATE                                                           ....................


TO
                          CC                              ■<    C o£aJ


FOR

ATTENTION

OF


COMMENTS                                                                   • £ # 0 : . : . . 3 . h ltS J l..............

                                 . .’j p t t .v b & M k j.. M f c . M * t .




 FROM                  c^st^r          .^£KK]b<i...... ...................................

 TEL NO                   0 7 tf-7 _                  ^     ..
                                                           $ !* ? > £ ,.

 NO OF                    r lw e ^ r v ...,OrO.C...............................................
 PAGES
 (INCLUDING THIS PAGE)



 IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY PLEASE CONTACT :-

 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
 TEL NO: 0742 768522 EXTENSION 3409
robert   Wa l l a c e c r e a s e r



Chief Inspector



Communications & Computer Department, Headquarters



I am a Chief Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police at present attached to

the Communications and Computer Development Department, Police Headquarters,

Snig Hill, Sheffield.

I have been a Police Officer for twenty years and have considerable

experience of Policing football matches.           I have performed the duty at the

 following five Football League grounds in South Yorkshire:

 Sheffield Wednesday (Hillsborough)

 Sheffield United (Bramall Lane)

 Rotherham United (Millmoor)

 Barnsley (Oakwell)

 Doncaster Rovers (Belle Vue)

 The bulk of this experience has been at Hillsborough, where I have worked at

 numerous football matches.           These have included Football Leagues and F.A. Cup

 Semi-Finals.

 Hillsborough is situated within the 'F' (Sheffield North) Division of the

 South Yorkshire Police.

 The first time I performed duty at Hillsborough for an F.A. Cup Semi-Final

  was as a uniform patrol Sergeant in 1977*

  In 1981 I was posted to 'F' Division (Sheffield North) as a uniform patrol

  Inspector and I remained within the Division until the end of 1987, during

  that time I frequently performed football duties at Hillsborough.
                                       -   2   -




I have been on duty at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium for the

F.A. Cup Semi-Final matches held in the last three years.

I have performed duty at most places within the ground, although the majority

of my experience has been at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Shortly after Hillsborough was selected as the venue for the Semi-Final

between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. I was contacted by

telephone by Chief Superintendent Mole, the then Divisional Commander of 'F'

Division, who confirmed my availability and requested that I work at the

match.   He stated that it would be his intention for me to work at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Eight days prior to the Semi-Final taking

place I received an Operation Order.       A comprehensive, yellow bound document

which contained details of how the event would be organised.       Over the next

 few days I made a detailed study of this document and, in particular, the

 areas of the ground where I would be supervising officers.

 On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the ground at

 approximately 9-30 a.m.   I was in possession of my Operation Order at this

 time.
 My areas of responsibility were for that part of the ground which was to be

 occupied, in the main, by Liverpool supporters and for the outside of the

 ground at the Leppings Lane end.

 The following Inspectors were allocated to my command with areas of

  responsibility as indicated below:-
                                     North Stand (upper and lower level).
  Inspector Woodward

  Inspector Bullas                     West Stand

                                       Leppings Lane Terrace and rear enclosure
  Inspector White

  Inspectors Sykes and Purdy           Leppings Lane turnstiles

  Inspectors Delaney and               Reserves

   Beresford
                                          -   3   -




I have previously personally performed duty at all the above locations at the

rank of Inspector.   I have previously worked at football matches with all the

above officers with the exceptions of Inspector Purdy.

The pre-match police briefing was given in the North Stand (Kop end) and

commenced at approximately 10.00 a.m.     It was a comprehensive briefing and

there was input from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, Inspector Sewell and

Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

Immediately following the briefing, I sought out all the above named

Inspectors and I persoanlly handed to them written (photocopy) details of

criminal intelligence which had been collated concerning people likely to

attend the match from both Liverpool and Nottingham.     I spoke to each of the

Inspectors and mentioned points which I considered to be of particular

importance as far as their own area of responsibility was concerned.       I knew

 that Inspectors Sykes and White both had vast experience of policing at

Hillsborough and intimate knowledge of the duties they had been

 allocated.

 Following the briefing until approximately 2.00 p.m. no matters of particular

 note took place.    I spent this time 'walking the ground' speaking to

 Inspectors, serial Sergeants and Constables.

 Additionally, I spoke to many of the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. stewards who I

 know (by sight but not name).     I noticed that these men appeared to be

 working at locations where I had previously seen them operate.     During the

 course of the morning I saw, and heard part of a briefing given by Inspector

 White to these stewards.    This briefing took place in the West Stand.

 It was my information that the first turnstiles would be opened at 12 noon.

 In fact a small number were opened prior to this and a few spectators entered

  at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and went into the Leppings Lane

  terraces in the centre pens.
                                         -   4   -




As people started to enter the stadium I could see the usual mixture of

supporters.    They were in good spirits and obviously looking forward to what

had been forecast as an interesting game between the two teams.

Shortly after 2.15 p.m. 1 visited Leppings Lane where I spoke to Inspector

Sykes.   There was a contingent of Liverpool supporters standing in Leppings

Lane on the opposite side of the road to the stadium.     We discussed the merit

of encouraging these people across the road to queue for entry to the

stadium.     Many of these were openly drinking from cans of beer and lager,

they were not at this time causing any trouble.      After dicussion we agreed

that such a course of action was not necessary as there was a reasonable

quantity of supporters already forming queues outside the turnstiles.

 Furthermore, it was considered that to move these people at this stage may

 inflame the crowd.

 As time progressed towards the scheduled kick off time it became became

 apparent that a large number of Liverpool supporters were still outside the

 ground in Leppings Lane and in the queues to the turnstiles.     I noticed at

 this time that the proportion of supporters who had obviously been drinking

 increased.    They were, however, at this time only a minority and were not

 causing any disruption.    Many of the fans who arrived were unsure of the

 geographical layout of the turnstiles which gave admittance to the North

 Stand, the Leppings Lane terraces and elevated section and the West Stand.

 The signs above the turnstiles were not clear and many fans were confused, a

  specific example of this was the alphabetic character displayed above the

  turnstile and the alphabetic character shown on the ticket as the gangway to

  be used for access to the West Stand were in apparent conflict.     It was

  necessary for Police Officers to give constant assistance in this

  respect.
                                        -   5   -




At approximately 2.30 p.m. I could see that difficulties were being

experienced in the build up to the turnstiles which were allocated to the

North Stand, the West Stand and the Leppings Lane turnstiles - all these

three locations are fed from Leppings Lane.         From this point until after

3.00 p.m. I continued to monitor and supervise the Leppings Lane end of the

ground on the outside.

I was with Inspector Sykes when he caused the flow of traffic to stop in

Leppings Lane in order to facilitate more opportunity for the ever increasing

pedestrian traffic to make progress.

I have considerable experience of policing this particular area and I could

see that the build up of supporters was later than usually the case and there

 appeared to be larger numbers.    The operation was frustrated more so by the

 presence of a considerable number of fans who had arrived in the vicinity of

 the ground, but were not in possession of tickets entitling them entry to

 what was an 'all ticket' match.    Furthermore, many Liverpool fans arrived at

 the Leppings Lane end of the ground in possession of tickets which entitled

 them admission to the Spion kop and attempted to seek approval to enter at

 the Leppings Lane end with friends who had legitimate tickets for that

 area.

 The situation outside the turnstiles, particularly those leading to the

 Leppings Lane terraces, was such that by approximately 2.40 p.m. a situation

 had arisen whereby there was a large crowd of supporters who were all pushing

  towards the turnstiles, but the turnstiles could not accept them quickly

  enough to permit entry to the ground.     The mood of this crowd was changing

  from a good natured crowd to a frustrated crowd who could perhaps see that

  they had little chance of gaining access prior to the start of the match.

  The proportion of spectators who had been drinking inceased as time

  progressed but they were outnumbered by people who did not exhibit any signs
                                        -   6   -




of drink.   Within this crowd there were at least two or three Police horses

who were attempting to stop the pushing.            It has always been my experience

that horses are able to control such a situation, but it was obvious in this

instance that this was not the case.

A Police Constable was allocated to the outside of each of the turnstiles for

the Leppings Lane terraces.   These officers were given the task of preventing

supporters entering the ground in possession of weapons, banners, alcohol

etc.    This searching action did not impede the rate of flow of spectators

through the turnstiles.   Because of the intense pressure from the surging

crowd, it was necessary to withdraw those officers from that position; a

decision taken by Inspector Purdy, which I fully supported.

With a view to reducing the area covered by the Police horses, I instructed

officers to close the gates which are situated away from the turnstiles next

to the river - I did this because fans were using this gate to get around the

horses.

The crush within the crowd was such that people were suffering and there was

the possibility of severe injuries taking place.            I saw two or three bodies

of young persons passed over the heads of members of the crowd, these people

either had, or were close to fainting.

At approximately 2.^5 p.m. I rejoined Inspector Sykes in Leppings Lane and we

 adopted a strategy of forming a line of Police horses at the rear of the

 crowd with a view to preventing the queues at the turnstiles becoming larger.

 This took some time to arrange.   There were gaps between one Police horse and

 the next one and I attempted to arrange for a Police Officer to 'plug' each

 gap.   Many supporters approached this line and forced their way through,

 despite firm advice not to do so.     I even saw a supporter crawl under the

 belly of a horse in order to breach the line.
                                       -   7   -




I could see that some people were climbing over the top of the turnstiles in

order to fain admittance to the stadium and at one point I recall seeing

Inspector Bennett CF' Division) on top of the wall above the turnstiles

serving the Leppings Lane terraces.

Some minutes later I attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could

not do so; there appeared to be a fault with my particular radio (a Pye PPX

personal hand held radio) in that it was receiving but I could not transmit.

I approached Police Constable Buxton who was at this time in a Police

Landrover.   This vehicle was parked in Leppings Lane and the officer was

 giving instructions to the supporters by means of a public address system.

 He was urging the spectators not to push forward.           I requested Police

 Constable Buxton to suggest to the Control Room that consideration be given

 to delaying the kick-off time of the match (his radio, a Motorola HT600E hand

 held radio, appeared to be functioning well).

 At approximately this time I was able to see that the large 'concertina'

 gates, known as 'A',        and 'C, had been opened and that a large proportion

  of the crowd surged forward through these gates.          These gates were only

  opened for a short period of time and I could see officers/stewards at the

  rear of the gates apparently struggling to close them, which they were

  subsequently able to do.    It is my impression that gate 'C remained open for

  a longer period than the others.    As a result of this action the pressure on

  the turnstiles reduced although supporters were still arriving at the ground.

  This action clearly had the result of easing the tension outside the

  turnstiles although the crowd there were still pushing forward.

  A short time later, I would estimate just after 3.00 p.m., there was a

   request for all officers to attend inside the ground to deal with an apparent

   invasion of the surface playing area.           I did not hear the specific radio

   transmission but I did hear officers around me saying words to the effect of
                                        -   8   -




'all officers inside - pitch invasion'.

I immediately attended inside the ground and went to the rear of the goal at

the Leppings Lane end of the stadium.       I could see that people were trapped

and that the gates from the centre pens were open and people were coming

through them.   There was considerable confusion.      Some supporters were

climbing over the fences, they were assisted to do so by the Police Officers

and by other supporters.    I assisted in the general activity of lifting

injured and apparently dead people from the Leppings Lane terraces onto the

playing area.   I was present at this location prior to a 'private' ambulance

arriving.   I gave instructions to some officers in an attempt to co-ordinate

what was happening.   I can recall, in particular, instructing Police

Constable Goodwill ('F' Division) to act as the Communications Officer for

Superintendent Greenwood.

A short time later I attended at the gymnasium situated inside the stadium.

I was there concerned in the organisation of a temporary mortuary.        My

primary tasks were ensuring that each victim brought inside was examined by a

 doctor to confirm death, and to allocate an individual Police Officer to each

 victim to deal with the formalities which would follow.

 I later acted as a logistical officer and was engaged in the liaison between

 the Police, Social Workers, relatives and identification       teams.   I continued

 with this work until retiring from duty at 5-00 a.m. the following morning.
                                                                            /    % / S


HARRY WHITE



INSPECTOR



HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION



9.00 am         On duty at Hammerton Road Police Station.         Full group present.

To ground in Police Transit D634.

9 .3O am        Gymnasium/Police Room.       Report presence draw radio.

9.45 am         North Stand forbriefing       by ChiefSuperintendent     Duckenfield.

10.00 am        Briefing.

10.15 am        Packed meal.

10.^5 am        Alone to Leppings       Laneterraces and    West Stand, because I have

been Inspector in charge of this end on a fairly regular basis since 1985*

I hold     a set of keys to the padlocks on inner gates and the main exit/

ingress     gates   A,   B   and   C.    Information   of   capacity   crowd,   therefore

padlocked six pen gates (one upstairs, five in terrace pens) to wall in the

open position.      Checked that two West Stand 'wing' emergency exit gates had

bolts    'shot' with gate in closed position but gates NOT padlocked.            Checked

storerooms and tunnel gates beneath West Stand (including switch gear room).

Quick physical check of terraces and elevated section for unwanted articles.

Area secure all okay.

11.10 am        Briefed serials 14 and 15 (from Barnsley) on terraces in front

of central tunnel and in two areas at rear West Stand behind turnstiles A-G

and 11-16.     (Note 9 and 10 turnstiles to be used for North Stand.            Blue gate

left open and C.C. barrier hung on hasp).              Brief per own notes of 14.4.89

scribbled on my briefing notes and covering mainly -
                                              -   2    -




    1.   SAFETY

    Evacuation    procedures     and   messages   and      identify    Police   Constables    with

    specific     gate     responsibilites    in       emergency     evacuation.       Other    E/E

    responsibilities.       Searching drink/weapons.

    2.   TV

    Individual behaviour on National TV and our own to monitor.                   Here to Police,

    not watch match.

    3.   PROPERTY CABIN

    Provision new porta-cabin for retaining seized items and procedure dealing

    property.

    4.   CASH SNATCH

    Last year's cash snatch at snack bar West Stand.                Showed physically location

    snack bars and included programme sellers and one thousand pound they would

    take and hold in cloth bags.

    5.   FIN 15’s

    Special Event

    6.   TICKET COLOURS

(   Brown to North Stand.

    Red to West Stand.

    Purple to Lepping Lane Terraces.

    7.       OFF DUTY

    No one to go off duty without permission.

    11.25 am            Called all stewards to West Stand whether deployed on stand or

    terraces.      Identified     two stewards        responsible     for West Stand wing E/E

    gates.      Ensured all aware E/E procedure and repeated tannoy messages for

    alert and stand down.         Stewards would have to ensure ticket in right place

    and steward crowd.
                                                -   3   -




No ticket - no entry.

All aware their positions allocated by club.

All wearing proper identification.

12 noon             Turnstiles open.        Officers and stewards in position.                  Build up

gradual and friendly.            Well behaved.          Made constant checks of snack bars,

programme    sellers         re security.       Supervision of pen               filling    unnecessary.

Officers, stewards and turnstile progress okay.

Between 1.30 pm and 2.00 pm.               Approximately six men with Liverpool accents

at Gate     'C' .      Steward on gate called men.                   Produced small wallets with

dynatape    claiming         'Official Liverpool            stewards'.      No    tickets    attempt    to

’yank’ gate open but I anticipate and held firm.                         I slammed it shut.         Repeat

performance ten minutes later.              No entry.

About 2.30 pm.           'Last minute' buld up started.                  Press on turnstiles.          Boy

fainted to property cabin.               Deploy Police Constable to snack bar and then

two Police Constables to programme sellers not in porta-cabins.                               Check pens

and elevated section.           No problems.

Approximately 2.40 pm.                Young Police Constable with                'stupid and legless'

drunk wandering about in concourse at rear A-G turnstiles.                                 Did not know

where     to go.        Took him to Police Room.                Had to support drunk all way.

(Police Constable 1719 or 1715 or similar).

2.45 pm               Checked watch leaving police room, radio message,                       "Get some

more    horses      up here"     (or similar).              Auto   - assumed Leppings Lane end.

Unknown     officer said,        "Sounds like       its getting busy at your end Harry".

Returned to Leppings Lane end via route under North Stand.                                 Getting busy.

Concourse rear 11-16.                Climbing over wall above gate               'B'.      Joined Police

Constables       at    'B'    gate    entice   down.          Fans   distrustful.          Waving    their

tickets.      Inspector John Bennett had climbed onto turnstile roof to deal.
                                                  -   n   .




Aware of the crush outside 11-16 turnstiles.                           Coming through very slowly.

Stepped away         from turnstiles to watch Inspector Bennett but two or three

times    I    was     pulled   by    Liverpool        people     who    had    got    inside    who    were

complaining about the crush outside.                      "You should be out there.            People are

gonna get killed".

Through the gate in the wall between the two concourses at the rear of two

sets of turnstiles.            I became aware of a movement of people.                      From previous

experience I knew it was too much for turnstile flow and there were too many

for waiting friends responding to a kick off or crowd cheer or similar.                                   I

stepped      through into the concourse behind A-G.                      (Not sure whether pulled

again by fans).

Twice called on radio using allocated call sign 'India 7'•

I seemed to recall that all the turnstiles had stopped.                              Men were screaming

trapped in them.           Gate 'C' was open and people were coming through.                           The

terror       in    the   turnstiles    communicated            itself    to    me     and    brought   the

seriousness of the situation to mind.

I went out through gate 'C' .

I remember standing alongside Inspectors Graham Delaney and Bob Purdy and

Sergeant John Morgan pulling people out of the crush on turnstiles A-G.                                  I

feared some would be killed.             Some were reluctant to come.                  I think they had

got   so close        to the turnstiles they had the single intention of passing

through.          I shouted at some, and as many as possible I pulled under the iron

bar that is a continuation of the wall housing gate ’C'.                                  The crush quite

suddenly      eased.       I   saw   gate   'B'       had     been   opened.        The     queues became

controllable         and containable again.               The two turnstiles nearest gate              'C'

appeared to function again.             Sergeant Barry Sorsby on his police horse came

up to railing and using the horse as a barrier we were able to filter out of
this agitated crowd fans who produced tickets.           I told the stewards on gate

'C' to take the stubs.

By now I have no idea of time or what is happening outside.

By word of mouth information passed, "Inside - Pitch invasion".              Went to the

pitch via rear of police control box and down the first steps               in the South

Stand.   I saw no players or officials on the pitch.

The invasion appeared to have spread as far as the penalty spot.                I got on

to the pitch and had got near to the goal post when I noticed those on the

pitch were not running towards opponents end or away from Police Officers.

Some were holding themselves, others lying down.          I looked towards the fence

holding back     fans    in the Leppings    Lane   terraces.     Police   Officers were

standing on the fence and leaning over.            Through the gaps in the legs I

could see the faces of fans pressed against the fence.            I realised they were

stood up dead.         The gate to this pen was opened.        I think it was number 3

gate.

Automatically (or it seemed) Police Officers formed a double line up to the

gate and formed a chain gang to pass out casualties.             When there was no one

at your end of the line to pass on the casualty, you carried it on to the

pitch.      Police Constable 2417 Pete Rotchel and I carried the unconscious

body of a 14 years old boy, dressed in a blue tee-shirt and blue               jeans, on

to the pitch.          I felt his heart beat   but his breathing was so extremely

shallow that I thought he was dead.         We prepared to do mouth-to-mouth when I

realised    he   was    in   fact breathing himself.     We did not       interrupt this

natural breathing and monitored his condition very closely, keeping him warm

and protected.         I remember as I was kneeling over him that I was kicked in

the back.     I seemed surrounded by the click-whizz, click-whizz of cameramen.
People came with a board and this boy was carried away.             More came with

another board to carry away the young woman being attended to next to us.            I

remember intervening as they were going to place her on the board nails up.

I turned and saw behind me a fireman apply cardiac massage to a male in

early   thirties.   He   then gave oral resuscitation and I knelt beside the

casualty to do cardiac massage.      As the fireman sat back he signalled me not

to continue.     We checked for vital life signs, there were none.        I covered

the casualty’s face with the front of his sweater.

I heard someone say, "They’re charging".        I looked towards the Spion Kop and

saw people     on the field moving    towards   it.   They were not running.        It

looked as though a confrontation was imminent.          I went beyond the half way

line and made uniformed officers form up in a line.        There was a line across

the width of the pitch.       This halted the progress of the Liverpool fans.

Some of them were crying.     Some were frustrated.       Some were angry.   It did

not help to hear the mass of Notts fans behind chanting and goading.           They

seemed unaware of the tragedy.

4.20 pm         This was the first lull in the sequence ofeventssince I left

the police room.    I looked at my watch, it was 4.20 pm.      I became aware that

my radio was still working.     There were public address announcements and the

ground slowly emptied.

5-00 pm         Given hot drinks.    Mustered serials     in North Standand spoke

to officers distressed by experiences.

About   5-30 pm I went    to gymnasium    which was being used      as a temporary

mortuary and I assisted in the collation of details of the dead.

11.00 pm        Went off duty from the gymnasium.
 xdent            103         170589 O P 3 23 1                     DOCUMENT             RECORD          PRINT

                                                                                               OFFICERS          REPORT NUMBER               R15

                                                                                                                                           S ta tio n

;r n a m e                     BULLA3

>r e n a m e s                 DAVID

)e                                                                            Date       of     birth

Idress                         S.YORKS.POLICE,                FORCE          HEADQUARTERS,                SHEFFIELD


rcupation                     POL       INS

•31 e p h o n e

imber        of    Pages

at e d                        E60489                                                                                                             Si g n e d


              DA VI D BULLAS,                 INSPECTOR

              HQ    OPERATIONS                DEPT.

              26    APRIL          1989




              On Saturday                15 A p ri l      1989     I commenced                d u t y at 9 am at F o r c e

              Headquarters.                   I then atten d e d             at    H i l l s b o r o u g h Football            Ground       at

              9.45am          for       the    general       briefing             - at       this    time        I took       ch ar g e    of     se ri al

              no.       13    consisting             of   1 sergeant              and    9    constables.              Th e    duties       of      the

              officers             on    the    serial       and    myself          was       to    p ol i c e    the W e s t     End S tand            at

              Leppings             Lane       - we w er e     directly             responsible             to S u p e r i n t e n d e n t

              G r e e n w o o d w h o wa s           in o v e r a l l    command             within       the gr ound.

              After          the    briefing          my s e r i a l     took       up       p o s i t i o n at    the W e s t      Stand         at

              approximately                   10.45am -        policing            the       all    covered seating area                    of      the

              stand,          the       refreshment          bars       at    the       rear       and    the     two sets        of      steps

              that       lead       into       the    stand       from       the     concourse            a r e a at    the     back       of     the

              Leppings             Lane Terracing.                 My    serial          was       not    deviated        from      the     stand -

              all       officers          remaining          at    that       location             until     the e v e n t s      that

              occurred             later b n at a p p r o x i m a t e l y               3pm     on the L e p p i n g s         L a n e T e r racinq/"~)

              From       my    position           in the       stand         I had a          clear       ’aer ia l     v i e w ’ of       th<
                                                                                                                                       PAG£          2
                                                                                                                                       R 15

terracing            below         me.      At       approximately                2.30pm       I took           up a       position         to

th e    front        of     the      stand       seating          looking          directly          down         on the         terracing

and     t he    crowd         that       was     gathering.                 The    terracing           at       t h at     t im e    was

reasonably             full,         but    there          appeared          to    be     sufficient              r o o m at        the    rear

of     t he    two     sections            directly             situated          behind       the     goal        ar ea.           The    two

outer         sections          of    the       terracing,             on    the       left    and     r i g ht       of    the      goal

had     plenty         of     standing           r o o m a lso.             On    looking        d o w n at        the      terracing            I

remember          on      thinking          to m y s e l f        t ha t     the       crowd a p p e a r e d          to    be      in good

humour         - at       one      stage        I saw a          large       ’b e a c h - t y p e    ball'         bei n g       thrown

about         above       the      heads        of    the       spectators             on the       terracing              - thus

illustrating                t h at    there          was     still         sufficient          room        on    the       areas       behind

t he    goa1.

At     this     time        I saw         several          ’s w a y i n g    m o v e m e n t s ’ down           the      terracing          -

these         were     the      ’t y p i c a l       swaying          movements'             that    are        e x p e r i e n c e d at

most        football          matches           - the        c r ow d w o u l d        sway    forward           but w o u l d         then

immediately               sway       backwards             to    the       original          position.             These movements

in the         crowd        did      not    ca use         any    injury          or    ’c r u s h i n g    effects*             within

th e    c r o w d - a n d all              of    the       people          concerned          appeared            ’to      be ta k i n g        it

in g o o d      humour’.              As    these          pushing          and    swaying          movements              t oo k    place       I

could         see a s p a c e         open       up to          the    rear       of    the    sway within                 the      crowd on

the     terrace.              On     several          occasions             I had       to s h o u t       down       to    people w ho

were        standing          on     the    shoulders             of       other       members       of     the       crowd and were

obviously            ’ chant         l e a d i n g ’ in c h e e r i n g           for    the L i v e r p o o l           Football

Club.          These        people were               causing          a sway          within       the     crow d         towards         the

front.

Up     to     t he 3 p m      kick-off           time        I d id        not    see a n y t h i n g       within          the

Leppings          Lane        Terracing              c r ow d t h at        was    unusual,          or     c a u s e d me          co nc er n

as     to     the s a f e t y        of    the m e m b e r s          of    the    crowd.           The     crowd          b u il d up on

the      terracing            appeared           to     be      normal       and       did    not    seem        o v e r - c r o w d e d tj^>

an     extent        t ha t     pe o p l e w e r e         being       crushed          or t h at      people were
                                                                                                                                     PAGE          2
                                                                                                                                     ft 15

attempting          to     c l i m b out        or    leave          the    area.

On    looking       down        at    the      crowd       I c o u l d see        that        the       gates        that a l l o w e d

the    people       to m o v e        f ro m    pen/sector             to       sector        at    the      rear        of    the    goal

were    o p e n a ll       the       time      and    infact          that       members           of    the     crowd were

using       these       constantly.               These         gates           are      l o c a t e d at      the rear of            the

sector       railings           which       extend         from       the       top    to     the        b o t t o m of       the

terracing.

At    approximately              3pm,       I cannot            recall          the    exact        time,        but      th e      two

football        teams        had      been      out      on the        field          for     several          minutes             before

the    kick     off       - that          I was      looking          d o w n at       the     c rowd        from a           position

in    the    center        of    the       stand      slightly             to    the     left       of     the      central          tunnel        -

when    I sa w w h a t          I describe            as a       ’R i v e r      of P e o p l e ’ s u d d e n l y             enter       the

terracing          from      the      c en t ra l     tunnel.              This       ’w e d g e    of     people’ seemed                     to

push    forward           down       the    terracing            —    pushing          the     pe op l e       that       were       already

standing        there        f o rw a rd .        Th e     scene       r e m i n d e d me          of    the     type         of    pictures

that    are     seen       on t e l e v i s i o n           -        in the       nature           programmes             - when          ’

molten       l a v a ’ is s h o w n         flowing         down       a hillside              f ro m an a c t i v e               volcano.

This    wedge       of     pe o p l e      seemed        to go        forward          do wn       the     terracing,               but

unlike       the    swaying           motions         that       had       taken       place        earlier          on       did    not

sway    backwards            but      remained where                  it was.

At    this     s t ag e    I co uld         see      the    people          towards           the       front       of    the

terracing          were      b eing        ’crushed         forward’ —                I attempted              to    contact          the

police       incident           room by         personal             radio       but     I coul d          not      get       through

due    to    the    amount           of    ’t r a f f i c ’ t ha t         was    being        passed and                the       crowd

noise       a r o u n d me      at    that      t im e     I c o ul d       not       get a n y         reply.           I then

attempted          to     p o i nt    to    the      crowd       b e l o w me         to a t t r a c t       the a t t e n t i o n            of

the    officers           w h o w er e      standing            at    the       rear     of    the L e p p i n g s            Lane    goal

on    the     playing        area.          I d o n ’t k n o w         if       I was       successful              in d o i n g      t h is

but    shortly          after        this      the    officers             at    the     front were              o b v i o u s ly a w a r e ^

that    something            was wrong            within         the       crowd.
                                                                                                                                             PAGE        4
                                                                                                                                             R 15

At     this       stage         I went       to    the       rear        of      the W e s t         Stand         in o r d e r        to    go to

the     terracing               b el o w me       - as       I got          to     the       rear     of     the       stand        I turned

and     looked          b ac k     towards         the       playing             area        and     I co u l d        see    that          the

officers           at      the      rear    of     the       goal        had       opened           the     g a t es    within          the

perimeter              retaining           fence        -    I also           saw      that        there were             several            peo pl e

from     the       crowd          climbing         the       perimeter                fence         from     the       Leppings             Lane

Te r rac i n g .

Prior        to    this         in c i d e n t    I vaguely              remember             hearing          some       traffic            on the

radio        with       regard         to the          crowd       situation              outside            the       ground       and

something              about       the g a t e s        being          opened          - but         I would           describe             the

messages           as      being       unclear          as       far     as      I was        concerned -               I was       not a w a r e

at     that       t i me    of the         extreme           difficulties                    that     officers            outside            the

ground        at       the L e p p i n g s        Lane       turnstiles                were        experiencing.

When     I left            the     s ta n d a r e a         via    the        steps          that     lead      into         the    concourse

at     the    rear         of     the t e r r a c i n g          I immediately                  saw that           there         was    a     large

number        of       people around               the       mouth          of    the        c en t r a l    tu nnel.            I went           into

the     tunnel          and       there w a s          a mass          of     people          in fron t         of me         leading             into

the     terracing               - I remember                pulling           several           people        backwards             and

shouting           to      t h e m to m o v e          b a ck     but,        they       d i d n ’t s e e m to           take       any

notice        at       t h at     time.          One    of        the       first       things         that        s t r u c k me      as    I

entered           the      tunnel        - was           the s t r o n g          s m el l     of     intoxicants.                  I h a d n ’t

really        noticed             this     before           with       me     being       out       in the o p e n - but                    on

entering           the      co n f i n e d a r e a          of    t he      tunnel           it w as        immediately

apparent.               It was         also       apparent             to me          that      the       people        t ha t     were       in

front        of me         h ad    consumedintoxicants                           to   varying          degr e es .

I cannot           truely          estimate              the t i m e          lapse       but       it o n ly       seemed          a short

time     afterwards,                 that an           injured           man      was     passed            back       from      the    crowd

towards           me    and       other     officers              who       were       present.              Th is m a n w a s          taken

o ut    i nt o     the      o pe n space           at       the    rear          of    the      tun ne l      and       two      female          and

one     male       officer           attempted              to    give        this       person           resuscitaion.                 At
                                                                                                                                             page            5
                                                                                                                                             R 15

          time      a young           teenage          boy of a b o u t          fourteen            years      was       brought        out    of

          the    tunnel         and        I could        see    that      he w a s          having         trouble        breathing.               I

          knelt      beside           him     and      gave     him the          ’k i s s     of     l if e    resuscitation’ -

          after      sometime              I was       joined      by a n a m b u l a n c e m a n             wh o   g av e     him     oxygen          -

          but    it w as         apparent           that       the y o u t h      had        stopped          breathing           and    had

          died      - this           was    confirmed             by the         ambulance            officer          who w a s       unable       to

          find a          p ul s e    or    any     signs         of life.           We       then     placed         the y o u t h      on a

          stretcher             and    took       him     to n e a r b y    exit            gate.

          I would          estimate             that    there a p p e a r e d           to    be     somewhere            in the        region          of

          twenty-plus                people       at    this      location          - who          appeared          to    be     either

          injured          or    d e a d.        In o r d er      to    create          a    central          locating          area     they

          were      carried           to    the     main       exit     g a te    and        placed         together.             After      s o me

          time      several           ambulances             arrived       at     t he       scene       and     the      injured        people

          were      taken          away.

          One       incident           that      sticks        in my m i n d        -- is         that      whilst        I was        kneeling

          beside          the      youth - a man                 who I p r e s u m e          was     a Liverpool supporter                     -

          came       up     to me         and    shouted          at me -         "You fucking                bastard -           this    is y o u r

          fucking           fault".             This     remark w a s        said           in a v i o l e n t       drunken           fashion.

          I then walked                   through        the     crowd     towards             the     playing area               a n d as     I did

          so     numerous            obscene        and      violent       expressions                were       d i r e c t e d at me a n d

          other       officers              in the       vicinity.           A     large          number       of    people        I saw

          appeared            to     be    under       the     influence           of       intoxicants.

          After       the       field and ground                  had     been       cleared           of     the    pub li c      -    I went

           i nt o    the N o r t h         Stand with            the m a j o r i t y         of     other      o ff i c e r s .        I finished

           duty      that       da y      at 7 . 3 0 p m .




N D OF   REPORT
^•cid^rit        105        1 7 0 5 8 9 O P 3 23 1                 DOCUMENT          RECORD PRINT

                                                                                          OFFICERS       RE P ORT     NUMBER        R15A

                                                                                                                                   S t a t ion
-u r name                    BULL. AS

 ore n a m e s               DAVID

■ ge
                                                                          Date       of    birth
'ddress



■ccupation                  POL    INS

e 1 e p ho n e

'umber      of P a g e s

ated                        050589
                                                                                                                                     S i g ned


             With      reference           to    my   previous          written       account        of w h a t       I witnessed

             during        the    events         which     took     place       at     the H i l l s b o r o u g h    Football

            Ground         on S a t u r d a y     15 A p r i l ,        1989.         I would      like     to     clear     up an

            ambiguity,            in that         on me     attending             at the           centraltunnel            which       extends

            under      the L e p p i n g s        Lane    West      Stand,            I did        not    see a n y      injured     pe o p l e

            actually          l ay i n g    in    the    tu n n e l .      I di d         not      see a n y of       the    injured

            carried         from     the        terracing       and      placed       in the       t un n e l .

            To   the    best       of m y        knowledge,         from what             I saw,    none      of     the    dead    or

            injured         supporters           actually          received         their       injuries          inside     the

            tunnel,         t he y w e r e       carried      from       the    West      End    terracing          to     the   rear

            concourse          area.

) OF   REPORT
                                                    Y O R K S H I R E ’S                     NATIONAL                     NEWSPAPER
                                                                                                                                                png                                                               FEBRUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THURSi




 Doctor who treated victims of Hillsborough disaster comes forward with challenge to inquest                                                                                                                                      ,t>


 Fre~u < ridence on t“a?edv
Simon glover                              Yorkshire Police’s handling of the       after the coroner’s cut-off point.     shire, was working at Rotherham         Hammond who show ed him a
                                          disaster and into the way West           This supports the claims of some       Hospital at the time of the disaster    transcript of the inquest referring
  VITAL new evidence on the Hills­        Midlands Police investigated the         victim s’ families, who insist that    but living near the Northern Gen­       to him as an “unknown doctor”.
  borough d isaster has em erged          tragedy.                                 m any fans were still alive well
 which will be used by families of                                                                                        eral where most fans were treated.        He said yesterday:“From my
                                            Dr Walker, who rushed to help at       after 3.15pm. They claim the ruling      He arrived at the hospital min­       own experience, I am as sure as I
 the 96 victims in their legal battle     the Northern General Hospital in         denied them the chance to submit       utes before the first casualties and    can be that when I arrived at
 to blame p olice officers for            Sheffield after seeing TV pictures       evidence that South Yorkshire Po­      w orked for six-and-a-half hours,       3.20pm, a good number of victims
 B ritain’s worst sporting tragedy.       of the unfolding horror at the Hills­    lice failed to activate its disaster   trying to resuscitate and treat fans.   had sig n s o f life. Some were
   A doctor who treated victims has       borough football ground, says he         plan in time.                          He later gave a w ritten statement      breathing and some had a heart
 offered fresh evidence which con­        has new medical evidence which             Dr Walker, who did not give evi­
 tradicts information given to the                                                                                        to the hospital and was told his        beat. Some of the patients were
                                          contradicts what the inquest heard.      dence and only recently saw tran­      name had been passed to police.         still breathing of their own accord
 inquest ju ro rs who returned acci­        At the inquest in 1990, Sheffield     scripts of the inquest describing
dental death verdicts on the fans.                                                                                          D r Walker believed police never      after 4pm.”
                                          coroner Dr Stefan Popper contro­        him as an “unidentified doctor”,        asked him to make a statement be­         South Yorkshire Police were
   The Hillsborough Family Support        versially imposed a “cut off’ time      has offered to testify that 14-year-
Group plans to use anaesthetist Dr                                                                                        cause there was nothing unique          last night checking their files to
                                         for evidence and refused to hear         old victim Philip Hammond was           about his evidence. It wasn’t until     establish whether they had any
Ed Walker’s testimony to ask the          d etails of w hat happened after        alive until 3.40pm.
High Court to quash the accidental                                                                                        he saw Jimmy McGovern’s recent          record of Dr W alk er’s role. A
                                         3.15pm on the grounds that the vic­         Philip Hammond’s father, also        drama-documentary that the im­          spokeswoman said: “Our expecta­
death verdict. The families’ solici­     tim s were already brain dead.           Philip, said: “We have been looking
to rs hope a new inquest would                                                                                            portance of his story came to light.    tion is that any statement would
                                           But Dr Walker, 33, who treated         for Ed for seven-and-a-half years         He wrote an article on Hillsbor­      have gone to Lord Justice Tay­
change the v erd icts to unlawful        up to 12 fans on the day of the dis­     and we are over the moon we have
killing.                                                                                                                  ough for the British Medical Jour­      lor’s inquiry into the Hillsbor­
                                         aster in April, 1989, says fans were     found him. At last we may get jus­      nal and contacted the Hillsborough      ough d isaster, but w hether it
   Solicitors are also applying to the   still breathing of their own accord      tice.”                                  Families Support Group to offer his     went to the inquest or not is more
Director of Public Prosecutions for      - suggesting they were not brain
a crim inal investigation into South
                                                                                     Dr Walker, who now works at          fee for the article. That led to a      com plex because o f the cut-off ‘Unknown doctor’: Dr Ed W alker a t   a
                                         dead - as late as 4pm, 45 minutes        Dewsbury Hospital in West York­         m eeting w ith P hilip and Hilda        tim e.”                             Press conference yesterday.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ■' • ’ - -HP?'-




■■m
 r-f


                                                                                        ~®1- •' * * ’fa.n* i   m.ifcnn



        i9fS7HiUM4,PHI»T3

    ,        A'
                  s o fd t o 0100 Thursday F e b r u a r y 2 ? I
                      JICLtSDOROUCUl DOCTOR HAS cNEH EVIDENCE;* I
                      By Pad r a l e F l a n a g a n , PA New a i
                      I /.:
 .;         . A                      d o c l m - ,«lu>                v itr f 4 » # « rf tit e - - I K ti s b o r m r r ^ .
 ■r?11 t u r n t h e t j r i g i i m l in q u e s t v e r d i c L . i
 -                                                                                                                                                      aasLef' lla s o fr e r e tl f r e^ s h ,,,e v id e n c e to
 -r-4
               Dr Etl W a lk e r , wlit> L euded a o r e Llian a tfojaea f a u « tin i                                j u„                              r ,,
 ui c h u o a L rad ic L H KfcuL Lite i n q u e s t w as l o l d . i                                '                                                         **xs*»»te r 1,1 ^ i l 1 9 8 9 , e l a i w s fK,

                                                                                                                                                           - m           -       u“- j *   u» » « • « » - *                     * ...

 w                                                                                                                                                 u , ? r n ^                                         u     ^     . , ,
4        .            AL aK                     1,1 l 9«0 . S h e f f i e l d c o r o n e r Ih* S L efai, P o p p e r r e f a s S                                    ?       »***          *t U        «*<•*«• 3 - i % W. i
-ji: g r u u u u s         y p .iL   L fio a e k i l l e d     w e re   a lr e a d y   b r a in           dead, i*            54,1                 « *« « » *        Lu » * « ■                  « f       w haL
                      Some o f Itm 96 v i t l i m s a ra m i l i e n i n s i s t majjy w e re s t i l l                                        a l i « . H- l t          - i*.      * ir
 i i sCi           -u Mubm 11 e v id e n c e         1 ^ * 1 S o u L li Y o r k s h i r e          jjo lic e             f a ile d       |«   JC i : , llb l    ■«                              T lie y      c la im     11,e r « j ;
 *                    Or Walker t wl»» d i d no I g i . « e v i d e o u * J 3                                  ™TV ™                 I             7                      *U««*Uar pi™, i „ U « e . i
                        has;; of Tered Lu testify Llutl 14-year-old victim Phi] if if**   “ IHCXJ-1)Lf °* y,« inptssl describing Sii® «B
                       'Ilt;:jlil lshor«urfli Fwiilv Seouir-l fl«y.n .*t... ....    aamott was alive until 3*40pm.i


                                                                                                                                                        b««i* lo o J k in g f o r Ed j                  aeveri «*«i                                    *:i«l we
                                                                                          ,    »

                                                                                                                                                          ^ ' ,. " ‘1 ^ilut,
                                                                                                                                                          - ™            l 1.„11 J K        a          *“H .u .     -       -      -
                                         —       .t~         a Pp i . v - B i» u , e „ w                       j r                                                       ;„u                          ■* ■
                   ',,*? 'r                 ,e                      r 1*”*
                                         U . « » t e r U »k Vf U ^'7;*'.* MV 4 l A pC. rJlil  Jg. I
                                                                                                  Jt S
                                                                                                     o f ^,    iSl’ i . l l.h> B1 1 ..
                                                                                                                                              h„*u^S Is                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                i*i«Soui.it          Ytifksil
                     :; s;rtitsh(ju
                         ■t(uahiiJ at,  Llif? yn
                                    <it Hie      u tm l.j dltd •Llsat
                                              ground                t...i „i               ■Ll>it? 96lh
                        +U u i>                   __  .. i r.
                       .tlk e r , wlw now works a l Oewsliurj
                                                               M                                                                                                                                                  Liv^          1 -     ■ « * « * - i’fj r t a L.
                                                                 - „      .r io^ 5s^p-»•it a lK. lin
                                                                                         ux*.      it       ¥e«f
                                                                                                            TP<e;
        rv'fur''.H;i»cH                 had no id e a i t was so i w w U i i l . s m                                   ,tM ,ln M :                                               ••*•’ “ <*“ • > * U « « « w . be™ K ill in g „ „ u ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ro
                                                                                                                                                                                     n u a riM L v w rsim        z t rconumT x

CO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 yyu
X
7D                             ft
W
-J




           W
            i' '.n:^                                                                                                                                                                               J
          # § »
          ^ <j                                                        But it reminded me o f the       He was in cardiorespiratory cerebrally so I atufeated him.
          •s#! • V.    :                                                                                                                                                diluting drugs with tap water
                                                                   fiie at Bradford City’s football W est and we instigated routine Another casualty was in a simi­
          W i                                                                                                                                                           and injecting them down the
                                                                   ground and I decided it might cardiopulmonary resuscitation. lar condition.
                                    £rf VHjiter recalls his                                                                                                             tracheal tubes.
                                                                   be worth driving the short          I believe we established        Sinus rhythm was re-estab­
                                 «t.s w/ten dea/i/ig >v('fA rAt                                                                                                            We resuscitated the nexi
                                                                   distance from my home to the sinus rhythm and an output lished in a fifth patient hut his
                               :I thorough ZJtt&jfcr.                                                                                                                   patient ’blind’ because o f ;
                                                                   Northern General Hospital although his pupils were fixed output fell. A joint decision
                                                                                                                                                                        lack o f cardiac monitors.
                                                                   in Sheffield to se* if I could and dilated; I’m confident we , was taken with the doctor 1 was
                               ‘I turned on (he television at      help.                                                                                                   In the dirty theatre area n
                                                                                                    were still getting an output workiqg with to abandon resus-        young boy was fitting. I carried
                            about 3.05pm and sawpicnitfs                  —Bawaity- department —i mtH at least 3.40pm
                            of the       events     at the                                                                          citation alter he re-anested for   out a routine rapid sequence
                                                                   didn’t know o f a problem but       By this time a,second child a third time.
                            Hillsborough ground.                                                                                                                       induction.
                                                                   ambulance control had told had arrived, . also in arrest.           We ran into difficulties
                              Theie wasn’t a n y talk o f                                                                                                                 In all, I think. I treated about
                                                                  them a paediatric cardiac arr ;t Similar measures were carried obtaining equipment such as
                           casualties at that stage and                                                                                                                 14 patients over six hours
                                                                  was coming in.                    out and this child was brought intravenous cannulae and the
                           from the pictures it wasn't app­                                                                                                            Only one of the cardiac arrests
                                                                     At the time we didn’ .<dise back into sinus rhythm with a people we asked to fetch drugs
                           arent a great number o f people                                                                                                             pulled through. When I left the
                                                                  it was from the ground but I good output.                         were not familiar with resusci­
                           were about to be killed or                                                                                                                  hospital at about 9.30pm my
                                                                  believe from what 1 later learn*    'The next case bad a good tation procedures.
                           injured.                                                                                                                                    car wouldn't start but a taxi dri­
                                                                  ed this was Philip Hammond. cardiac output but was irritable         At one stage I resorted to      ver gave me a free ride home.’


                           r            A steroid success now re-shaped                                                                                                        Dr Ed Walker:
                                                                                                                                                                            'I treated about
     -1

sr> o                                                                                                                                                                      14 patients over
m m# # f
qcdM | s |                                                                                                                                                                         six hours’

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             a   M   o v c
                                                                                                                                                        Co
o4'0*3        97          09:42           ©0151 227 3223                WEIGHTMANS                                                               @001




                                                                                            FAX
             To Fax No                        0114 252 3855                                 Date                                    4 March 1997

             For the Attention of             Ken Greenway                                 From

             Your Ref                                                                      Our Ref                                      DLS ND
             Pages to Follow                  2
                                                                                           If any pages are missing or unclear
                                                                                           please telephone us on 0151 227 2601




             Further to our telephone conversation yesterday I attach copies of articles featured in the Liverpool
             Echo dated 27 February and 3 March 1997.




              The information contained in this fax may be confidential It Is intended only for the use of the named recipient. If you
              sre not the named or intended recipient, please notify us immediately so that we may arrange lo collect the fax from you.
              You should not disclose the contents of this fax to any other person, nor take copies of it
              Thank you for your co-operation.




4   ilh 'R     1 'ri i'     ‘:i - Lv- J                                         >•                           r 'H 'v E '   .   lJ            1
                                                                                                                  W E IG H T M A N S




           LivbipOOl E c h o , M.niriny,             n 'i.



      B r ita in                                     Anger as firm pulls Internet plug                                                                                           CA BLC com pnny Tflla-
                                                                                                                                                                                 w est has pulled the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ByHell HuUgson
                                                                                                                                                                                 plug     on   free Internet          Telaweaf* d tc lilu i.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          The Interne! w/w In-
                                                                                                                                                                                 »CC«»S-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      eluded In Ttlftwefit's U i i
    Tragedy o f                                                                                                                                                                      It la taking inc aoiion
                                                                                                                                                                                 from April 1 bffCrtUfift its
                                                                                                                                                                                 □yatcin to In danger of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cabJp-ta-Aablo c alls ffflcr.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      brtwtcn flpm-eam, ari4
    ecstasy mum                                                                                                                                                                  c lo g g in g     up w it *
                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘’TflkWea’' Togging on for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wraktind0«
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A to1oMAt1 BpDkes-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wornm fiflld: (Therd
                                                                                                                                                                                 hour?.
    A M O T H E R died a f te r taking                                                                                                                                               Bui new eu a io m er             g row in g evidence frftttt
        Frcritnsy tnhlat, pnlicu said                                                                                                                                            James Byrne Is Incensed              Norih TimerJod and the
    torJ«y. l.-cil^y Wmdrrhaw, 31i                                                                                                                                                that His v« * i aurting" Is         UK that allowing thes«
    who lived iii fclivssftf*,                                                                                                                                                    about ta be beachcdr                calls dram aUvtUy <n-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c re a f t t t a v a ra g a call du r
    Derbyshire, died lust wer:W.                                                                                                                                                            Honour                    #tiorv an tho lEicpnone
       H e r llf<e support m«ch>n c «<
    M anchester O cnernl UoypitHi                    blInternet
                                                       nwL11                                                                                                                         He end his wlltr JoMe
                                                                                                                                                                                  arc both             a M hfi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      f P f f i p n n y a ftfVltchr or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CIDhuT)fc6>
    wnr. luriiud u l l l i s t Thursday.              dlsobleri                                                                                                                   cgitiplftlhad'. '"ThQ in-                “ M»r»y I n tv n * ! u a o rs
                                                      Jylie end                                                                                                                   I«?n4t IB our llnfc with Ihfl        whc> hfiv t a fr*4 SOI!
    Broad review: \ Wn\,-,                            jim m y                                                                                                                     CIUtStdB WDlltlr                     fitdlify tag 6ftr RHd *^ V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lOBBod ftn tor hoMW                  *•
    ranging n;vlcw uf lin*                            Byrne who                                                                                                                      “Th* contract wo» <nr
    m anagement of Protidm oor                        sny                                                                                                                         13 m o n th *,          Ihay         tlmo, Which h a * a c o n n -
    Apecial h c ip itb l, con centrating                                                                                                                                          vhct(>M honour I h o t ,'            q lif tn t « f f a c t o n
                                                      Teleweat                                                                                                                                                         cd paclly oC lii* awltcft/'
    on security and                   of              ■tis u ld                                                                                                                   as Ed Mr Byrh#, i f W9«t»
                                                                                                                                                                                  vsl*, Klrhby.                            Tei^weit la t& provide
    cure, wasbttiutf uiuiuiiHi:ei.l <i<                honour m elr                                                                                                                  C h fl*« V i-y n c h . o,i         its awn In w m d « r v ! c t
    tin; (.>>rninori!s.                                1 2 -month                                                                                                                 MatynaiiK Rood, Wtfter-               w»hln b nionth wrth
                                                       contract                                                                                                                    loo. * 1 * * condemned               c o u n ts to o u b 4 CMb#rl.




                                                              ■Family battle to clear name over Cameo Killing—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           amazing

                                                         HMGED MAN IS                                                                                                                                                      display
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bABVSunwnthii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Evens has 12tiny
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           linger* and 12 tiny



                                                         TO BE EXHUMED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Joe*.  ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S»n«nlha h i t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Amazed dstftorc and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            neighbour* In t« r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W if c h v n jH *   „„
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hftrlathnr Davids 3B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            noticed ihAnitre itlgii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mi she had her first
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (w d ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Thd Odd* *gan»t t
                                                                                                                                                                        She Im s also had                    permission Iriw6»by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i       havlnfl «S many
                                                                 EXCLUSIVE: byOfittiteJonnstm                                                                       the IfoclieOffice              I <3               hei    llnnsr* end toaa Is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             miiilone tc enf,
                                                                                                                                                                    f ilH ie r '#         \tv d y f r o m            H it1
                                                             t h e body o f Uiii m an h an ged                                                                      iinuMii 9«V.rAled Jiw unfl trf Wultuii                        3 am#r,tha Itvei Ia
                                                              frtf o n e o f Liver i««>l’fl m ost                                                                   .TMil tft s!Wa him P clcretst liuvidl                     ^addau, Mlri'
                                                              n o t o r io u s m u r d e r s v* U* be                                                                   Tt\e ‘ 53-y^sii ulil g ran d m o th e r               0<<vmafflan, ttftlt Sav1
       " M u m m y , tindiy, I          I f in ift                                                                                                                                                                            m cthoi'A Hyiw and
            I’m qvntu htifiped"                               i>xiiu(Ked as his fa m ily b a ttle s u»
                                                              c lc u r liis naiH«.
                                                                                                                                                                    gnlrt: "Ai; a
                                                                                                                                                                     WUti ISbOO.              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                *V«n mentioning il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      . .     brothflra w d
                                                                                                                                                                         u] «rcw         *i{« r^i^lMiC my hid pflfl           ally^on, 14, Qaratn. 1
                                                                Oftorg? Kelly whs found              of                                                              been IilSghtftd by what nod                              Rhyi, 10 and ef^ht1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              year-Old J00<4.
       Water cheer:                     W a te r             w hal ciimc to lir Uniiwn on the
                                                             Cjikii-ii Ik! il!ltig in February 1D50.
                                                                                                                                                                     rtlfliift, r.Bpeciun.h’ 08 it wn* Owmght »n
                                                                                                                                                                     the faintly th:»<                 ruihftr was the             m e baby la du* b
      bills are set to r^lf .^i.jipty in                                                                                                                             vietim of •y'T» injustice, lh a l he wa?                  d N .doetnra about
                                                                !Ic waa huiitffid flt, VV^lt^n JjjJJ
      t h r ycni* 4000. Ia n Uyutti O fw at                  fllW tlv pftcrw^rdy -it t n * agP nf 27.                                                                itirtArpnf nf the crijiie lOl which he                    hsving the esrtr* digit
                                                                                                                                                 • Handed                                                                      agfgicAMy removed,
      director te n e n tl. w it! he wanes                                                                                                       m a n . *.          wns executeil.
      a j it f n il k u t jl u jit-a l} reduction              A eo-dfifendani, ChQrlcs Connolly.                                                                                                                              uuttftey a n w
                                                                                                                                                 Ge<?rgfi                                                                      p a r ftw y farmed ih#)
      in p r i t r lim its in urder tu (jive                 WAS convlctrd uF rubbery auu                                                                                               F r u s t r a t io n
                                                             cuuspiraey tu rob.                                                                  Kelly wbb                                                                      may advla* that ah?
      kiark covings mncir liy the
      utilities Since ili<? \fuH rpvtaw.
                                                                                                                                                 vxftcutodlor                       leelinji ol h utU ^ tivU hA«                Ktap them.
                                                                             M a in ta in e d                                                    t h * m u rd *f        j;iT;wn ovftr ilift years. I Saw the Carl
       Wage costs: Firmer?                                      Leonard Thnmas. manager of ttjc
                                                                                                                                                 of Leonard
                                                                                                                                                 Itw m a s
                                                                                                                                                                     S   ridjjewaier case on tclcviston v m t
                                                                                                                                                                      thoiiQli( M wn? n clh^erucjc, ami it                    Brotherly
      loniilC at least £13bu a year in                        rtow-dcmttiishcd C s m w cinema
      M i j r bilta due to auscntcuiim,
      a new Sui^cY shnwnd today!
                                                              VVflvcrtrsc, was murct^r*^} f/>r just
                                                              jS l while («i dury.
                                                                                                                                                                      reniiuJiid me iff my falllei "
                                                                                                                                                                          R e c e n t fllv e s t lf a iJ o r n           by   health!
                                                                                                                                                                      M erjeyiid e author GeorKc SVdly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WOMEN who have
       Goa get him: Alecturer
                                                                K e lly a n il C o n n o lly a lw a y s
                                                                          thriir innoceftci.                             My father was                                into the case claimed viltil
                                                                                                                                                                      were wef'r »mJ caII ijH tr« th * h'i^l nnri
                                                                                                                                                                      K d ly wnfi thft virtim of o rnnspiracy.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 brathara fftand leaa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ehanca of devafoptn
       fro m Swansea claims lie                                 K e lly 'S dOUfiMtCP, K n th ln n n
       spotted m ystery M anic Street
       rre a c h e rs s ta r Riiihes'
                                                              HVEhr:?, nnw plnrw ;t U!jial LJinpaiUn
                                                              inyjuvL*hiiiFuUjki svifSinnOCOtH-                          the victim of                                     M r M ukin recUllS t2U3iMS Coi>ll(JC
                                                                                                                                                                       Kfillv^S b r o th e rs , F ra n U ic ;im!
                                                                                                                                                                      ,7fih«nyr rrt Ifl.W. Th*»y o'**1* unhappy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 allarglaa la cats, dui
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 or graas, say* rt fiev
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAporl
       Edwards, missing f o r tv.fi
       years. In rhn Indian paradise
       island of (rd* last Novem ber.
                                                                                  nf l.lvrrpont, was uuSv -
                                                              «iu At ihn tim e of the trial. She wn*
                                                              misei] by h e r , pnrndfoirtnls Vrhe'
                                                                                                                         an injustice ’                                with [U p w,*iy thr.ir brother‘s rase
                                                                                                                                                                       was bundled.
                                                                                                                                                                           He sard;,''‘We fli t £ 0 lnc tp p rc M rc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RasBaraherft In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 firlatat and Uondan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 found that women
                                                              her mother, firuhjei. rem arncdk                                                                         a n a p p h r.ij Viu i\ to t h e n e w                    wara I n u Ilkefy to b
       Test bids MFsshouldbe                                  w,ip r r v c r allowed to spunk ot Hie
                                                              case in public
                                                                                                                  Nuw. with thu help of anlicitor
                                                                                                                 Rex M akin. she is to appeal to a
                                                                                                                                                                       c o m m is s io n t h a t com es In to
                                                                                                                                                                       operation in April.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ■am ltlvB td akborn*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Irritants from the thi
       BrCflUt«ly.‘;t:d b e iu ie they vole                                                                                                                                ’*) Jl«v«            tJMJfle wi'i'inlrif.fHr^iJlA     »cu rc*j V they had
       In ilic com m uny und t ln r e
       shauld be s ms on uuhuulihy
                                                                 k I ji- rlr;/:f.ribcd iha murder
                                                              m ilU lo n t          ro u n rt       nnck
                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                 in v e s tis a tin f
                                                                                                                 lustice.
                                                                                                                                        m is c a r ria g e s   of      to caliabciraia with M r u u m a lly
                                                                                                                                                                       regarding Jit5 own appeal."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               drown with up
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  wethers In thctr ho:
                                                              tlirouahoui             Ut*.
       fuuds, according to 0 list nf
       ideas in a sui’vcy pi»hllshad
       today,

        Tatftucki 'i'w^ntyUic!                  , A/lore to attend Hillsboro servicelHinii                                                                                                   governor denies
        tteUcts shrired O '*         nnvirt's
        Day N a tio n a l L o tte ry jackpot
        o f OJ.lm, w inn ing £'138,500
                                               *^             T H E ennunl Hillsborough                       By Carnllna Slarall
                                                                                                                                                *tBlam*nl b*Tor« h * Iflkafl a
                                                                                                                                                decision on whether to teopen
                                                                                                                                                                                      ' crisis of overcrowdim
                                                              m eifiorlai eorvlce »t AnflcW                                                     the ejiae nr nnt
        cooh. Thfty wort w ith numbers                                                                victims ho treated wore olive                                                       ' I f l K jjn v K in a r Ilf W n lto rt .t« ll to ila y (ini
                                                              I t expected ib flraw an                                                             Dr W alher tre a te d 14-year-
         3 3,23, 4$, ft. 9., -12. The bonufl                  e v e n la r g o r s t te n a a n c c   eftet4pm-           . ..   ,              em Philip Hammond on the
                                                                                                                                                                                           he WH5 fflC'nH :>ii o ve i'cru w d in g cris’ lt*
        bait was H.                                           than uaual t h l i year.
                                                                                                        this coroner       at the Inqueflta
                                                                                                      did not tike *mdenee after
                                                                                                                                                day of the disaster but the                     T h e pi'ism i Is c u r r e n t ly k i ll , w ith !
                                                                                                                                                youngAtftr dind tnt«r,                    in rh ates tnsM p            V ic t o r ia n w alls.
                                                                  It win b t held on April 1S —       3 . 15 pm, cielnilnfl tne victims            PhJtlp’B mother, Hilda Ham-
         Bingo numbers; uu.-                                   Iho nlghth Bnnivar.ary of tho          were dead by then.                        mon«. eaidi "Dr waiKer did                   A lea k e d H o m e O ffic e re p n rr rle im s
         are ihw bingo nnm brrs fruni                          tragedy In Sheffield.                                D c e ls lo n               roaUse eteflWcanov ot tha                 p riso n syslein i i a t b r e a k in e r ' 111" ” ■ '
                                                                                                                                                                                          the ].,iverprm l prison th e wul'St affc ctc r
         today’s M IR R O R . Game 1?                             OrgnnW*r* a ay there Tios               6 r W alker cam?                      3.15pm cLrt-oif paint until hft
         (claim deadline 4pm ): 50, 88,                        liMiti a huge sutgo of tnter4&i        iH vr w»l?hlng Mr UcQovern’s              i4w the Jimmy McGovvrn pro                saviitH tlie r e w ill be no cells a v a ilab le a d
         76, I SC. 46, Bp, 34, 14. 21. 6&,                      following S t t TV etrw ning of       d r a m s - d o c u m e r t ia r y last   gramme.                                   tin : c o u n t r y   w ith in    a fo rtn ig h t
         fifi, tft, 20. Claims rrtuSt be TPftdc                 (ho Jlmmv Ucfiavnrn pro­              p*oam bor baoouao U/IlM th *n               "Thai was tne reeaon he                 prisoners w o u ld by ntoved to police c**!^
                                                                gram m& Into the di*k^ttr.            he h *d b **n unaware of how              oama forward when ha did.'"                  C o v tirn o r llob D u n t a il Siiitl W a lto n
         tn tIrr M irro r. N o r«:\?ortall)j|ity
             In*, tiilctn by the ECH
                                   Ofor                            Tlili. iwKii h*!ghtaned fay Or     crucial ihs
                                                                                                           Home Secretary Michael
                                                                                                                                                  The HUlaborough
                                                                                                                                                ara a lill aim ing ta epan a              not fa c in g a crisis Hut w as w o rk in g at
         any errur* •*'<t l i ^t .                              Ed Walker'* U titp d fl! H i t
                                                                WMH e'-s' ^ ^'   .  w rrt* Of tf\*     Howard is due to retd hi a               tampeifln HO In Uvarpo^t.                 capacity.




4   M HR        ’ h ?                                                                                                                                                                                    h   P G E . 0 0 3
                  04/0$ '97                                 09:42                            ©Oloi 227                                     "l                                                                                                                                                                          @002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T liut'wlu y, T n lin c n r y 77, lJTD7


— HILLSBOROUGH: Crucial evidence th«* could force new inquiry—


 I f 8 difficult tosay when the
 last people were breathing
 ... but it was after 4pm*
 Doctor speaks of meeting with victim’s dad
A D O C T O R w l i o s e v i if tl i i t w
c -iU n ,:c                   c o u ld         jp ^ rk            n
                                                                                            Special
H ills b o ro u g h                    in q u iry             has                           report
   jMiUcMi i.*r                    m^Tuvir.                   m et
I!ic          fa th e r          o f one             o f       th e                         by Paddy
                   h r trie d to save.                                                        Shennan
     An.;! ?3.r T.rt W a lk e r , w h o >5
,<*ninftni i h a i s o m e o f ihujiy
u?si.uilliws lir t r e a t e d w r r n still                                                     a! I'Jnvvflbiiiy
.i'i.i/i'-                        vii           ;fwy ul t h e H o s p i t a l . s a i d : " i i * w a s A b o u t
'T^pofl.y. is n o w h c p i n ; lo mc.et H.ZUpm when r arrivrri nt tfif?
■<nipr f am ili e s.                                                 liuttyiUil.
     H* uiu dv ‘J u i i l l u n r*;pi:rl rjfUT                            ■ ‘A                n u n i l f t r p f t h < j w S q t l m '5 1
• h - d i s a s t e r , b u t w a s n o ; c all ed 10 ^ H c ik W to Ip^fJ sip'trs nF life —
■': >r cvitl ^nr c "I »l*c imuej*l,                                  floHip UTtf: hj-rntWjitj, flonir hnH
     A f I ft r w n 1 1' h 1 a % .1 \ m r»i y hcLirtbcnts,
y. <:CJ«<'crnV d r a m n - r f a e i i f n m l . i r y                    " J l f *5 p j f t r f i i n o l ) ' r t l f f i r w H tt>
 • i ^ i l p b o r o u s h . I J it 3 3 - y s a r - o M w l i m 1->1rr I.Tt-Pif.l timrj v«:>!C wtif?n
   <                  th<* l lill ^ b o r o v f th Fontily pr^jilr w rr r brrflllilnR. llu t If was
 >i’p p o r t C r n n p .                                            <:■■ v'.unfv :iltfir ’Ipm."
                                                                              .                   "Urniii.flfnri i* n very
                          E m o tio n a l                            W ‘                  filial very icchnlesl term.
      T U t s l i d t b fl ’" r l t e v ' m j j v / i ' h             A:- i vrt^l^rsi.nnrl u , pruplr who ure
  i-...i»n;nynd, who.’:*? H ' T . i r v ' I r i '.on, ill , Hi                                 rt. 94 llfd                              *6
            jF'hih'p, Wdis ottf1 r,t                        <r»ktkii KrfifM-cMfltf. comz of !lie vlcifms 1
           ' r 's,rn n » i ? m {,"eH/!i'ai                            lir:if{‘5l w<‘i t iifrlrniilv bri’aUjhiu.
                                                                              1 coutfJri't             l>i> F in e (is n ' n i i r
                               a v « r y e m o U f n * l llniT.rnr'nc.r^                                      TVif 1 rc'TirT.ilirr
                ' smr D? Wnlker                                      T w i t n hjbft into hir. trn rlirn In
       •           i'liiiAf l.rtvfc                      rt l f«.r help Ms brrsiilliinf!."
 •                      l i r e f c j r ur Fi\f-c h ^ u r* ,               A?Vcd wby                                 b^Jn’ t coi'ic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  • Emo^onfll , -. Dr              UJJ l)f<! 'lav
 '■'«>                  o-bc-v: 1 Vhiltp ,md u,'hat
   ■a p p e n p d o n rh*
                                                                      ift r'.vnnl ppj-Uf-r, lip kj*U1: "I Found
                                                                      it r.y nfu wnj i, This; vvn« ti l o t i e liine
      “ P h i l i p ’ *; b r o t h e r l iv r .s i n Hfirt, J wfts a lot yfrjmp.cr — yfi.
                                                                                                                                                                              msmm                                                W a l k e r lelL m e t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  faercp v o d     fp^bcr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ■'T li n t YiJMi iii              nr J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s-t.r-. Hir- '"■sut of my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   j n v n l v r m m i u n t i l rrrcinMy.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                uth;   IHRD



  •
     1 11‘t r ' h ^ u * hj ju w e ru e i
               pl.innr-'i *n mr'cf « p
                                                             ii'vre.        ' T n j s i h l y I ro n l< ] l l a v t t o j n e                                                    '■■.fe'.;-:                                      P h ilip H a m m o n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Afi.er w a k i J ' i ; eo ntaet. w h h t b r
                                                                      forward. 1/ ! ]i#d I wouldn't have
 ;,!1: jJOl-lOO'tjiSlStll'FuLy                                         in fin H i n n j a l i Uiis n o w                                  1    f»ulhovli*cs Rave my n a m e to i h e                            k,I h a d j u s t c o m e h nc k f r n m           HfH?hnrowRh                   K n m ily S u p p o r t
      ''A m i, t h r o u g h t h e 1                                  l i U i a l l y \Jid u 'l k n u « '                               to     pnlic*!.1’                                                   Welkins            niy d o p , p u l u n t h e         C r n u p mill I'lillfp                           Ur
  ; JUijjl.Y S u p p o r t G rou t                                     ApcroAcn.                                                                                                                            t e l e v i s i o n am!           I l\ e c ro w d      WftlV.cr W3E f'>OWT1 vopic?i o f ».bi:
                                                                                                                                                   B u t he confim cd he h n s n ever                                                                               I n q u ri tl r e p o r l "in P M lip ju^!*ic' a n d
  rrv^ct n t h t f f*ni>li£is ? t                                            r \ r t # i l y d i d n 't t a k e f                        -:i   b e e n int.ervje.wnrt by t h y pul j r e .                  tiuenfcs, 1 rirfiv*? to the h o * p itn l tft
      IJiS 4Vidertce c o uld                                           n! ,i!i in tfir i n q n r ^ t. j                                 .'v                                                                 s e e if I c o u ld be o r flHjr use.                  i b e pr.isl n i n J J r r i i c'fcrfil'l.
                                                                                                                                                   AbkeU il it preyy*! yjj |\if> juiiiiJ
  tnr n new Inquest                                               Of UtinU 1 tliilu’i \ v j 33i tt? (ju                               u^li     tin a t h e h a d n ' t a o i i f : pu b lic Aoorlcr,                                                                   H e ' a i d : "l! uhs. t h « Firm t i m e 1
  ;:niov\*fui killing.                                                 ii alt                                                                  D f W ilk si* s a id : '’It ( I m s now. T u t                                    Casualty                          li;jrl ueeii *>«*v ^ th c * e no cu n irn tf; .
      A l l l ie u v i t f i i m l i i n i w r s 1 .                         “ I ■w asn’ t, t r y in g to                         bide         I rtli!n‘t r r n l K e whint I h n t\ t o finy                  *1n r r i v u dLwu l i ' l li r c e                 A m i t l w a s 'ihr. f l P i t i l m r 1 f t t i t H i !
  5h ? f W d                c o r o n e r t> r 3 l * U »                                                                           kJC^Tl’l    hniJ nny                                                     bcfpyii! i h e f i r s t c a s u a l t y nn d w w      o u t I hd^J hcr<* r r f r r t u r t      5 S th e
  P n p p c r reF ujed. t o hnsir d e t a i l s o f ic [i |i r n u c; !■ r>l l’V Ihf- f11*- v n it I                                                A t i f i e iS itiu \»r t h e d i s a s t e r . l > r   ibfiii hn a v il v it»vi?W«!rl witli llir              ‘utiifjentiMrfJ Jlirt l«jj
  wih»!                              I'T lrr 3 15pm nn                 ciijrhnriticR) I diffn’t h a v e a n y t h i n g                        ■W fllk ijr w a s * f O n io r h o u * ^ o F E lc cr
  tli<* c r m i n n s t b i t thnr.ft kille.ri w r r                   rtMiivfttU ti> say,                                                     in f n o e s t b c l i c s tit                                  “ I t h i n k T t m n t f i d b e t w e e n 10        ill’ VVAlf-iPt* ivlflprt Hiftt hn w n n l d
  Already foi itin-dcntl,                                                    ” 1 t h o u g h t 1 h n d f ulfill ed my                          lli ShS i ‘1 Mt-iApilill — lull llv^t! rlftfift              a n d 12 o f t h e v i c l i m s , I was a s k e d     be h a p p y t n ro»npf!ratft w i t h t h e

 the   Dr vValkcr, “'iio t o d a y w o r k ? in ri»j;pnnflfhHjrlpft hy i v r i t / n g my
    *1■" A»<>i]+*i1 I :<rwl I;, m p r s. ? n c y                       r n p n r t . A n d I k n o w t h e h o s p it a l
                                                                                                                                               tn fihrrfic.W’r N o r f l j r r n L-CHrrn!                   by.ilift hoflpi^l amlioritiwacHon
                                                                                                                                                                                                            w r i t t e n 'tt^ l.^nieni »i!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for *a                 rwlevinil. H u ! l " i i i l i « s s l i u u l ' l » rie>w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   iOMliu'V f’C
                                                                                                                                                I ioaj>i luf.




    A step on the path to the Truth                     SO LEM N , sh a vcivh e a tJe tJ fif 'd —                                   PADDY SHENNAN reports                                                 B r c r u r " of Or Ed Walker. Sc c o u g c                Alter me trial tiy na ti o nal med ia , a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 clflarly ifrod ? nd b r o w b a 9 t4 n Ed
                                                        a t t i m e s — s i l e r v , It w a s h a r d n o t                        on Ed Walker's grilling from                                      vt h i s de te rm inati on, h o w e v e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                      fiaemfpgly l&te 111 Ihv d o y f lo tell liln               v/alkvr tafd t h e ECHO: "I h* d d o n e
                                                        t o Teel s o r r y t o r U r E d W a l t e r a s
                                                        h o t a c p d t h p PrpRB.
                                                                                                                                    ihs media — and how Ihe                                           story. A s ta r y w n ic h h e n . i t told
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ih* o d d TV r*vl#w for Ih s Drltl»h

                                                            And tho m usic,                                                         doctor came away iromms                                           b e t e t e — In an attleiai rep or t — but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Medlcnl J o u r n a l a n d I know th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rli,*niw*rfDr:uf*'*ntprY w av c o rning i.tp
                                                            "I e n n 't            \ h«»v» t»**n «HUng                               O id Q f il w i t h s o m e c r e d i t                          which tin s n s v e r b e e n he ard .
                                                                                                                                                                                                          But tlw d o c t o r Isn 't daft. He play e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 90   1 th o i'ffh t I'd like lo wu-K^ mhcivl IK
                                                              tf)W itwTf rpr «lght y p * r i. j h i d n o                                                                                                                                                           "it was very p.owp/fyf, f Ctfn’l
                                                        I4«a it w n i 1 0 I mpo rtant.“                                                 Wi^y hadn't he ootne fo m a rd                                tfte F r e e* with t h e straKth te j i af
                                                                                                                                     frtrlii^r? Riifftty hff hnd heard nbout                          ba ts , r e f u s in g to a n a w e r any                  CfirtirtienT an thp aconracy* ot
                                                            l ll i own w o r d i — ut tvre d DCrOHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      auB stlo its w m e h Invited him — or                      oilifii'wirtft, at it, But ibst y/as t'safiy
                                                        ? ha ft lfy -to nvfln^d grilling i t t i l o n .                             lh*r evMenrtft ft! Htft In ^u e M — and
                                                                                                                                     tbnt pn^t              ftviri^noe anuldn't                       APPEARED to Invite hi m — to                               MOW the contact wb* rt'fldS'belW^Srt
                                                        An<i w^r(f? wfilch v o u i d b e th rown                                                                                                      a ppo rt ion blam e.
                                                                                                                                     bip hcdfrf? Hart he nnl w ished he’d                                                                                        m yttit and thn lam'i^s-
                                                        bw K t \ him by rep orter* — a gain                                                                                                               Now e v e ry t h ln a 'a out In t h e o pe n,
                                                                                                                                            lip Y<:*H     r r !^ 11Vr ^ of                                                                                          "It was only h<?caitBe I wanted to
                                                        ai>rt pgsJo.                                                                                                                                  he k n ow a n t i life win ne v e r h e the                donnti* my E100 review Jee to IFi*
                                                           W»j aiiijuld b f grateful Ihnl h e                                        MllllboroU^h vlftdms
                                                                                                                                                                                                      snmc flflflln.                                             Hin^borouoll Family support Group.”
                                                        lUrr»ifiJ u p . A*rri w * p h c v l d b e g ra l r^ u f
                                                        be on swsrotf             que^lloriv a s                                     id
                                                                                                                                         PrcvDcnltvc q u c s J l a n s Which Tailed
                                                                                                                                          p ro vok e ih lj wlty. i n w n s s , y s t
                                                                                                                                                                                                          And, hDpctufly. H win niso mran
                                                                                                                                                                                                      the tlvea Of th e HHfabdfSugh fnmflles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1* —         hopetyH y w h e n — t h ir n ’w
                                                        ho n c it i y a s     eeul(J,          Urlo                                                                                                                                                              n n e w l n n i ’*ry, Hr f d Wntknir will
                                                                                                                                     i d ti ly ano k * n m a n . Or, s t laaet. fsn s d               will also never be the same asalti.                        on e ? egn in b ? !n IHf sp^tl tgh!,
                                                        t o u l d h a v e ropr«fl«ri*d arv^lh^r i\* p                                ta p r a v o k e Ina i a n a n t a n s o r. Which                    All b e c a u s e Dr W alh et w a tc he d
                                                        Sh th e path io {w N sp er «] Th^ Tiwtl).                                    w a s guile p r o bably luBMieS.                                 Jlmrtty MeG ov ern 'a etu nnln o d n m j -                     Bu t h e a da torm innS to Bsnln give
                                                            &f- W a l k e r fACRrf fris p n r t of                                   Wlia tsvs r (He why? o n d w h o r e to f M                      tftMfumentary, HIIUS otoub H.                              s tr e la h t enswtK.i.
             v W - V ’t                                 Bg ar^asiv e qunslinnlng nnt yfli lac^O                                      ot thB tlm ln s of t h is q uite o inailnq                           p e r h a p s n o w t h o a e Deople w ho                  Eight yeflr3 pn it m oy be. bu t the
         t J im m y M c G g v ^ m                       by m an y w h o wnri> inr morft e lo w ly                                    P n a a c o n te r c n e n . t h e fuel Is It WAS                sd W It w ould s e rv e ho uaatul                          H ills bor ough fpmlMe! v/ould pro bab ly
          ,.. dpco^te^iary                              Involved with t h e trngrxly.                                                taKlng piflcc.                                                   p u r p o s e will s e n th ey w e r e w r o n s .         BtttH tor thRt,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T




                            f ’ l i--l R
                                                                                                                                  S AND LOCUM OPPORTUNITIES
   1 INSIDE


            INTO FOCUS
              Our spotlight




                                Hillsboroughtrafedv
                falls on the
               osteoporosis
           category of this
           year’s Hospita
           Doctor Awards.
        [Turn to page 28 to
           find out how to EXCLUSIVE                                                                                                                                           Dr Wsl'
             start planning by Heather Stephen and                                                                                                                          ing as at;
                 your entry Pat Hagan                                                                                                                                       the Roihc
                                                                                                                                                                             HospiJa
                                A DOCTOR who treated vic­                                                                                                                   tance fr
                                tims of the Hillsborough disas­                                                                                                             Norther: > i -
                                ter has contacted Hosph-il                                                                                                                  Sticff-oM ^
                                PiH.mr wilh sensational new                                                                                                                 ickn . ..
                                evidence which will be used in                                                                                                              unfolding u „
                                a legal bid to overturn the orig­                                                                                                             The first              ^
                                inal inquest verdict.                                                                                                                      was Philip Hjinm... .■
                                   Dr Ed Walker, who tended
                                                                                            ’I:,.   i
                                                                                                        /'   /                                                             ough the young?, ter v,.-
                                more than a dozen fans on the                                                                                                              to death, D r Wulk c
                                day of the disaster in April                                                                                                               detected n pulse jn.!          ;
                                1989, says the first victim he                                                                                                             mon itor also pi L- ke s i • ;
                               treated was still showing signs                                                                                                              Ih.‘*v well after 3.1
A look at opportunities        of life well after 3.t5pm.                                                                                                                  gave ep attempts to wi
                                   At an inquest in 1990,                                                                                                                   boy at about 3,40pir
in the highly specialised                                                                                                                                                       Ttie Hillsborough Family
                               Sheffield coroner Dr Stefan          Disasterday.
field o f ear, oose and        Popper refused to hear details                                                                           i 1969 ware alive after 115pm      Support Group plans to use l>
throat surgery                 of what happened after thrs          the ruling denied them the from A & E coasu ltab t                                                     Walker’s testimony to ask ♦
                               time on the grounds that those                                                                               Having recently seen tran­     High Court to quash t!
                                                                    chance to submit evidence .?                             pathoKP*
                              killed were already brain dead.                                                                           scripts o f the inquest. Dr        inquest verdict of aeeitfeniDl
BODY TALK              38                                           proving South Yorkshire Police                        ;r, but did   Walker, a Hospital Doctor          death.
                                  Some victims’ families            tailed to activate its major dis­ not call Dr Waiter w ho was
                              insist many were still alive well                                                                         columnist has offered to testify        Its solicitors will demand a
Is there a real alternative                                         aster plan in time.               referred to as ‘an unidentified
                              after 3,15pm. They also allege                                                                            that 14-year-old Philip Hanim-     new inquest — at which they
to the Review Body?                                                    TUs coroner heard evidence doctor’,                        .     Qtid wm alive until 3.40pm.                  Continued on page 2



                                       all to simnort                                                                                         C O Z A A R . T H E FIRST
■ft,
1    Aerial photograph of Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground

2    View of Concertina Gates B + C and turnstiles A - G from Leppings Lane

3    View of entrance to pen 7 + North West Terrace from fence

4    View of wall on concourse from entrance to pen 7 + North West Terrace

5    View of Gate A + B + turnstiles 1 - 8 from entrance to North Stand

6    View of Gate B turnstiles 7 - 1 6 from concourse near to West Stand stairs

7    View of Gate C turnstiles A - G and wall dividing concourse from entrance to pen 1

8    View of entrance to tunnel and wall dividing concourse from entrance to pen 1

9    View of tunnel and entrance to pen 1 from Gate C

10   View of Gate C turnstiles A - G + concourse from entrance to gents toilet on left of tunnel

11   View of tunnel and steps leading to West Stand from wall dividing concourse

12   View of tunnel from Gate C
13   View of terraces through tunnel from concourse

14   View of concourse through tunnei from terrace

15   View of pen 3 Leppings Lane terrace from tunnel

16   View of pens 4, 3, 2, 1 Leppings Lane terrace from pen 4

17   View of pens 2, 3, 4, 5, + 6 Leppings Lane terrace + tunnel from playing area

18    View of Leppings Lane terrace from below Police Control Box

19    View of Leppings Lane terrace + West Stand from inside Police Control Box

20    View of Leppings Lane terrace + West Stand from inside Police Control Box

21    View of interior of Sheffield     Wednesday      Football Club   Ground   Control Room
     showing monitors

22     View of interior of Sheffield    Wednesday      Football Club Ground     Control Room
      showing monitors

23     View of interior of Sheffield    Wednesday      Football Club   Ground   Control Room
      showing control desk
24   View of interior of Sheffield    Wednesday    Football   Club   Ground   Control   Room
      showing monitors

25   View of interior of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ground             Control   Room
      showing cupboard where video machines located (door closed)

26   View of interior of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club           Ground   Control   Room
      showing cupboard where video machines located (door open)

27   View of bank of video recorder machines

28   View of Leppings Lane outside turnstiles and Gate C from South Stand car park

29   View of Leppings Lane outside turnstiles and Gate C from South Stand car park

30   View of Leppings Lane outside turnstiles and Gate C from South Stand car park

31   View of Leppings Lane outside turnstiles and Gate C from South Stand car park

32   View of Gate C from South Stand car park

33   Plan of ground taken from match order

34   Plan of ground
           lllilliiip iiii
             75*^  8
           SOUTH J
            VISITORS
VISITORS     om»Y
 ONLY
3
t
‘(iHiiiij
II
     35 a
it
■
S h e f f ie ld             ]/V e d n e s d a y F. C .                                                                                                         P o lic e

                                                                                                                                                               R oom
                                                                                                                       F ir s t - A id R o o m \ \                j
       H ills b o r o u g h                 G rou n d
                                                                                                                                                                                     < / b      K' v /

               |IJV E R PC C fc;^O T PC X W E IS^
                                                                                                                            Qytnna$kjm
                                                                                                                                                                                     \ \                   ,^ 7 7 - 6 8
        <\                                                                                                                                                                                A'*       >r A ' . \       ,7 3-76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -\ 5 5 -7 2
                                                                                                                                      V       , a t ,;
                                                                                                                                      ^        «***„
                                                                                                                     NORTH S T A N D '                 .   ~
                                                                                                                                                                             IS s s ii
                                                                                                                            £ > %               '* * - I r M
                                                                                                                                                                             £5
                                                                                                                        *                 -     .:■.
                   \ \"


                                             4
                                             .^      '             '
                                  1-16
                                                  v as •.*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /
 •' o / ,
              o     V‘
  fC

                                                   v -       ■■   ..7:4£
                                                                                                                     P i t y * r *«
                                                                                                                     Tunnmf -
                                                                                                                                  \
             is E n t r a n c e / / \
                                y                                                    --------- --------- r s s s r
             \ o !o :>u r e s <                                            f   1 1



                                                                                                                 SOUTH
                                                                                                                 5     STAND                                                                    L-c
                  )lice C o n t r o l                                                                                                                                                           3 7 -4 2
                                                                                             „ Jta —m —E3™_
                                                                                                2 3 -2 8                                                       Q -3 2 N ^ 3 '3 6
                                                                                                                                                                  "”■*>«»»    \     \
                                                                                                                                                                <;®r                ^..
                                                                                                                              w

                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISAM r o 5.? s-,sT sn v i-t> K n ‘‘iv->
                                                                                                                                          Appendix I:
                                                                                                                                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                                                                          Hillsborough Ground.




                                                               Gymnasium




                                                                                7*“         ^Police                    Lighting
                                   Lighting                       First Aid
                                   Tower                          Room
                                                                         "a                   Room

                                                     NORTH STAND

                                                                                                                                  CCTV*
                                                                                                                ■611




4 -Q
                                                                                                                <411
             G ats
   .Gata C

                                                                                                                311




                                       M
                                       2
                     CCTV



                        Lighting          Police
                        Tower                       CCTV                CCTV
                                          Control
                                                       SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                      ,na on.

                                                           J    'D ir e c to r s Entnanca



                                                               L»ghtmg ~
                                                               Tower
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          •*lL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YORKSHIRE POST
                                                                                                                                              HOME NEWS                                                                                                                                                      THURSDAY SEPTEMBER 1 1 1 9 9 7             9*-

                                                                                                                                                 esTsT
Expert hospital treatment brings hope to cancer victim                                                                                           EH IB s Ip
                                                                                                                                                 tsSBSfl
                                                                                                                                                                                   TR T "                                    jjT h T b v Q ir o w u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Football
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          disaster ?
The loving care that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      families r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          see grim I
eased a woman’s fear
C lare Walker                                                                                     cancer centre and treats
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          photos
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A MOTHER has told how
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            she has viewed harrowing
                                                                                                  thousands of patients from                                                                                                                                                                                               pictures .of her son on tti?
CAROLYN Dowd was sim­                                                                             across. Yorkshire every                                                                                                                                                                                                   day h e died which were1
ply too frightened to consult                                                                     year,                                                                                                                                                                                                                    released to her last.week as
her GP when she found a                                                                             Much of the appeal fund                                                                                                                                                                                                part of a new examination
lump in her right breast.                                                                         will be spent on installing a                                                                                                                                                                                            of the Hillsborough disaster"
  She knew the lump felt dif­                                                                     state-of-the-art radiotherapy'                                                                                                                                                                                              Margaret. Aspinall, • 50?
ferent to the benign cyst she                                                                     planning and treatment sys­                                                                                                                                                                                              whose son James, 18, was
had had removed 14 years                                                                          tem at the hospital.                                                                                                                                                                                                     killed, said files have been,
earlier and it took her three                                                                       The appeal has -.now                                                                                                                                                                                                   released to the families ;b^
weeks to muster the courage                                                                       reached. £350,000 and                                                                                                                                                                                                     South Yorkshire Police for’
to go to her doctor's                                                                             already clinicians and medi­                                                                                                                                                                                             scrutiny as they gather new'-
surgery.                                                                                          cal physicists are evaluating                                                                                                                                                                                             evidence to present to Lord^
  A week later she was told                                                                       equipment which w ill be                              j .-•./nit,                                                                                                                                                         Justice Stuart-Smith. . -
she had cancer, and shortly          CANCER                                                       used as part of the new                                                                                                                                                                                                     Home Secretary <Jackl
                                                                                                                                                         .'•“ •V - ’r-r-*    :
after that she had surgery to                                                                     treatment system. '                                                                                                                                                                                                       Straw has asked him to rS-r'
remove her right breast.                                                                            The latest contributions                                                                                                                                                                                                examine the events of April7'
  Her fear that the lump             CENTRE                                                       from readers include'.,                                                                                                                                                                                                   5, 1989, before Mr Stratffc
meant terminal cancer will                                                                          Mrs IS Robertshaw, £10; S                                                                                                                                                                                               decides whether or not to;
be familiar to the thousands         APPEAL                                                       Stockdale, Oldham, £25; K E                                                                                                                                                                                               order a full public inquiry-/..
of women who each year                                                                            Towler, Carr Manor Parade,                                                                                                                                                                                                  Now about 20 families ar^
discover breast lumps.                                                                            Leeds, £20.                                                                                                                                                                                                               examining files , on dead rel^
  But, after a two-week                                                                             Mrs M D Rebori/Bramley                                                                                                                                                                                                  atives, seeking evidence in'
period of “numbness” fol­                                                                          Grange Farm, Bramley,                                                                                                                                                                                                   photographs and eyewitness^
lowing her diagnosis, Mrs       Harrogate, has recently          Carolyn Dowd: ‘Cancer            Rotherham,- £25; J W                                                                                                                                                                                                      accounts. It .is the first timer
Dowd, 43, found strength to     completed a course of            can b e cured’.                  Emberton, TickhiU, Don­                                                                                                                                                                                                  the files have been madfe?
face her operation and the      chemotherapy at Cookridge                                         caster, £100, -                                                                                                                                                                                                           available to them.           . !'-‘
treatment to follow.            Hospital, Leeds, and is now        He said: “The staff see so       Mr and Mrs J Ackroyd,                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mrs Aspinall, of Huyton in’
  Her story gives hope to       having radiotherapy.             many people going through        Denholme, Bradford, £20; C                                                                                                                                                                                                Merseyside, said seeing the1
other women who., on find­        Her worst experience has       that it’s almost as if they      W & B M Smith, Dacre Hall,                                                                                                                                                                                                three pictures of her
ing a breast lump, will ini­    been losing her hair, which      actually do understand how       Dacre, Harrogate, £20,                                                                                                                                                                                                    dead and dying on the pitcfti
tially be filled with dread.    began to thin a few weeks        patients are feeling.              I Constable, Park Avenue,                                                                                                                                                                                               in Sheffield, was a traumatic
  Mrs Dowd, a charges clerk     into her chemotherapy.             “They’re really very car­      Harrogate; £10; Mr B                                                                                                                                                                                                      experience but a necessary,
with Lloyds Bank in Leeds,        But she wears a wig and is     ing people and all 1 did was     McPartland, £10.                                                                                                                                                                                                          part of the families’ cam^
said yesterday: '‘Something     confident her hair is now        create an opportunity for          P R Jarvis, £50; Mrs E                                                                                                                                                                                                 paign to find out more about
clicked and I became posi­      growing back.                    people to give something to      Shaffner, £5, and Marion                                                                                                                                                                                                  how their loved ones died. f’-->
tive and thought ‘cancer can      She has found support in       Cookridge.’'                     Patchett, £250.                                                                                                                                                                                                             “Our main priority is thaU
be cured’.                      her work colleagues, family      ■ The Cookridge Cancer             You can make a donation                                                                                                                                                                                                 people will never have to go1
  “As far as I’m concerned      and her husband, Norman,         Centre Appeal continues to       to the appeal by sending                                                                                                                                                                                                  through what we have gone1?
my cancer has gone, and the     49, an IT manager with Har­      attract donations from York­     cheques to. the Editor’s Cen­                                                                                                                                                                                             through ever again,” sK&
treatment I'm having now is     rogate Council.                  shire Post readers.              tre, Cookridge Cancer Cen­                                                                                                                                                                                                said.                     , .
to prevent it coming back.        He had his head shaved to        This newspaper is support­     tre Appeal, Yorkshire Post,                                                                                                                                                                                                 “It has been very painful
  “Fortunately I didn’t leave   raise money for the              ing the appeal, which aims       Wellington Street, Leeds,                                                                                                                                                                                               . looking at these pictures but
it too late; I knew I had to    Cookridge Cancer Centre          to raise £1.5m for radio­        LS11RF.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                  seeing them has made m £
go to the doctor but I was      Appeal, and has just pre­        therapy and other services         The appeal office is based                                                                                                                                                                                              want justice more than ever.i
absolutely terrified.”          sented the hospital with         at the hospital.                 at Cookridge Hospital,' 0113                                                                                                                                                                                                “For families to. get these*
  Mrs Dowd, of Pannal, near     £2,110.                            Cookridge is the regional      292 4021,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 photos eight-and-a-half years'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            after the disaster is absfc'
                                                                                                                                                                                     ■'■mm                                                                                                                                  lutely. appalling.” By exaiflv

Gun-raid police
M atthew C atling_______        Joseph Carr, 50. Mr Carr’s       shock from their farmhouse       shire for damages. Mr Goose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ining the pictures and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            eyewitness statements, sh£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hoped to discover mofce'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            about James’s death.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The fam ilies’ solicitor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;i
                                green Vauxhall Astra had         in Kirby Grindalythe, near       told the court: "We have no                    Daring; For 17 years scaling th e                                          daring re sc u e s ended recently on                    h im self clinging to a lump o f        Aim AdUngton, said: ’‘They'
POLICE officers acted law­      been linked to the incident      Malton, to York police head’-    doubt about the distress that                  3 0 0 ft cliffs o f Flamhorough Head                                       his transfer to a d esk job a t the                     Flamborough rock.                       have been very shocked and1
fully when they woke a fam­     in which the road-rage vic­      quarters, Sheffield County       happened to this family but                    h as been a regular part o f th e job                                      marine rescu e co-ordinating                              Mr Crosthwaite, who still liv es      upset by what they have.'
ily at gunpoint and wrongly     tim said a gun was held to       Court heard.'                    the issue here is whether                      for coastguard Vic Crosthwaite,                                            centre a t Bridlington, th e hub o f                    at th e coastguard h o u se at          seen but they feel that at
accused the father of being a   his head.                          They were locked up in         the police acted unlawfully,                   s e e n above with a m em ento o f                                         operations from th e Humber to                          Flamborough, h a s co u n tle ss        long last they are actually*
gun-toting maniac, a court        As a result, Mr Carr, an       separate cells and only                                                         h is escap ades.                                                           th e Tyne.                                              m em ories, including th e Carol        getting details about howi
was told yesterday.                                              released hours later, after        “It is an unhappy but true                                                                                                                                                                                              their relatives died.” .       iv/
                                antiques     dealer,    was                                                                                        No on e e l s e know s their                                               C olleagues o f Mr Crosthwaite                        Sandra d isaster in 1984. Four
  Barrister Julian Goose, for   dragged from his bed at 4am      police admitted they had got     fact that more and more                        crumbling chalk f a c e s better - Mr                                                                                              Flamborough fisherm en w ere lost         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                                                  firearms are being used by                                                                                                from S p eeton , Flamborough,
North Yorkshire Police, said    on December 16,1995.             the wrong man.                                                                  Crosthwaite, 55, h as ab seiled                                            Bridlington and Hornsea, have                           when their cob le w a s wrecked.        will also examine closed ci*v
that the day before the inci­     He, his wife Catherine, 52,      The Carr family say they       people and more and more                       down nearly every inch o f them                                            not forgotten th e co u n tless life*                   Three m ore liv es w ere lo st when     ciiit television footage and'
dent two visits had been        son Christopher, 24 and          were traumatised by the          officers have to risk their                    searching for b odies or people                                            saving esca p a d e s and have                          a secon d cob le crew ed by a party     evidence from Dr Ed.
made to a road-rage victim      daughter Lucy, 19, were          raid and are suing the Chief     lives."                                        trapped on th e rocks below.                                               p resen ted him with a m em ento in                     o f anglers from Doncaster w as         Walker, of Sheffield, who
to establish a link with        then taken in a state of         Constable of North York­           The hearing continues.                         But his days o f taking part in                                          th e form o f a miniature figure o f                    overturned by freak w aves.             treated people on the day.



Women to sue hospital
                                                                                                                            T h e till n e w
over cancer-test errors
Richard Grange                                                   alleged medical negligence
                                                                 against the hospital.
A HOSPITAL is to be sued                                            Mrs Dawson said: .'‘I
by two women who were                                            received the letter telling
wrongly given the all-clear                                      me about the faulty tests
after having smear tests for                                     only two days after my
cervical cancer.                                                 brother-in-law died of can­
  They are Dawn Murray,                                          cer.
32, who has four children,                                          “I’ve found . the whole
and mother-of-two Elaine                                         experience extremely stress-:
Dawson, 26, both from                                            fill.
Upton, near Pontefract,                                             “I went to my doctor
  Seventy-six women were                                         straight away and was given
recalled by Pontefract Gen­                                      anti-depressant tablets.
eral Infirmary in August                                            "I’ve had a biopsy and I'll
after being told they could                                       have to- return to hospital
be at risk from cancer Dawn Murray: ‘I fear                       for a follow-up smear.”
because of problems in the th e w orst now.'                        But doctors said yesterday
way smear tests were car­                                        the possibility of any of the
ried out.                       'ligh t when the hospital 76 women who were con­
  Mrs Murray is having to reviewed nearly 75,000 tacted developing full-blown
undergo laser treatment          smear results from the last cervical cancer was very
after a new sample showed five years.                            minimal.
signs of abnormal cells.           The test slides were re­         The medical director of
  She is still waiting to learn examined after the introduc­ Pontefract Hospitals NHS
the full significance of the tion last year of new               Trust, Dr Colin White, said:
new finding.                     national control guidelines “We have already apolo­
  “I’m separated from my on cervical screening.                  gised to the patients regard­
husband and I've got four                                        ing the anxiety caused.
kids at home," she said.           Previously, slides were          “If an individual has a
  'T could have died of can­ checked by only one person.         complaint, we urge them to
cer in these last four years     Under   the  new  guidelines’ ' contact us directly. '
since I got the all-clear. they have to be checked by               “We still feel that it is
What would have happened         two   people,  to  lim it the   highly unlikely that anyone
then?                            chance  of human  error.        will have suffered any pro­
  “I can’t help thinking the       The two women have con­ gression of the disease of
worst now. Who’s going to sulted the Leeds-based legal cancer, or will suffer in the
look after my children?”         firm of Lupton Fawcett, long term as. a result of
  The problem tests came to which is handling claims for this."



                                Mother ‘would
 A GIANT drinjks com­
                                A MOTHER accused of mur­
                                dering her severely handi­
                                capped 34-month-old daugh­
                                                                   Abigail suffered from a
                                                                 skull deformity, clover, leaf
                                                                 syndrome, and could only
                                                                                                            M a n y th o u g h ts                                                                                                                                                   V e r s a tile in t e r io r s p a c e
 pany is to spend £lm           ter told a court yesterday       breathe and feed with the
 repackaging 'its. top-sell­
 in g alcdpops drink,
 Hooper’s Hooch, to give
                                how she and her husband
                                had told doctors to do every­
                                thing to keep the child alive,
                                                                 help of tubes, and her sight
                                                                 and hearing were affected
                                                                 by her condition, which had
                                                                                                            m ake a M azd a                                                                                                                                                         D r iv e r 's a ir b a g
 it anr“unambiguously           despite her suffering a heart    also caused brain damage.
 adult” look.                   attack just after birth.           Watts said she.only had                      A s y o u c a n seej w i t h t h e a ll n e w
   The move' by-B^ass             Women jurors at Manch­         nursing care help' on three
 Brewers comes after the        ester Crown Court were in        nights a week, .despite ask­               M a z d a 626, i n n o v a t i o n i s n Tt t h e o n l y t h i n g t h a t
 drinks industry watch­         tears as Julie Watts, 31,        ing for more.
                                                                                                            c o m e s as s ta n d a rd .
 dog, The Portman               described how she and hus­         She said: “I used to stay                                                                                                                                                                                        R e m o te c e n tra l lo c k in g
 Group, said some               band Andrew had been             up next to Abby after she
 alcopop brands were            asked by doctors whether         had -come home. I couldn’t                     T o b e o n e o f t h e f ir s t to f in d o u t ju s t h o w
 sp ecifically targeting        they wanted the machines         sleep, I had to put cold
 under-age drinkers.            keeping their daughter Abi­      water on m y face to keep                  g o o d t h e n e w M a z d a 626 r e a l l y iSj v i s i t u s t o d a y .                                                                                             D o u b le d o o r lo c k in g
   The new “adult” drink        gail alive to be turned off      awake because I knew I
 w ill carry a different        because her chances of sur­      couldn’t sleep.
 label and contain less         vival were so slim.                “I tried everything to get               From your Yorkshire Mazda d e a ler s                                                                                                                                   R D S r a d io c a s s e tte p la y e r
 sugar. It is expected to         Watts, who denies murder,      care for her.” •
 go on sale ,next month         said she and her husband           She was allowed to take-
                                                                                                                                                                            Hayselden Mazda
 and will be backed by a        had been given the option        Abigail home in August
 £7m advertising cam­           together after learning of       after she underwent an
                                                                                                                                                                            ' York Road, Doncaster                      v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E le c tric d o o r m ir r o r s
 paign next year/               their daughter’s disabilities.   operation on her skull at the                  C D Bramall Mazda                                             ;:.'V:Sbuth,Vbrk^                                   y d T '6 Q 0 ^ ^ d iC e itti« |
   Hooper’s Hooch’s new-          She told the court: “We        world-renowned Radcliffe                              K7::iiontidn^Rbaci:1 ^ ;                                                                                                     Ring Road
 label w ill have a black       decided she was our baby         Infirmary in Oxford.                       i r l . Sheffield,‘ S6utb;y6H^hire>;;i:                         Tel: 01302 361061                                     :;T v iLbwertVfortleyVvv':-''S-i^
 background and carry a         and we were not going to let       Her daughter had pro­                            Tel^ 01142 551616                                                                                                         .v.:! Leeds, Y orksh ire^ -
 “more authentic” fruit         her die, not for anybody.”       gressed so w ell shortly                                                                                        Jordans Mazda                                        ijel: 01132 799600                        ;                                                                          I.
 image. The words on the          The prosecution alleges        before her death that she                          David Fox Mazda                                 | V;/>- 5i'W itham/Hiilri;' v?
 label w ill change from        that Watts, of Little Hulton,    had joined a number of local                                                                                    v* V ’H u m b e r s i d e ' ^ f t / : v ; i.;;
 “Alcoholic Lemon” (or          Bolton, Greater Manchester,      toddlers’ groups.                                    *^:L^iside:<aarSgeir-
                                                                                                                                                                        iTfel: 01482:222500                                               Turnbulls Mazda
 orange) to “Hooch Alco-’                                         'Then on July 20 Abigail                     i:::.:;.;'.FQrT«^ne,Head'.^V7                                                                                              .    17-27 tayerthorpe •          ;
                                deliberately killed her                                                      .Kharesbbro^^
 holic Drink”:                  daughter by pulling out a        was admitted to the Royal-                                                                                                                                       .   i         .Ybrkj:Yorkshirei f .
                                                                                                            ,v:<i        <NbrtfrYbrkshire : v‘V;
   Bass Brewers ch ief          breathing tube while she         Manchester Children's Hos­
                                                                                                                    Tel: 01423 545556                                                                                                 Tel:;01?04 658809
 executive Iain Napier          was in the Royal Manch­          pital with a chest infection.-
 said: “Bass wants to           ester Children's Hospital.         A week after being admit­                                                                           -. fclarieiBradfdrdi1Yorkshire w ;
 take.a lead on the issue         Giving evidence yesterday,     ted, Abigail was found with                                                                                Tel: 01274 777600
 o f under-age drinkiiig        Watts, a trained psychiatric     a breathing tube .removed
 and to underline the           nurse, told how she-had to       from her throat after her                  •M o d e ! show n: Mazda 626 GSi 5 d o o r £16,910 on th e road. P rice includes VAT, num ber pla te s , d e live ry and 1 2 m onths road fund licence:
 w liolly ^responsible          care for the little girl night   mother shouted to staff for
 stance it'has taken.”          and day after being allowed      help.
                                to take her home.                  The trial continues.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■r
                                                                                                                                                                                  \A
Iv t A        YORKSHIRE POST
 J J .U       THURSDAY SEPTEMBER 1 1 1 9 9 7                                                                                                      & ANALYSIS

      YORKSHIRE POST                                                    The British who went out to India but never came back have been remembered in York. Stephen M cdarence reports,

      The peace                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M M




      shuttle
                    ' ADELEINE ALBRIGHT is
                      unfamiliar with the Middle
                      East. After almost a year as
                      American Secretary of State,
                    .she is only now visiting the
   region for the first-time. She believes,
   understandably, that too many of her prede­
   cessors have had their reputations ruined
   by early and protracted engagement with
   the Arab-Israeli conflict (recall Syria’s Pres­
   ident Assad snubbing a foolish-looking War-
  .ren Christopher on his final round of shut­
   tle diplomacy). But last week's triple suicide
   bombing in. Jerusalem and the failed Israeli
   raid on Islamic militants in Lebanon makes
   it imperative that Mrs Albright tours the
   region’s capitals to hear whether, beneath
   the noisy clamour of war, calmer voices are
   to be detected beseeching peace.
       First impressions suggest Mrs Albright is
   hot hopeful. Her emissaries have been brief­
   ing reporters not to expect too much. The
   problems are too intractable, the ancient
   hatreds too ingrained, for them to be
   amenable to a ritual round of diplomacy.
   What she will be looking for is a sign that
   Yasser Arafat and Benjamin Netanyahu are                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rS *
   willing to talk. Before, this can happen, how­
   ever, Chairman Arafat, who rules his miser­
   able strip of sand like .any other Arab dicta­                                                                                                                  tews*'
   tor, must show he is serious about the .
   terrorism spawned in Gaza and the West
   Bank. He. might begin by arresting those
   police officers in the Palestine Authority
   who are wanted for terrorist offences in
   Israel. He might also tone down the hostile
   rhetoric and make it clear that the Palestin­
   ian Charter accepts Israel’s right to exist.
       All three of these measures are within                      Sir David Goodall: "It w as like visiting th e s it e o f a vanished civilisation. You s e e som ething o f th e liv es o f th e p eople ’■a n d how fragile a lot o f th o se liv es w ere.”        P icture: Bruce R ollinson.
   Mr Arafat’s gift. But he has not offered
   them to Jerusalem because of the way he
   thinks the Israelis have broken the spirit, if
   not the ambiguous letter, of the Oslo peace
   accords. In particular, the Palestinian
   leader is outraged at the destruction of Arab
   homes and the building of Jewish settle­
   ments around Jerusalem, which he sees as
   contrary to the principle of land for peace.
       Without some sign of compromise from
   the two .camps, Mrs Albright’s mission is
   doomed. But neither Mr Arafat nor Mr
   Netanyahu are in a good position to give
                                                                    T h e fo r g o tte n R a j
   ground. If the PLO chairman offers an olive
   branch to the Israelis, it will inevitably                      A                 GOOD Cemeteries
   draw new recruits to the militant Hamas,                                          Tour of Darjeeling? It                                                                                                                                          m
   unless Jerusalem offers something in                                              was a fanny way to                                                                                                                                                                                           IS
   return. However, it is almost impossible for                                      spend Boxing Day. We
   the Israeli leader to give ground to Mr                                           picked our way down
   Arafat, since this will be seen as rewarding                                      the steep Himalayan
                                                                    hillside - me, two guides and three
   terrorism just a few days after the suicide                      members of BACSA, “the liveliest
   bombing and the loss.of young Jewish sol­                        society in Britain for the deadliest
   diers in the failed Lebanon raid.                                subject’1.
       But Mrs Albright must persist in her                            BACSA is the British Association
   search. It is not merely that the conflict                       for Cemeteries in South Asia. Its
                                                                    1,700 members are passionate about
   touches voters in America whose loyalty is                       cemeteries. One of them has trav­
   vital to the Democrats’ election prospects.                      elled to every comer of India and
   There are bigger, geopolitical considera­                        Pakistan recording 50,000 inscrip­
   tions. The Middle East is the world’s petrol                     tions from the gravestones of the pio­
   station. It is also home to some of the most                     neers of the British Empire.
                                                                      The society, a postscript to the Raj,                                                                                                                                                             ft!             A        itt'
   virulently anti-Western regimes (Iran, Iraq,                     set up its stall outside York at the
   Libya and Syria are among the worst of the                       British Family History Conference.
   pariah states). Many of these countries not                      An exhibition at Askham Bryan Col­
   only export crude oil, but terrorism (the                        lege highlighted the sorry state of
   IRA arsenal was built with Libyan help; the                      many half-forgotten British cemeter­
   World Trade Centre in New York bombed                            ies in India 50 years into indepen­
   by Arab Islamists). A solution to the Pales-                     dence.
                                                                      Soldiers and civil servants, sur­
   tianian problem, Mrs Albright knows,                             geons and Inspectors of Telegraphs,
   would do much to make these larger dan­                          barrackmasters and “Professors of
   gers easier to contain, if not to overcome.                      Hindoostanee”... their graves are all
                                                                    too often vandalised or lost in jungles
                                                                    of undergrowth. Some cemeteries
                                                                    have been enterprisingly trans­
      Regional accents                                             formed into villages, the tombs find­
                                                                    ing new uses as walls.
                                                                      There are people who died in polo                                                                               wrfe*'-!a\'“ *
               HE most successful economic                          accidents, from exploding soda bot­
               regions in the world - Interstate                   tles or after being attacked by bears.
                                                                   BACSA’s strong Yorkshire member­
               85 from Georgia to the Carolinas,                   ship includes Sir David Goodall,
               Hong Kong and southern China,                       Britain’s High Commissioner to •                                                                                                                                                 The N icholson C em etery, Delhi,
               Penang - have grown up not                          India from 1987 to 1991 and now                                                                                                                                                  ab o v e le ft and left: a d e s o la te
   because governments have sought to make                         retired to Ampleforth. Sir David, a                                                                                                                                              p lace w h ere m on k eys scam per
  them more competitive, but because policy                        keen artist who has recently pub­                                                                                                                                                over to m b s and crow s circle
  makers have been prepared to step back                           lished a book of watercolours of his                                                                                                                                             overh ead . Above: S t G eorg e’s
                                                                   time in India, recalls visiting Meerut,                                                                                                                                          C em etery, Madras.
  and allow an entrepreneurial culture (often                      flashpoint of the 1857 Indian Mutiny.                                                                                                                                            P ic tu re s : S te p h e n M c C la re n c e .
   with ugly, short-term side effects) to flour-                      “It was a fascinatingly evocative
 - ish. Among the chief characteristics of these                   place, overgrown with creepers,” he                                                                                                    § 1 1 1 1
  regional economies, which produce a dis­                         says. “It was like visiting the site of a
  proportionately large slice of their nation’s                    vanished civilisation. You see some­                                                                                                                                             soldier- in the 21st Lancers - before
  total product, is an openness and receptive­                     thing of the lives of the people - and                                                                                                                                           becoming a railwayman. As station-
                                                                   how fragile a lot of those fives were.1’                                                                                                                                         master at Karachi, be witnessed
  ness to foreign, inward investment. In addi­                        It was just that feeling that inspired                                                                                                                                        some of the terrible violence of Parti­
  tion, labour tends to be cheap, non-                             Theon Wilkinson, BACSA's secretary                                                                                                                                               tion. “I was at school in Simla when
  unionised, but skilled (or with colleges and                     and former industrial-relations con­                                                                                                                                             things were getting bad with rioting
  universities on hand to train people to the                      sultant. He was bom in Cawnpore -                                                                                                                                                and killing. We were evacuated and
  required standard). Moreover; local politi­                      another Mutiny centre - where his                                  m                                                                                                             told to collect whatever was available
  cians seem to have business in their blood.                      father was in cotton. He thought he                                                                                                                                              and take the train. We regarded it as
                                                                   had got the country out of his system                                                                                                                                            a great picnic. We were all given a
      For instance, when North. Carolina won                       at Independence, but an Indian trek                                                                                                                                              packet of sandwiches for the jour­
 •the BMW contract against 250 other loca­                         with his son, Wyn, reawakened the                                                                                                                                                neys.'
  tions-in 10 countries, it did so, in no small                    interest. “I was trying to keep him                                                                                                                                                The Thomsons have visited India
  part, because of the determination of politi­                    off the hippy trail, to stop him get­                                                                                                                                            twice, looking for family graves as
                                                                   ting into bad ways - but when I came        vous complaint “due to an inordinate        the 18th century could expect to sur­       at Indian cemeteries. The “Can You           they went. “These graves are your
  cal, civic and business leaders. Some $36m                       back with a beard and crazy about           use of the hookah”.                         vive for two years.                         Help?” column in the latest issue            ancestors. Anyone duing family his­
  was spent buying up middle-class homes on                        the cemeteries, friends said I was the        In Ooty, the southern hill station,         Nicholson is a desolate place, but        includes a note about a member               tory research in Britain can use
  the proposed site (including one which had                       one in a bad way.”                          Georgiane Wroughton died at the age         the Anglican cemetery in Darjeeling         “researching the manufacturers of            libraries and archives. In India, it’s
  only just been completed) so that they could                        So Theon set up BACSA. As a regis­       of 30 after bearing seven children.         is even sadder, as the BACSA trio -         Victorian and Edwardian brass                not so easy. The grave is something
  be demolished. A state once dependent on a                       tered charity, it funds preservation        She was buried near a bishop “who           Don and Belinda Brittain, from Sus­         memorial plates”. It is, gloriously,         tangible. It shows a person existed."
  single cash crop now has one in four of its                      work at cemeteries in India, Sri            worked as Labourer and overseer in          sex, and Virgil Miedema, an Ameri­          that sort of society.                          But is it not a touch eccentric to bo
                                                                   Lanka, Burma, Malaysia, Singapore,          that portion of the Lord’s vineyard         can living in Delhi - saw last Boxing         Doreen Thomson had come down to            interested in these lumps of old
  workers on foreign payrolls and an econ­                         Indonesia and Thailand.                     planted in India”.                          Day.                                        the annual meeting from Royston,             stone? “Oh yes, I think so,” says
  omy plugged into the global market.                                India is probably BACSA's main              If death could be colourful, cholera        It was a grim place, full of spindly      near Barnsley, with her husband,             Tbeon Wilkinson eagerly. “It:s eccen­
    . If those who are behind the new regional                     focus. The graves of such worthies as       ensured that life was often brutally        trees and broken crosses. A group of        Peter. She was the third generation          tric in the way it stimulates people.
  development agency in Yorkshire possess                          Hardwicke Holdemess and. Joe                short. “To Mercy, our darling infant,       youths was playing cricket among            of her family to be born in India,           All sorts of things are sparked oft.
  this same can-do enterprising spirit, then                       Blennerhasset de Courcy, Cubitt             died aged two months,” runs an              the tombs.                                  after her great grandfather went out           “It gives you a feeling of continuity
                                                                   Sparkholl Rundle and John Nepo-             inscription in Delhi's Nicholson              “Oh‘, this is quite normal,” said one     with the Bengal Anny in 1839.                and a more balanced picture of the
  the region will have found a new voice to                        muk Mark throw a fascinating light          Cemetery. “Our second little bud in         of the guides. “Very often you have           “As far as we know, he died just           people who went out East, not just
  amplify its growing ambitions. If, however,                      on 200 years of British life on the         heaven.”                                    an angel acting as wicketkeeper.”           before the Mutiny,'’ says Mrs Thom­          the politics of battles and mutinies.
  it becomes merely an arena for the exercise                      sub-continent,                                Nicholson Cemetery is named after           The Brittains reported what they’d        son, a retired teacher. "It was fortu­       From the study of the tombstones
  of regional rivalries, it will fail and the                        Here is the Commander of His              a Britisli general who displayed the        seen at BACSA’s 20th anniversary            nate his family went up into the             emerges the story of their lives and it
  chance to capitalise on the anti-business                        Highness the Nizam’s Army; there,           heads of his enemies as desk orna­          annual meeting in London three              hills; otherwise they’d have been in         leads to ail the quirks and eccentrici­
  effects of a possible tartan tax could be lost.                  the Astronomer to His Highness the          ments. Monkeys scamper over the             months later, It was a convivial day,       the thick of it.                             ties of BACSA.”
                                                                   Raja' of Travancore,                        tombs, crows circle overhead and the        bristling with majors, old administra­        “We have his will. Obviously it was          Or as Virgil Miede put it at the end
                                                                     In Calcutta,' the pyramids and            sun blazes down on the graves of            tors, plenty of knights and the odd         done literally a few hours before lie        of the Good Cemeteries Tour: “If
  N o 4 8 ,5 5 1                                                   obelisks of South Park Street Ceme­         army wives who died in their early          viscount. Many were carrying their          died. He could hardly sign his               you’re interested in the British
  The Yorkshire Post was founded as the Leeds Intelligencer
                                                                   tery surround the grave of Sir John         twenties.                                   copies of Chowkider, the BACSA              name.”                                       period in India, a lot of it comes alive
  on July 2 1 7 54 ; Became a daily, The Yorkshire Post, on July   Hadley D’Oyly.who died from a ner-            Most Europeans .arriving here in          magazine named after the caretakers           Mrs Thomson’s father was also a            in the graveyards. So to speak.”
  2 1 8 6 6 arid absorbed the Leeds Mercury {founded 1718) in
  November 1939.
I_i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YORKSHIRE POST                             A A
                                                                                                                                                     • II                                                                                                      THURSDAY SEPTEMBER 1 1 1 9 9 7                         ±J_




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   saw the light
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The C onversion o f                         w hen Henry VID severed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Europe                                      the links w ith Rome and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Richard Fletcher                            the papacy at the period "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (HarperCollins, £25).                       some people are pleased 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to call the Reformation. •1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Why 371 to 1386?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M ich a el Brow n                           Because by 371 the             j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Emperor. Constantine           .<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              had long been baptised, .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  THIS is a book, by an                       and 1386 saw the baptism 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  historian at York Univer­                   of Grand Duke Jogaila of?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sity, about the triumph                     the Lithuanians and            .\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of Christianity over                        thereby the acceptance of-j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  paganism in Europe                          Christianity in Lithuania-]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  between 371 and 1386AD.                     in general, You have to ,•
The S tory o f C aroline B e a le , A                 ten a very emotive book based on                                                                                                                                            The whole of Europe?                        start and. end some­
S tran ger and Afraid                                 the salacious facts of the case;                                                                                                                                            Well, yes. In one volume?                   where.                      ‘!
Duncan Campbell. (MacMillan                           instead he has written a more                                                                                                                                               Indeed.                                        Lithuania becoming
£16.99).                                              important one. In taking a cooler,                                                                                                                                            There are more than                       part of Christendom, as -
                                                      more collected view, he has revealed                                                                                                                                        500 pages and they                          the author says in his
                                                       something of the machinations of                                                                                                                                           include a splendidly                        narrative, put the last
Trina M cIntyre                                       the US legal system,                                                                                                                                                        wide-sweeping bibliogra­                    piece o f the jigsaw puzzle ';
                                                        Where you could easily have read                                                                                                                                          phy, exhaustive notes,                      into place.                    1
                                                      elaboration and embellishment,                                                                                                                                              and a comprehensive                            Paganism had been          •'!
             T WHAT point did Caro­                   there are facts and first-hand                                                                                                                                              index. There are also 16                    vanquished and Europe a



A            line Beale make her fate­
             ful mistake? Was it
             when she decided to con­
             ceal her pregnancy?
When she gave birth to a baby girl,
alone, in a hotel room without seek­
ing medical help? Or when she put •
                                                      accounts, quotes and interviews
                                                      with the key players, as you might
                                                      expect from a broadsheet Crime cor­
                                                      respondent,
                                                        Each person, no matter how minor,
                                                      gets a potted biography which slows
                                                      the pace of the book but adds to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pages of photographs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  which include an illus­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tration of an intriguing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  reconstruction of King
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Edwin of Northumbria’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7th century palace com­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  plex at Yeavering, sited
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              had become, at least
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nominally, a completely • -j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Christian continent.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 What a narrative it is. “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The book’s title is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              uninspiring, but not the s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              book itself. This is a com--';
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             )

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ’’


that baby - which she believed was                    reality of Caroline’s situation.                                                                                                                                            on a natural terrace                        pelling story engagingly ,j
stillborn - into a bag?                                 This is the story of how a “normal”                                                                                                                                       which slopes down to the                    told. And here and there .1
  The commonly-held belief is that,                   person copes in an abnormal situa­                                                                                                                                          River Glen,                                                  romanti- 1
even then, Caroline would have                        tion, removed from everything famil­                                                                                                                                         scene of mass                                               cally told, '
made it safely back to the UK had
she not tried to carry the bag con­
                                                      iar.
                                                        As Caroline went into labour,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   baptisms            / The UK, a                             too.          ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   administered                                                  Others '
taining the baby around her neck                      waist-deep in bathwater, she felt as                                                                                                                                         by Paulinus,        ■ member in                             who have i
through customs.                                      though it was happening to someone                                                                                                                                           the first                                                   tackled      -j
  Even the officer who arrested her                   else and said it was like watching a                                                                                                                                         Bishop of           our time of the                         such a        ,
at JFK Airport admitted: “Caroline                    black and white TV.                                                                                                                                                          York.                                                       m assive
could have placed the baby in any                       After giving birth - all the while                                                                                                                                           This is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       European                                subject
kind of garbage can and we would                      lapsing in and out of consciousness •   C aroline B eale: Forced to adm it her “guilt: s o s h e cou ld b e freed from th e American ju s tic e sy ste m .
probably still be looking for the                     Caroline cut the umbilical cord with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   story of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  taking of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Union, was in                           have self- Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               indul*      .!
mother.”                                              a pair of nail scissors and left the     only give limited explanations - her         friend died, Caroline believed her              In the end the evidence was never      Christianity       those distant                            gently        ,
  Instead, the 30-year-old health                     baby floating in the bathwater.          memory, is sketchy of the actual             baby had died with-her. But an                tried. As Caroline refused to go back    to Scandi­                                                  taken two '‘r
worker from Essex spent eight                           Unsure what to do then, she knew       birth and she could not explain con­         autopsy showed the baby had taken             to Riker’s, the only - but damning -     navia and          days very                                or more       *
bewildering months awaiting trial in                  only that she had to take the baby       clusively why or how she kept her            a breath. It was this breath that the         way out was to plead guilty to           even to Ice­                                                volumes        ’
custody in Riker’s Island and was                     back to England.                        •pregnancy a secret because she               prosecution case hinged on.                   manslaughter in the second degree        land and            much a part                             to do it.     1
eventually forced to admit her                          Much of the book is less about         could not explain it to herself. After         One of the defence witnesses lined          and agree to psychiatric treatment       Greenland, as
“guilt” in a plea bargain so she •                    what happened and more about             all, who could answer why they               up was Professor John Emery, emer­            in England.                              well as to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of Europe,                         y    Yet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fletcher, ,i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ■'!
could go home.                                        what happened next - the court case,     behaved irrationally?                        itus professor of paediatric pathol­            Although Caroline’s arrest and        Latin coun­                                                  though he
  Had the same series of events                       the time on remand, the people Car­       The reason she gave for hiding the          ogy at the University of Sheffield,           subsequent court case was widely        tries such as                                                disciplines
occurred in the UK it is doubtful .                   oline met in the US, the legal rows,     pregnancy was that her best friend           who concluded the baby had proba­             reported, some of the facts are so      Spain. And the bringing                    him self to one, leaves out
Caroline would ever have gone to                      the phone calls back and forth.          was dying of cancer at the time and          bly died in the uterus and gave sev­          incredible they raise only more         of it to these British                     nothing of importanc e. ;!
court.                                                  The author had access to Caroline-     Caroline did not like to break her           eral explanations for air being pre­          questions. This book goes some way      Isles. It’s about establish­                  He gives us, d&light-      'j
  Duncan Campbell could have writ­                    for in-depth interviews but she could    own news at such a time. When her            sent in the lungs.                            towards answering them.                 ing archbishoprics and                     fully, portraits of all the ■]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  bishoprics and monaster­                   leading characters of the ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ies in places as far apart                 m illenium covered by h is r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  as Constantinople -                        chronicle: the Venerable ;J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Istanbul in modem                          Bede, Columba, Aidan,

      An empty space full of nature’s beauty                                                                                                                                                                                      Turkey - and Gardar on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Greenland’s southern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  shores.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     And, on our domestic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wilfrid of York, John o f '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Beverley and Anselm of i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Canterbury, to name ; ;"i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             som e o f the British ones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  front, of their being set                    .. There’s also ail the    .‘
    Gobi: Tracking The                                                                                                                                                                         ontology and speaks to             up in centres we know                      popes, emperors, kings, j
    D ese rt                                                                                                                                                                                   some of Andrews’ succes­           better like Iona and Lind-                 bishops, abbots, theolo-'
    John Man (Weidenfeldand                                                                                                                                                                    sors.                              isfame, York, Dublin and                   gians, historians and           '
    Nicolson, £18.99).                                                                                                                                                                           However, as interesting          London.                                    other lum inaries of the
                                                                                                                                                                                               as desert fauna past and              And, though it probably                 exciting, turbulent 1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                               present are, it is regret­         doesn’t mean to, the book                  year period to which he ,
    Richard Hopwood              ______                                                                                                                                                        table that Man does not            also shows that what we                    has turned his expert           ’
                                                                                                                                                                                               devote more time to                now call the United King­                  eye.
   THE Gobi Desert: a name                                                                                                                                                                     informing the reader               dom, a member in our                          Here, too, are outlines
    which effortlessly conjures
   up pictures o f uncharted,                        s ii                                                                                                                                      about the Gobi’s most
                                                                                                                                                                                               interesting inhabitants, its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  time of the European
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Union, was in those dis­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of, or at least references r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             to, councils o f the          .
   trackless wastes and a                                                                                                                                                                      population of nomadic              tant days very much part                   Church such as Nicaea
   region which until                                                                                                                                                                          herdsmen,                          of Europe.                                 in 325, i^aitioch in 341,      '
   recently lived up to the                                                                                                                                                                      He does meet several of            This was coincidentally                  Paris in 561, and W hitby,J
   image.                                                                                                                                                                                     the people - although               true economically.                         the council which in 664 (
     The Gobi, wedged                                                                                                                                                                         there is, on average, only            We were then what we                     decided when Easter          »i
   between Russia and China;                                                                                                                                                                   one per square mile - and          are still - a trading                      should be observed in         I
   was, to all intents and pur­                                                                                                                                                               does give us some informa­          nation. But It was pri­                    Britain.                      /
   poses, off limits to West­                                                                                                                                                                 tion.                               marily true ecclesiasti­                      This is history made       j
   erners before the end of                                                                                                                                                                      But more colourful por­          cally and remained the                     vivid and real: a gem of a .
   the Cold War when Russia                                                                                                                                                                   traits of desert life in the        case right up to the time                  book.
   withdrew from Mongolia -                                                                                                                                                                   gel's - the white, round
   and much of Mongolia is,                                                                                                                                                                   house-tents known else­
   effectively, the Gobi.                                                                                                                                                                     where in Central Asia as
     Not that tourists have                                                                                                                                                                   yurts - would have been
   exactly flocked to this                                                                                                                                                                    welcome. Likewise, more
   wilderness since the                                                                                                                                                                       of the sights, sounds and
   demise of the evil empire.                                                                                                                                                                 smells of Ulan Bator
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YORKSHIRE POST
   John Man is at the van­                     The A ltai m ou n tain s in th e Gobi D ese rt, under th e first sn ow o f w inter.                                                            would have daubed a                     READER H O L ID A Y
   guard of a few hardy trav­                  nation, the Gobi has life in      of weather conditions,             plains, Man unfortunately                 Among the more famous           splash of human colour on
   ellers and scientists who                   abundance and stunning            from searing heat to freez­        fails in his quest for the              ex-residents of the Gobi          the endless desert land­
   have ventured into this                     natural beauty, a glimpse         ing cold, the one seeming          rare snow leopard of the                are the dinosaurs whose           scape.
   area and his account is all                 of which is given by the          constant feeing the fierce,        mountains. Even more elu­               fossils - eggs and all - were       It was not only the Gobi
   the more fascinating for                    too few photographs in            moaning wind.                      sive is the world's only                discovered by Roy Chap­           which became available
   that.                                       this book.                          He also encounters a rich        species o f desert bear, but            man Andrews, the model            when the Soviet Union fell,
     Far from being the                          John Man covers moun­           diversity, of wildlife, but        this is hardly surprising as            for Indiana Jones, in the         but also the nation of Mon­
   unprepossessing and deso­                   tains, canyons and dunes          whereas there are gazelles         there are perhaps only 30               1920s. Man proves himself         golia - but that is perhaps
   late place o f popular imagi-               and experiences a variety         aplenty on the desert              left alive.                             knowledgeable about pale­         a tale for another book.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13nights^aboard                                           from




L E T T E R S                                                                   production. Many of the floral
                                                                                tributes have carried the mes­
                                                                                                                   is read instead of the dis­
                                                                                                                   torted version reported by the
                                                                                                                                                            would be to axe the millen­
                                                                                                                                                            nium dome - costing £850m -
                                                                                                                                                                                                vice as our NSPCC Child Pro­
                                                                                                                                                                                                tection Helpline, providing
TO         THE            EDITOR                                                sage - “May you rest in            media.                                   and spend it instead on build­      counselling, information and                                      mmm
                                                                                peace.’1                             Princess Diana’s death is              ing a hospital on the site          advice to anyone concerned
Write: The Editor, Yorkshire Past, Wellington Street, /
Leeds LSI 1RF. Fax: 0113-238 8537.                    ^
                                                                                  Dare we hope “the rest is        indeed a tragedy, but I have             named after the Princess.          that a child is at risk of sex­
Phone: 0113-243 2701, ext 8910 (after 4.30pm,                                   silence” will apply to her sur­    been appalled over the past               This would be supported by        ual, physical or emotional
max 150 words please), e-mail: yp.editor@ypn.co.uk.                             vivors?                            week by the frenzy of senti­             all the people I am sure, as it     abuse or neglect.
• Please include your full postal address.                                                                         mentality which has been                 would be a very useful and            The service has been set up
                                                                                     From: Jill Pullan,            whipped up by the media.                 worthy cause.                       because deaf people often

Not all the people want                                                         l&zJ St Catherine’s Road,
                                                                                     Harrogate.
                                                                                                                     Some restrained reporting
                                                                                                                   of events during the week
                                                                                                                   would have been preferable to
                                                                                                                                                             I am sure such a scheme
                                                                                                                                                            would have won the backing
                                                                                                                                                            of the Princess and her family
                                                                                                                                                                                                have difficulty reporting and
                                                                                                                                                                                                discussing their concerns
                                                                                                                                                                                                about a child.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   g, ‘Tenerife Qibraltar
this hysteria over Diana                                                        Sir, - The views expressed by
                                                                                Bernard Dineen on Diana
                                                                                (September 8) echoed my
                                                                                                                   the constant bombardment
                                                                                                                   we have had to endure. The
                                                                                                                                                            would approve as well.                Children who are deaf also
                                                                                                                                                                                                experience difficulties inform­           Qran Canaria
                                                                                                                   procession of the cortege and                                                ing adults about the abuse or
      from: M Smith,                        Do they realise there are           thoughts exactly. I was begin­     the funeral sendee took place                                               ill-treatment they may be
      Beaumont Park,                        other “people’1who don’t            ning to think we (ie myself,       with dignity and were very               Now hear this                      experiencing.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S a t u r d a y 6 t o F r id a y 19
      Huddersfield.                         expect the Queen to romp            family and some friends and        moving.                                  ■v:l:i From: John Cameron,            As well as being aimed at                              D ecem ber 1997
                                            down Piccadilly beating her         acquaintances) were the only         Diana's achievements were                     NSPCC Child                 these deaf children who will                   h e B la c k P r i n c e , w i t h s u p e r b l y a p p o i n t e d
Sir, - 1 would like to redress              breast in a public display of       sane people around. Thank          very real, and her concern for                  Protection Helpline,        need help or advice, the                 T     restau ran ts, attractive and c o m fo r ta b le lo u n g e s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and places to rest as w e ll as play, has a w e lc o m in g
the balance slightly, after                 g rief- reducing suffering to       you, Bernard Dineen.               those in our society less fortu­                London.                     textphone helpline is avail­             a n d i n f o r m a l a t m o s p h e r e in w h i c h y o u w i f i
reading the criticism about                 the amount of noise measured                                           nate than ourselves deserves                                                able for adults who are                  im m e d ia t e ly feel at ease. The m a x im u m p a sse n g e r
your contributors Bernard                   by applause in a TV game                                               recognition, but I feel that to          Sir, - The NSPCC would             deaf.                                    c o m p le m e n t is 440.
Dineen and Helen Bullock,                   show.                               Royal support                      make her a cult figure is a              appreciate your help in publi­        Deaf parents for example,                F u lly air -c o n d itio n e d an d sta b ilise d , Black Prince
  I looked in vain for Bernard                I consider Diana’s brother's •    [pjp From: Mrs Christine                                                                                                                                boasts a w id e range o f w ell-app ointed cabins all with
                                                                                                                   great mistake.                           cising a new child protection      may be worried about coping              TV and p rivate facilities. Two e x cellent restaurants,
Dineen’s column last Monday                 funeral tribute to be on a par      MM Brinkley, St George's                                                    helpline service for deaf peo­     with their children or deaf              the Fleur d e Lys and the Royal Garter, will s p o il y o u
morning, and the thought                    with Marc Antony's eulogy                Road, Harrogate.              Editor's footnote: The York­             ple.                               neighbours may be concerned              for c h o ic e at b r e ak fast, lu n ch , d i n n e r an d supper.
crossed my mind that he had                 on the death of Julius Caesar,                                         shire Post published the fu ll             The freephone number is          that the children next door              Traditional after n o o n tea is s e r v e d in th e lo u n g e s .
been muzzled.                               and with the same derisive          Sir, - 1 hope we can allow all                                                                                                                          R ound th e clock entertain m ent c o m e s in the form of
                                                                                                                   text o f E a rl Spencer’s speech in      0800 056 0566.                     are often left alone.                    q u iz z e s , crafts, b in g o , c a rd s, d a n c e c la ss e s,
  However, he popped up on                  purpose in mind.                    those close to Princess Diana      a special edition on Sunday.               We're pleased with the             This service allows deaf peo­          s w im m in g , sauna, g y m n a siu m , international cabaret,
Tuesday morning, with the                     I thought the Earl's address      to grieve in peace and that we                                              steady response we’ve              ple to communicate with                  m u sic recitals, dan cin g, p ian o bar and casino.
only reasonable account I                   totally out of order, in partic­    can give them our support at                                                received since this textphone      trained social work counsel­                W e've in c lu ded free return coach transfers to D over
have come across during this                ular his patronising advice to      this unhappy time.                                                          helpline started in July.                                                   and fr e e car p a r k in g is a vailab le at N o r m a n t o n in
                                                                                                                                                                                               lors by exchanging messages
week of mass hysteria, con­                 the Royal Family in such cir­         Criticism of the Royal Fam­      Hospital memorial                        However, as one in seven           via a keyboard and a small
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W est Yorkshire.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T h i s c r u i s e h a s b e e n a r r a n g e d f o r r e a d e r s of
cerning the death of the ex-                cumstances.                         ily has been quite unjustified,          From: Diana Pickles,               adults in the UK have a hear­      screen.                                  Y orkshir e P o st N e w s p a p e r s fay S h e a r in g s H o lid a y s,
wife of the Prince of Wales,                  However, this provoked a          suggesting that forces are at            Reservoir Hotel, Allerton          ing impediment, we’d like            Hearing readers using the              M iry L an e, W ig a n , W N 3 4A G , A B TA V 6468,
  I’m a bit tired of all the TV             round of applause from the          work which'are trying to                 Road, Bradford.                    them all to know about the         usual telephone network can              t e le p h o n e (01942) 241432.
and radio coverage referring                congregation - or should I say      undermine the monarchy.                                                     service.                           still call the 24-hour NSPCC                For further details contact S h e a r i n g s .H o l i d a y s or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t e le p h o n e o u r 24-h ou r a n s w e r p h o n e on (0113) 238
to “The People” - People’s                  “audience’1since it turned a         I hope, too, that the exact       Sir, - A fitting memorial to               The textphone helpline           Child Protection Helpline on            .8384
Princess, People’s Vigti etc.               sacred ceremony into a stage        text of Earl Spencer's tribute     Diana, Princess of Wales                 offers the same 24-hour ser­       freephone 0800 800 500.
                                                          L-
              YORKSHIRE POST
 12           THURSDAY SEPTEMBER 1 1 1 9 9 7



Mother recognised man convicted of sex attack on son                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £5m may
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pour in
Paedophile caught                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for wine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     fanatic’s
by council warning
A PAEDOPHILE who was at                           mg a south-east London pri­                         imposed, although this time                      and national newspapers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cellar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IT is enough to make wine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    buffs drool in anticipa­
the centre of a council's                         mary school, was arrested.                          with the condition that he                       picked up the story, discov­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tion.
warning to parents that he                          The jury at Southwark                             receive medical treatment.                       ered Pedley’s identity and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The world's la rg est
was living in their area was                      Crown Court took less than                            Then, in July last year, he                    named him.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   private wine cellar is to go
convicted yesterday of a sex                      half an hour to reject his                          was arrested after inde­                           An hour-long TV pro­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       under the hammer at
a,ttack on a 13-year-old boy.                     claim that he had been the                          cently exposing himself in                       gramme was run on pae­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C hristie’s in central
 ■Michael Pedley,. 45, the son                    victim of mistaken identity                         front of children and was                        dophiles and included clips                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  London next week.
of. a senior retired                              and convicted him of inde­                          jailed for two months..                          of Pedley skulking around                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The 19,000 bottles, un­
Metropolitan Police officer,                      cent assault.                                         About the same time, he                        outside schools.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             veiled at an auction house
p'ounced on the boy on the                          He showed no emotion                              had come to the attention of                       During legal argument at                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   preview yesterday, are
day the London local                              either when the verdict was                         Haringey Council in Lon­                         the trial, Pedley’s lawyer,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  expected to raise £5m at
authority’s letter about him                      returned or when Ian Paton,                         don, which heard o f his                         Peter Guest, argued that the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the sale on September 18
was sent out                                      prosecuting, read out his                           presence in their area and                       previous publicity meant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and 19-
 . After indecently assaulting                    lengthy criminal record.                            decided to alert parents.                        his client would be unable                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     But the owner, an anon­
him and making; an obscene                          Pedley, an unemployed                               Earlier      this     year,                    to have a fair trial.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ymous European business­
suggestion, Pedley, who has                       chef, of Perry Vale, Forest                         Lewisham          Education                        But Judge Michael Harris                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   man in his early middle
a' string of previous convic­                     Hill, south-east London, sat                        Authority was told he had                        said if every child molester                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 age, has not been forced
tions for interfering with                        cleaning his glasses as Mr                          moved to Forest Hill.                            who had previous convic­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     by financial restraints to
children, ran off,                                Paton revealed that he first                          They decided to join the                       tions was able to escape jus­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                sell his collection.
                                                  turned his attentions to                            half a dozen other local                         tice on those grounds, it                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The connoisseur, who,
  •Not long afterwards the                        young boys 18 years ago.                            authorities in Britain who                       would amount to a "pae­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      has built his cellar over 15
boy’s mother arrived to col­                        Then his victim s were                            had taken similar action                         dophile's charter”.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          years, is keeping more
lect him, learned of his                          aged eight and nine. He was                         against paedophiles and                            However, he ordered Ped­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   than half his 40*000 bot--
ordeal and phoned the                             put on probation.                                   inform parents.                                  ley to tie referred to as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ties and sellin g mainly!
police.                                             Eight months later he was                           The letter from the coun­                      “Michael Peters" during the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  duplicates.
 IThe next day she received                       back in court for attacking                         cil's director of education,                     hearing and directed that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      “He’s a fanatical wine
Lewisham Council’s warn­                          an 11-year-old boy. Again he                        Althea Efunshile, did not                        jurors should come from                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lover,” said Paul Bowker,;
ing and realised that their                       was put on probation.                               name Pedley but described                        north-west London.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           director of Christie’s wine
description of Pedley was                           Three months after that,                          him.                                               After the verdict and after                                                                                                                                                                                                                                department.
yery similar to that her son                      he indecently assaulted a                             It said he was shabbily                        revealing Pedley’s true iden­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  “But he simply got to the
had given of his attacker.                        boy aged eight after offering                       dressed, had a “flat boxer's                     tity to the jury, the judge                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  point where he realised he
 ‘ She contacted police again                     him money. This time he                             nose” and pronounced his                         adjourned sentencing for a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w ould never drink a ll
q!nd next day the balding,                        was jailed for six months.                          Rs as Ws.                                        month.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40,000 bottles of tins cali'
bespectacled paedophile,'                           In 1986, he tried to inter­                         Thousands of letters were                        He remanded Pedley in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bre even in five lifetiines.
who only weeks earlier had                        fere with a 10-year-old boy.                        delivered or faxed to                            custody for pre-sentence and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ‘'So, while he’s selling 36
moved into a flat overlook-                       A third probation order was                         schools. Within hours, local                     psychiatric reports.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         b ottles of the Chateau
 *‘ ^ ^               ^ .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M outon'Rothschildi for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    instance, he’s keeping

Parents ‘put health of children                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     another 100.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      The most expensive sin-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gle bottle is a jeroboam of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1945 Chateau Mouton'

in secondhand beds at risk’
THE health of up to one-                          on fashionable shoes or                             which is often aggravated at                      nationwide campaign this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rothschild, expected to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    reach up to £40,000 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    described by C hristie’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    w ine taster M ichael
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Broadbent         as      “the
and-a-half million children                       trainers which only last for                        night by dust mites which                         autumn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Churchill of clarets”.
is, at risk because they sleep                    three or four months, or on                         thrive on the warm, damp                            It is also publishing a new                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 “It is above and beyond
in secondhand beds, a                             properly measured shoes for                         environment and dead skin                         booklet, The Good Night                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     its peers - richly coloured,
report out today claims.                          younger children, but they                          cells found in mattresses,                        Guide for Children, which                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   exciting, spicy, super-
 -New figures show 181,000                        expect the same child to                            especially old ones.                              aims to make parents more                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   fragrant, concentrated yet
three to eight year-olds have                     sleep in a bed which should                           The survey .found children                      aware of the role of a good                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 exquisitely balanced, still
to’, sleep on beds between 20                     have been thrown out years                          in London and East Anglia                         bed in getting a good night's                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tannic. Perfection.”
and 30 years old.                                 ago.                                                were the most likely to sleep                     sleep.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        The oldest bottle is an
  The Sleep Council claims                          ‘’Nine out of 10 parents                          on beds which were 10 to 15                         It includes advice on sleep­                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1847 Chateau d ’Yquem
steeping on beds aged more                        questioned believe that                             years old or more - 16 per                        ing disorders, poor sleeping                                                                                                                                                                                                                                valued a t £10,000. The
than 10 years old can                             every child should have a                           cent compared with the                            habits and common reasons                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ow ner could n ot bring
worsen asthma, lead to                            new supportive bed, yet                             national average of 10 per                        for broken sleep.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           himself to part with vint­
tiredness and lethargy at                         there is still a scandalous                         cent.                                               Ms Alexander added: “We                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ages from 1811, 1 8 2 2 , 1825
school and cramp growing                          number of children sleeping                           Children in East Anglia                         want to make serious in­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and 1831.
children.                                         on old, sagging beds.1’                             and Wales were more likely                        roads into the secondhand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The sale is dominated by
  Experts from the organisa­                        The survey of 500 parents                         than others to sleep on a                         bed market by encouraging                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bordeaux, and Mr Bowker
tion hit out at parents who                       in 10 different areas across                        secondhand bed - 21 and 20                        parents to give new bed pur­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                said: “It’s not a sale for
they claim are failing to                         England, Scotland and                               per cent compared with the                        chases a higher priority.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Burgundy lovers because 1
acknowledge the importance                        Wales revealed that, while                          average of 11 per cent.                             ’‘When you think that peo­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                he doesn’t particularly
of, a good-quality bed.                           88 per cent of parents regu­                          The Council, backed by                          ple can lose as much as hall'                                                                                                                                                                                                                               like Burgundy.
   Jessica Alexander, consul­                     larly pay for properly fitting                      bed manufacturers, retailers                      a pint of fluid a night and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “But he's a very eclectic
tant to the Sleep Council,                        shoes, one in 10 young peo­                         and suppliers, suggests beds                      shed a pound of skin cells a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                collector and there are
said: ‘It seems that parents                      ple aged 14 to 18 complain                          should be replaced every 10                       year, much of it into their                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w ines from Spain and
have a mental block when it                       their bed is too small.                             years and more often for a                        mattresses, you begin to rea­                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Australia, There may only,
coeies to the very basic pro­                       Almost one .in 10 children                        growing child. To persuade                        lise the conditions that chil­                     ‘Churchill o f clarets1; Sylvie Buschmann, o f Christie’s, holds up a jeroboam o f Mouton-ftothsctiilti,, vintage                                                                                        be three lots from Spain
vision of a decent bed.                           were also found to suffer                           parents of the benefits of a                      dren in secondhand beds                            1945, which is estim ated to s e ll for £30,000-£40,000 at it s Grands Crus private wine cellar s a le , next                                                                                            but they are of the coun­
 - “They’ll spend a fortune                       from asthma - a condition                           new bed, it w ill launch a                        are expected to sleep in."                         Thursday and Friday, The jeroboam is th e m ost exp en sive sin gle b ottle in th e sa le . Picture: M atthew Fearn.                                                                                     try's greatest wine/'




                                                                                                                                                                                            M RRKM HRH
                                                                                                                                                     "7
                                                                     M JM




            CHRISTMAS IS COMING -                                                                                                                                               Q a ra u m                                    L r o a d a n J e n jjo                        ij    ik e        J e liq L b                  o j i k e je s iw                 e     season In j o                         r e ljjn          p ta r is


      CHRISTMAS SHOPPING IN BOSTON                                                                                 VALKENBURG CHRISTMAS MARKET                                                                                                             CHRISTMAS IN THE
                              5 to 9 D e c e m b e r - £379
                                                                                                                                                  7-10 D e c e m b e r - £95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AUSTRIAN TYROL
    C eleb rate C h r is tm a s e a r ly a n d e n joy a w o n d e r fu l w e e k e n d b r e a k in
 B o s t o n , g a t e w a y to N e w E n g l a n d a n d b i r t h p la c e o f t h e A m e r ic a n                                                                                                                                                         22-28 D e c e m b e r - £299
 R e vo lu tion . B o s t o n offers a n i n t e r e s t in g m i x o f o ld w o r ld c h a r m and                  V a lk e n b u r g i s a n a ttr a c tiv e s p a tow n in s o u th e r n llu lla u d m i l l i n ' ;
                                                                                                                  i n a v a l l e y s u r r o u n d e d by t h e h i l l s o f L i m b i n g . Wi<!i ii s .inrii'ni                 E n jo y C h r i s t m a s in a W i n t e r W o n d e r l a n d a m i d s t s n o w - c a p p e d
 p r e s e n t d a y A m e r ic a w h e r e e l e g a n t c o lo n ia l h o u s e s a n d d ig n ifie d                                                                                                                           p e a k s and p ic t u r e s q u e c h a l e t - s t y l e v i l l a g e s w h e r e y o u r h o s t s w i l l
 c h u r c h e s b l e n d w i t h m o d e r n s k y s c r a p e r s . D u e to i t s c o m p a c t               c a s t le , g r o tto s , c a ta c o m b s a n d fin e s h o p s th er e is p le n ty i<> dn ;uid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  provide a w arm w e lc o m e an d jo vial fe s t iv it i e s . W ith a n ea rly coach
 s t r u c t u r e a n d a n e f f i c i e n t p u b lic t r a n s p o r t s y s t e m t h e v is ito r c a n     s e e . E a ch y e a r t h e to w n h o ld s a g lit te r in g C h r is tm a s m arkef housed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  from Y o r k sh ir e w e 'll o v e r n i g h t in t h e F r e n c h c it y o f M e t z before
 e x p e rien ce i t s m a n y s ig h t s , s o u n d s a n d a t t r a c tio n s w ith e a se .
 • O u r coach w ill d e p a r t Y orkshir e ea rly for G a tw ic k a n d t h e V ir gin
                                                                                                                  i n s p e c t a c u l a r c a n d l e l i t l i m e s t o n e e a v e s w h i l s t th e si r c i'is a r e
                                                                                                                  fe s to o n e d w i t h d ecorations. J o in u s for a fe stiv e break sfayin.L; three
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  eim linuin'i o u r jo u r n e y Lo t h e A u s tr ia n Tyrol to s ta y four n ig h t s o n a                                         FRENCH CHRISTMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h alf-b u m d a r r a n g e m e n t a t a f a m ily r u n hotef. O n C h r i s t m a s E v e
 A tla n tic flig h t to B o sto n . W e’ll s ta y th r e e n ig h t s a t a c en tr a lly located                n i g h t s a t a c o m fo r ta b le h o t e l. W e ’v e in c lu d e d retu r n ■-<>;■■-[■ u \iv r l.           w e ’ll v i s i t I n n s b r u c k - o t h e r i n c l u d e d e x c u r s i o n s w i l l t a k e i n a                           SHOPPING MINIBREAK
 h o t e l w it h in w a lk in g d is ta n c e o f f a m o u s B o s t o n C o m m o n . O ptional                C h a n n e l c r o s s i n g s , t h r e e n i g h t s ’ a c c o m m o d a t i o n in rn            u ifli     |ja()ufnr s k i r es o r t s u c h a s K i t z b u h e l o r M a y r h o f e n , a n d v i s i t th e
 e x c u r s i o n s w i l l in c l u d e c i t y s i g h t s e e i n g , a f u l l d a y a t W o r c e s t e r
                                                                                                                  p r iv a t e fa c ilit ie s , C o n t i n e n t a l b r e a k f a s t s , a v is it lo thi C h r is im s is     a n cien t g la s s b lo w in g cen tre, R a tte n b er g , a n d b e a u tifu l L ake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5-7 D e c e m b e r - £79
 C o m m o n O u t le t for d is c o u n t s h o p p i n g an d a n e v e n i n g a t t h e fam o us                                                                                                                              A c h e n s c e . C h r i s t m a s D a y w ill be s o m e t h i n g t o r e m e m b e r - w e ’ve
                                                                                                                  m a r k e t , a v i s i t to B r u g e s a n d to a h y p e r m a r k e t . D u r in u o u r s ta y                                                                                                                                S o lv e y o u r C h r is t m a s p r e s e n t p r o b le m s , s t o c k u p o n y o u r d u t y fr e es
 U n i o n O y s t e r H o u s e for a tr a d itio n a l N e w E n g la n d lo b s te r dinner.                                                                                                                                   in c lu d e d a l i g h t lu n c h fo ll o w e d l a t e r b y a s u m p t u o u s C h r i s t m a s
                                                                                                                  th e r e w ill b e a n o p p o rtu n ity to v is it b u s tlin g C ologne oiul l hr quaim .                                                                                                                                      an d e n jo y a n i n t e r e s t p a c k e d C o n t i n e n t a l w e e k e n d b r e a k in t o t h e
 T h e s in g le s u p p l e m e n t is £ 1 2 0 .                                                                                                                                                                                 din ner, m usic :ind dan cin g. T h e s in g le s u p p l e m e n t is £ 6 5 .
                                                                                                                  E ife l v illa g e o f M o n s ch a u . T h e s in g le s u p p l e m e n t is £32.                                                                                                                                              bargain! O u r c oach w i i l d e p a r t York, H a r r o g a te , L e e d s , W oolle y E d g e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a n d W oodall S e r v ic e s e a r l y to ta k e t h e lu n c h t i m e fe r r y c r o s s i n g to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C a la is and t h e n c o n tin u e to L ille to s t a y t w o n ig h t s w i t h b r e a k fa s t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in c lu d e d a t a c e n t r a lly located ho tel. T h a t e v e n i n g y o u w ill b e a b le to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b u y din ner, p e r h a p s v i s i t a b a r a n d e n jo y t h e fe s tiv e a t m o s p h e r e o f
                     DISNEYLAND PARIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              t h e C h r i s t m a s i l l u m i n a t i o n s . N e x t d a y w e ’ll e x p l o r e t h e q u a i n t
                   PRE-CHRISTMAS MAGIC                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NEW YEAR IN THE                                                                        B e l g ia n to w n o f B r u g e s - fa m o u s f o r .its c a n a ls , c h o c o la te s a n d coffee
                                                                                                                         COLOGNE CHRISTMAS MARKET                                                                                                           GERMAN VALLEYS                                                                         h o u s e s - th e n r e tu r n to L ille for t h e e v e n in g . O n our l a s t d a y w e ’ll
 •{                  5-8 D e c e m b e r - £125 a d u lts ,                                                                     & MOSELLE                                                                                                                                                                                                          ta k e a g u id e d to u r o f L ille b e fo r e c a llin g a t C ite E u r o p e , a n en o r m o u s
  !                 £85 c h ild s h a r in g w ith a d u lts                                                                                                                                                                                        29 D e c e m b e r - 2 J a n u a r y - £199                                                    c o m p le x of b o u tiq u e s , b a r s , r e s t a u r a n t s a n d a h y p e r m a r k e t , be fo r e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w e c r o s s t h e C h a n n e l a n d r e t u r n h o m e . T h e s i n g l e s u p p l e m e n t is
  -A m a g ic a l e x p e r ie n c e a w a i t s y o u w h e n y o u v i s i t D is n e y la n d P a r is                                        10-13 D e c e m b e r - £85                                                        R in g out th e old ... R in g in th e n e w w it h a m a r v e llo u s celebratory                            £25.
 a t C h r is tm a s t im e . A tr u ly fe s tiv e a t m o s p h e r e e x i s t s w ith t h e ’lig h ts
 rtf w in t e r ’ - a n in c r e d ib le a r r a y o f th o u s a n d s o f l ig h t s f o r m in g a n a r c h                                                                                                                   r>-day break Lo th e p ic tu r e s q u e M o se lle Valley. W e’ll s e t o ff e a r ly b y
                                                                                                                       T h e R hin feland c a p ita l o f C ologn e b o a s ts t h e b e s t C hrist urns Mark in                 co a c h from Y o r k sh ir e to a r riv e a t o u r h o t e l in L o f, in t h e M o s e lle
 a lo n g M a in S t r e e t U S A - fab ulo us C h r is t m a s d e c oration s, w e lco m in g
                                                                                                                   i n G e r m a n y w it h w o n d e r fu lly d e c o ra ted s ta lls s e llin g nil m an n e r or               Valley, by e v e n i n g w h e r e w e ’ll s t a y fo u r n ig h t s w ith b r e a k fa s t an d
 S h ops o ffer in g d e lig h tfu l C h r istm a s s o u v e n ir s and p r e se n ts,
                                                                                                                    f e s t i v e f a r e a n d g i f t s . W e ’ll d e p a r t Y o r k s h ir e e a r l y in m a k e imr         d i n n e r i n c l u d e d . W e ’v e a ls o i n c l u d e d a n e x c u r s i o n to t h e R h i n e
 C h r is tm a s c a ro ller s a n d a sp e cial colourful C h r is t m a s P a r a d e . Our
                                                                                                                    C h a n n e l c r o s s i n g a n d a l a t e e v e n i n g a r r i v a l a t n u r f a m i l y rim           G o r g e , B o p p a r d a n d L o r e le y R o c k a n d a v i s i t to t h e p i c t u r e s q u e
 w e e k e n d b r e a k , c o s t i n g £ 1 2 5 for t w o a d u l t s s h a r i n g a n d £ 8 5 for
 c h ild r e n a g e d 3 -2 1 y e a r s s h a r i n g w it h t w o a d u lt s , in c l u d e s r e tu r n          h o t e V g n e s t h o u s e i n t h e M o s e l l e v illa g e o f B r o d u n b a c h , N e x i day         tow n of C oc h e m in t h e M o s e lle V a lle y - y o u m a y w i s h to t a k e a n                            BLACK PRINCE PRE-XMAS CRUISE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  optional e xcu rsion to Trier, G e r m a n y ’s o ld e s t city, or e x p lo r e t h e area
 ^ oach t r a v e l fro'm Y o r k sh ir e, C h a n n e l c r o s s in g s a b o a r d ie S h u t t l e ,           w e'll v is it C ologn e, a n d its celeb ra ted C h r is tm a s M ark et tn look Tor
 th r e e n ig h t s bed an d b r e a k fa s t in a g o o d 2 - s t a r G r e a te r P a r is a r e a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ind ep en dently. T h e r e w ill, o f course, be N e w Y ear celeb ra tio n s w ith                                                     6-19 D e c e m b e r - f ro m £699
                                                                                                                    u n u s u a l g i f t s a n d s o u v e n ir s , s a m p le h o t m u lle d w in e am! d e lig h ts           m u s i c , d a n c i n g a n d a s p e c i a l N e w Y e a r ’s d i n n e r . T h e s i n g l e
 h o t e l , a v i s i t t o c e n t r a l P a r i s a n d a o n e d a y a d m i s s i o n p a s s to             • s u c h , a s B r a t w u r s t a n d s p ic y g i n g e r b r e a d . T h e r e w ill he tim e lo                                                                                                                             V is it in g M a d e ir a , T enerife, G ran C a n a r ia , Morocco, G ib ra lta r '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .supplem ent is £30.
 D is n e y la n d P ar is. O p tio n a l e x c u r s io n s w ill b e a v a ila b le. T h e s in g le
                                                                                                                    e x p lo r e t h e s t y l i s h s t o r e s a n d b o u t iq u e s a n d v i s i t the m a g n ific e n t                                                                                                                       T h e B la c k P r in c e ,-w ith s u p e r b ly a p p o in te d r e s t a u r a n t s , a ttr a c tiv e
 s u p p l e m e n t is £42.
                                                                                                                    C a th e d r a l. T h e fo ll o w i n g day i s fr e e to e n joy th e Mnsulk- V alley <>r                                                                                                                                     a n d c o m fo r ta b le l o u n g e s a n d p l a c e s to r e s t a s w e l l a s p la y , h a s a
                                                                                                                   jo in a n o p t io n a l e x c u r s io n to p i c tu r e s q u e A a c h c n an d its colmirl'ul                                                                                                                               w e lc o m in g a n d in fo r m a l a t m o s p h e r e i n w h ic h y o u w ill i m m e d ia t e ly
                                                                                                                    C h r i s t m a s M a r k e t . O u r h o m e w a r d jo u r n e y w ill lie hrnken w it h a                                                                                                                                   feel a t e a s e . T h e m a x im u m p a s s e n g e r c o m p le m e n t is 4 4 0 .

  I                 PARIS PRE-CHRISTMAS
                                                                                                                    v i s i t to q u a i n t B r u g e s i n B e l g u i m a n d to a F r e n c h h.yperniarkM
                                                                                                                    before our C h a n n e l c ro s s in g an d a l a t e e v e n in g arrival in Yorkshire.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NEW YEAR IN PARIS                                                                           F u l l y a i r -c o n d i tio n e d a n d s t a b i l i s e d , B l a c k P r i n c e b o a s t s a w id e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r a n g e o f w e ll-a p p o in te d c a b in s a ll w it h T V an d p r iv a te 'facilities. Two
 •i                    SPECTACULAR                                                                                  T h e s i n g l e s u p p l e m e n t is £21.                                                                                   30 D e c e m b e r - 2 J a n u a r y - £129                                                    e x c e l l e n t r e s t a u r a n t s , t h e F le u r d e L y s and t h e R o y a l G arter, w ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s p o il y o u for c h o ic e a t b r e a k f a s t , lu n c h , d in n e r a n d .s u p p e r .
 -i                           5-8 D e c e m b e r - £89.99                                                                                                                                                                          C eleb rate t h e N e w Y ear in s ty le an d t a k e a tr u ly m e m o r a b le b r e a k                     T rad ition al a ftern oon t e a i s s e r v e d in t h e lo u n g e s . R o u n d t h e clock
 *                                          T h r ill to th e s p e c ta c le o f P a r is                                                                                                                                        in P ar is w h e n th e c ity is a t "its f e s t iv e b e s t. W e ’ve in c lu d e d c o a c h                  e n t e r t a i n m e n t c o m e s i n t h e form o f q u i z z e s , c r a f t s , b in g o , c a r d s,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  travel th rou gh o u t, retu r n fevry/le S h u t t l e c rossin gs, th r e e n ig h t s bed                     d a n c e c la s s e s , s w i m m in g , s a u n a , g y m n a s iu m , ’in t e r n a t io n a l ca baret,
                                          p r e p a r in g for C h r is t m a s - drive aloDg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an d breakI'iist a t a 3 - s t a r h o t e l a n d a N e w Y e a r ’s E v e P a r t y w ith                      m u s ic r e c it a ls, d a n c in g , p ia n o b a r a n d c asin o.
                                          t h e g lit te r in g C h a m p s E l y s e e s a n d s e e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d an cin g an d c h a m p a g n e a t m id n ig h t. T h e r e w ill be o p p o rtu n ities to
                                          store a fter sto r e decked w ith fe stiv e
                                          bou ghs and tw in k lin g lig h ts and
                                                                                                                                          METZ & TRIER                                                                            sue the s i g h t s , v i s i t V e r s a ille s , e x p lo r e M o n t m a r t r e , s e e ’P a r i s b y         W e’v e in c lu d e d free r e t u r n coach t r a n s f e r s to D o v e r a n d f r e e car
                                          b u r s tin g w ith e x q u is ite C o n tin e n ta l                                        CHRISTMAS MARKETS                                                                          N ig h t ’ an d c ru ise th e S e i n e a bo ard a B a t e a u M o u c h e . T h e s i n g l e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s u p p le m e n t is £42.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p a r k in g is a v a ila b le a t N o r m a n t o n in W e s t Yorkshire.
                                          m e r c h a n d is e . F r o m th e s m a l l e s t to the
                                          g r a n d e s t, e a c h w in d o w i s a b la z e w it h ■                                            12-15 D e c e m b e r - £99                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ■
                                          y u le ti d e cheer. We'll d e p a r t Y orkshire
                                          b y c o a c h a r l y to m a k e t h e C h a n n e l                       B e a u tifu l, v ib r a n t an d h is to r ic M e t z is o n e ol‘ Lliii Cow Fr-rudi eilie s
                                          c ro ssin g an d a rriv e a t o u r G rea ter
                                          P a r is a r e a h o t e l b y la te e v e n in g .
                                                                                                                   to o r g a n is e a C h r i s t m a s M a r k e t . W ith c e n t u r ie s o f t nic liticn iMctz                                                                                                                                                            DAY IN LAPLAND
                                          D u r i n g o u r t h r e e n i g h t s s t a y w e ’v e
                                                                                                                   o ff e r s s o m e t h i n g for e v e r y o n e from s u p e r b slmpping am i guuniirl                                                      DAY IN VIENNA                                                                                     S u n d a y 7 D e c e m b e r - £199 & £299 .
                                          in c lu d e d a to u r o f th e C h r is tm a s                          d in in g to c u ltu r a l a n d a r tis tic in t e r e s t s . With coach Croin Yorkshire
          Yorkshire Post                  illu m in a t io n s - o p t io n s w ill b e to tour                    a n d l e S h u t t l e C h a n n e l c r o s s i n g , w e ’ll s t a y t h r e e n i g h t x w i l h                                 S u n d a y 7 D e c e m b e r - £149                                                        D e p a r t L e e d s /B r a d fo r d e a r ly m o r n in g to c ross t h e A r ctic Cir cle i n
           Newspapers                     t h e fa m o u s s ig h t s o f P a r is , t a k e a trip                b r e a k f a s t in a c en tr a lly located ho tel. A s ig h t s e e in g tom o I' th e lify                                        +£10 a ir p o r t p a s s e n g e r d u ty                                                 t h e w i n t r y n o r t h e r n r e a c h e s o f F i n l a n d to m e e t t h e r e a l F a t h e r
        _    ,             _ 1, j         u p th e E iffe l Tower, v is it M o n tm a r tr e ,                     w i l l t a k e in t h e m a j o r h i g h l i g h t s b e fo r e v i s i t i n g th e c h a l e t s l y l e                                                                                                                    C h r is tm a s . W e offer " S a n ta ’s V illa g e ” w h e r e y o u c a n c h o o s e from a
       ivCUuCY            H o l i d a y s t a k e a S e in e riv e r c ru ise a n d v is it th e                                                                                                                                     Enjoy b r e a k fa s t a bove t h e clouds before a m id -m o r n in g arrival in                             r a n g e o f o p t io n a l a c t i v i t i e s or t h e ’’L a p la n d E n c o u n t e r ” w h e r e all
                                                                                                                   C h r i s t m a s M a r k e t w it h i t s il l u m i n a t i o n s , w o n d e r fu l d i s p l a y s an d    V ienna. B le n d in g old-w orld charm w it h Im p e r ia l s plendou r, V ie n n a
                                             m a g n ific e n t P a la c e o f V e rsa ille s.                     d e lig h t f u l Y u le t id e a t m o s p h e r e . W e ’v e a ls o in c lu d e d ;■ visit lo l In-                                                                                                                           y o u r L a p la n d a d v e n t u r e s are in c lu d e d . A c tiv itie s i n c lu d e a n e x c itin g
                                                 W e 'v e i n c l u d e d a 1 0% d i s c o u n t                                                                                                                                  boasts o p u le n t facades, im p r e s s iv e p a la c e s, d e lig h tfu l s h o p p in g a lo n g
                                                                                                                   n e a r b y C h r is tm a s M a r k e t a c r o s s th e G e r m an IwnliT in 'frier and m                                                                                                                                      s n o w m o b i l e r i d e t h r o u g h t h e p i n e f o r e s t to s e a r c h f o r F a t h e r
                                     C T c^ T yL vou ch er fo r s h o p p in g in th e                                                                                                                                            e le g a n t b o u le v a r d s a n d t r a d it io n a l c o ffe e h o u s e s s e r v i n g m o u t h ­        C h r is t m a s , a r e in d e e r a n a h u s k y d o g s l e i g h ride, a v is it to' S a n t a in
                                                   fa m o u s P r in te m p s d e p a r tm en t                    L u x e m b o u r g . D u r i n g o u r h o m e w a r d j o u r n e y w e 'll s l o p n i l at a               w a te r in g sp e c ia litie s. T h e colourful C h r is tm a s m a r k e t s w ill fill you                    h i s c o sy lo g cab in , a v i s i t to S a n ta 's P o s t Office w h e r e y o u c a n s e n d a
                                                       sto r e a n d w e'll m a k e a v i s i t to                 c h a m p a g n e c e lla r in E p e r n a y an d a h y p e r m a r k e t bi'fhre w e n'lui-n                  w it h I'esUve c h e er ! A n o p t io n is to t o u r t h e s p l e n d i d S c h o n b r u n n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s p e c i a l C h r i s t m a s G r e e t i n g , a L a p l a n d c e r e m o n y a n d - l u n c h - a ll
                                                          a h y p e r m a r k e t d u rin g our                    v i a l e S h u t t l e , a r r i v i n g Y o r k s h i r e by l a t e e v e n i n g . T h u s in              P a la ce and B e lv e d e r e C astle. D in n e r w ill be s e r v e d d u r in g th e r e t u r n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c h ild r e n u p to 1 2 y e a r s r eceiv e a s m a ll t o k e n L a p p is h g ift. D in n e r
                                                            h o m ew a rd jou rn ey. T he                          s u p p l e m e n t is £ 42.                                                                                   e v e n in g fligh t to L eeds/B radford.                                                                        w ill b e s e r v e d d u r in g t h e h o m e w a r d f li g h t a r r iv in g la t e e v e n in g .
                                                            s in g le s u p p l e m e n t i s £4 2 .




“1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r
    18 x                                                                                                                                               L ocal N ews                                                                           The Star, Thursday, September 11,1997




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         slam
                                                      mry-




                THE MIDWEEK
          tmmm m m m e e
                       (INCLUDING LU N C H
                     ON THE RIVER THAMES)
                                                                                   ‘ Bflak’'3

                                                                                 PARENTS will be able to
                                                                                 report bad schoolteaching
         ■k Full use o f executive coach throughout                              d irect to a G overnm ent
         * River Thames sightseeing cruise                                       watchdog unit, it was con­
         ★ Three course lunch on the Silver Bonito
                                                                                 firmed today.
        ★ A visit to the show o f your choice                                       Critics called the plan a
                                                                                 “sneak’s hotline” and teach­
        * Services o f lo u r m an ag er                     W                   e r s ’ l e a d e r s a c c u s e d th e
           A ll road tolls, includ ing existing VAT                              Government of taking “big
                                                                                 brother” power.
                                  T ic k e ts fo r
                                                                                   But Education and Employment
                                                                                 Secretary David Blunkett today
                                                                                 affirmed parents had a right to a
                                                                                 say on how schools were perform­
                            W ith d i n n e r & d a n c e                        ing.
         STAYING AT THE SUPERB HILTON RINGWAY VISITING BATH                        S heffield B rig h tsid e MP M r
                                                                                 Blunkett said: “I am not interested
                                                                                 in Government power. Lam inter­
    I   OUR WEEKEND INCLUDES:                                                    ested in the power of parents.”
      * Luxury coaching throughout with experienced driver                         He insisted he wanted to work
    ! * 1 night accommodation at The Hilton Ringway, Basingstoke                 in co-operation and partnership
      * Carvery dinner Saturday evening                                          with teachers but added: “They
                                                                                 have a job to do and parents have
      * Full English breakfast Sunday
                                                                                 a right to have a voice.”
      * Visiting Bath Sunday
    [ * All rooms en-suite                       fp'lr                                           Complaints
    | it Dancing to live music Saturday                                            School governing bodies and
         evening                                                                education authorities - which are
    I * Seats in the upper circle for "O liver"                                 both getting more parent repre­
                                                                                sentatives - should be the first
                                                                                port of call, for complaints about
                                                                                schools n o t up to sc ra tc h , M r
             A Fantastic Three Day Break                                        Blunkett said.
        HEARTBEAT COUNTRY                                                          E d u c a tio n a u th o r itie s w ere
                                                                                ex p ected to be “a d v o c a te s on
| Staying at a Yorkshire hote l including a breathtaking Steam                  behalf of parents and children”.
     Train Journey on the North Yorkshire Moore Railway                            But if parents get nowhere they
                                                                                will be able to call the Education
          ieparting: 26th September 1997                                        and Em ploym ent D ep a rtm en t’s
[ WHAT'S INCLUDFD:                                                              standards and effectiveness unit.


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hillsborofamiles
     *   Luxury return coach travel.                                               Mr Blunkett said: “Parents have                                           POLICE have opened                                                                               of th e 96 victims are
     *   Two nights accommodation at a Yorkshire hotel.                         a right to have an appeals mecha­                                            up th e ir files on the                                                                          understood to be
    I*   All rooms with private facilities and tea/coffee making amenities.     nism, to be able to indicate what                                            Hillsborough disaster                                                                            exam ining police flies.
    I*   Two (3 course) dinners and two full English breakfasts.                they th in k of the local service.                                           to relatives of victims.                                                                         Solicitor for the

                                                                                                                                                                                                           sift policefiles
                                                                                They are the users of the service.”
     *   Steam train journey, Pickering to Goathland on the _                                                                                                They are allowed to                                                                              Hillsborough families
         North Yorkshire Moors Railway.                                            The standards and effectiveness                                                                                                                                            Ann Adlington said:
                                                                                u n it is m onitoring progress on                                            scrutinise details held
    I * Included visit to Goathland, home of the                                                                                                             by police into the                                                                               “They have been very
         Heartbeat series.                                                      changes in schools, like boosting                                                                                                                                             shocked and upset by
                                                                                th e th ree Rs and raisin g other                                            deaths a t the Sheffield                      will be presented to      Ja ck Straw.
    1 * Free souvenir brochure of Heartbeat Country, p l u s in s u r a n c e                                                                                W ednesday stadium to                         Lord Justice Stuart-                               w hat they have seen
                                                                                standards.                                                                                                                                           M r Straw will use the   but they feel th a t at
      k * Services of an experienced tour guide.                                                                                                             look for new evidence                         Smith, who is re­
                                                                                   Mr Blunkett said: “Parents need                                                                                                                   report to help decide    long last they are
                                                                     :
                                                                                to tell us whether they believe the                                          am ong photographs .                          exam ining events su r­   w hether a full public   actually getting
                                                                                school is co-operating in carrying                                           and statem ents.                              rounding the tragedy      inquiry should follow.   details about how
             IS L E O F W IG H T                                                that, through.”                                                              Any fresh evidence                            for Home Secretary        Relatives of about 20    th e ir relatives died.”


I
j
I
    *
    *
    *
         Coaching throughout,
         Return sailings Southampton to Cowes.
         4 nights half-board accommodation at the Tarvic 2 Hotel.
                                                                                ~ forptdeatli crash
                                                                                A POLICEMAN told a jury yester­                                        light in Sheffield or gone at high
I   *    Island Tour excursion.                                                 day he could remember nothing                                          speeds on the motorway, as sug­
           * The services of a resident Galaxy Holidays courier                 about the crash in his police car in                                   gested by one of the girls Emma
                              on the Isle of Wight                              which a teenage runaway died.                                          Cubbin.
                                                                                   But Pc Adrian Ward, aged 31, of                                        T he a c c id e n t h a p p e n e d on
                                                                                South Yorkshire Police, denied he                                      T ic k h ill R oad, M altb y , n e a r

                                                          ill!                  had been speeding on the journey.
                                                                                   He said he had no memory of
                                                                                what happened after leaving the
                                                                                M18 as he and another officer were
                                                                                                                                                       Doncaster, when he lost control on
                                                                                                                                                       a bend and crashed head-on into a
                                                                                                                                                       van, killing the other girl, Shelley
                                                                                                                                                       Simmonite.                                                                                                 mm
                                                                                driving two 15-year-old girls home                                        Ward said he felt a lot of guilt for
                                                                                to be cautioned for shoplifting.                                       the accident, but could not say
                                                                                  But he told Robert Smith QC,                                         why he lost control of the vehicle
                                                                                defending, that on the route earlier                                   that night.
                                                                                he had not driven through a reel                                          “I just don’t remember,” he said.

        y^Please rush me a copy of the following brochurei^sQ
                               London Matinee Q
                                                                                 CONVICTED by Sheffield magistrates.
                                                                                 September 8:
                                                                                 Dennis William Thompson, aged 47, of
                                                                                 Rev ill Ln, W o o d h o u s e , th r e e ye ars                       fine, £30 costs. Paul Booker, 35, of Deer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TOYOTA Corolla 1.3 GS
                                     Oliver   G
                                                                                 probation, £40 costs, indecent exposure.                              P a rk Rd, S ta n n in g to n , year discharge.
                              Heartbeat Country       G                          David1Andrew                            ...........................
                                                                                                                     25, of  Rivehn Park
                                                                                 Rd, W alk ley , £50 fine, £20 costs, retain                           C rim in a l dam age: C arl Millis, 36, of
                                  isle of Wight   G                              stolen goods. Burglary: M ark Andrew                                  Ravenscroi't Dr, R ic h m o n d , y e ar dis­
                                                                                 W ild ,       21,         o f S.. o u t"h w e l"l
                                                                                               .....................                         Rd,       charge. £25 costs.
                                                                                 G r i m e s t h o r p e , y e a r d is c h a rg e , £40      £<                        C hristopher Ashley Heaton-
                                                                                 costs. Theft: Elaine Delseta Edward*,                          :1s.       ard, 29, of Periwood Dr, W o o d seats,
                                                                                 29, of Silkstone Rd, F rec h e v illc , year                          £100 fine, £20 costs, six m onth ban.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rows
          Reader H olidays                                                       discharge, £20 costs.
          The Star                                                                                                                                     No insurance: Ronald Fogg, 59, of Main
                                                                                 Assault: R ahm an Akther, 36, of Olivers                              St, G re n o sid e, £170 fine, £30 costs (no
          York Street                                                            Mt, D arn aO , 160 hours com m unity ser­
        \ SHEFFIELD
          or                                                                                                                                           l i c e n c e o r t e s t ) . M a s s i m o S e r g io
                                                                                 vice, £75 costs, £200 compensation.                                   M a r t e l i a , 19, o f K in g E c g b e r t Rd,
        \S1 1PU                                   . .Postcode                     Threatening behaviour: Craig May, 18,                                T o tley , 100 hours comm serv, £30 costs
                                                                                 of W eakland Ci, H a c k e n th o rp e , £100                         (drive while banned).
64                                                                                                           S ta r * A ds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   The Star, Thursday, September                                     1 1 , 1997



                                           Situations Vacant                                                                                                                                      Situations Vacant




                                A Different World                                                        PERSONNEL ASSISTANT                                                                                                                               T R A IN IN G

                                                                                                                                                  c.£8,250
                                                                                            Group 4 Court Services are looking for someone who is energetic and enthusiastic
                                Sheffield -Fargate                                          to join our Personnel team in Worksop.                                                                                  Ever thought o f working in:
                                Around the country - and even around the
                                                                                            Based at our Head Office, you will w ork in a small busy team providing a
                                                                                            generalist personnel service to a 1 ,7 0 0 strong w orkforce across various
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Landscape Gardening
                                world - the name Thomas Cook is renowned for
                                offering high quality, value for money flights
                                                                                            locations throughout England and Wales.                                                                             Sports Ground Maintenance
                                                                                            Your responsibilities will include recruitm ent, payroll adm inistration, absence
                                and holidays.
                                                                                            monitoring and the production o f m anagem ent statistics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Glass-house Work
                                F   l i g h t   C   o n s u l t a n t s                     You will be confident and enthusiastic and possess good interpersonal skills,                                              Green-keeping
                                Offering customers professional advice, you’ll              and need to be a hard working, flexible good team member. Previous office                                            First Class Training with Placement Opportunities
                                                                                            experience is required, and experience of personnel work w ould be an                                                      Working Towards NVQ Levels 1 & 2
                                need to draw on at least 2 years’ travel experience.
                                                                                            advantage. Applicants should have a good w orking knowledge of Word                                                                  City & Guilds 9383
                                If you are motivated, enthusiastic and career-              Perfect fo r Windows, and w ord processing qualifications are essential.                                                          If you arc aged 16 or 18
                                  minded, with excellent communication skills                                                                                                                                                      Ring L ance on
                                                                                            There will be encouragem ent fo r you to develop your skills and career and
                                    and a real drive for delivering quality                 to study fo r a professional qualification.                                                                                       (0 1 1 4 ) 2 4 2 2 0 9 0
                                     service, this is your chance to join this
                                                                                            The vacancy is subject to the s tric t vetting standards set by Group 4 and the
                                    successful team.
                                                                                            Secretary of State fo r the Home Office.
                                    In return, we offer competitive salaries plus
                                                                                            Please apply in writing enclosing your CV to John Holmes, Personnel
                                all the benefits you would expect from a
                                                                                            Manager, Group 4 Court Services, Carlton House, Carlton Road,
                                successful travel company.                                  Worksop S81 7QF. Closing date: 23 September 1997.                                                                                                               TR AINING
                                For an application form please telephone
                                our Nottingham Recruitment Line on:                                                                                                                Group 4 C ourt Services
                                (0115) 948 4140.                                              [g ro u p 4                                                                         is an equal opportunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                 em ployer      VACANCIES IN CATERING
                                Closing.date: Thursday, 25 September 1997.                          ■SECUEiiASii

                                Ref: TJ/9/14.                                                 THE P R O F E S S I O N A L SE C U R I T Y PEOPLE                                                                     FOR TRAINEES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Do you want to earn while you learn?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We have a vacancies NOW for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CATERING TRAINEES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aged 16/17,
      T       e l e c o m m u n ic a t io n s                                                                                                                                                                   Careership training leading to nationally recognised
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qualifications.
                   T e c h n ic ia n s                                                                                                                                                                                           Interested?
                   S&T G r a d e s 3 t o 5
                                                                                            Senior A dm inistrative                                                                                                    For further information please contact:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bev or Glynn
                 L o c a te d D o n c a s te r                                              Assistant                                                                                                              Telephone: (0114) 242 2090
          £ 1 4 k t o 2 5 k p .a . p l u s b e n e f i t s                                  £ 1 2,267 to £ 1 5 ,4 5 2 pro rata
Jarvis Infrastructure is a forward thinking division within                                 Temporary until 31 July 1998                                                                                                                 IMIS
Jarvis Facilities Ltd providing both maintenance and                                                                                                                                                                                    .         CONSULTANTS
renewals expertise to a growing portfolio of customers.                                     Job share for 1 S '/s hours per w e e k Monday, Tuesday,
We now require experienced Telecomms Technicians to
                                                                                            W ednesday am
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COMPASY:
form a team responsible for providing complete                                              We are looking for a well organised, creative and innovative team leader                                                                 N u m b er one in Europe.
m aintenance and minor work solutions to our clients.                                       who has a positive and customer focused approach to their work, to                                                                       O ver 1/4 million happy customers.
                                                                                            join our admissions office.                                                                                                              23 years in business.
Whilst essentially a team player you will have specific
responsibilities lor installing, testing and commissioning                                  You should have a good educational background, excellent                                                                                 38 branches throughout U.K.
telecomms projects. In addition you will provide liaison                                    communication skills and experience of developing and implementing i                                                                     OPPORTUNITY:

with customers/contractors and provide technical support                                    procedures, and using a wide range of IT applications.                 0                                                                 A n u nrivalled career in direct sales.

to the organisation.                                                                        Please quote reference 128/97 Closing date is 2 6 September 1997                                                                          Earnings from the firs t week.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     No cold calling.
 Trained in Telecomms installation and Testing with an                                      Further information a n d application form s are available fro m the
ONO in Electrical/Telecomms Engineering desirable or                                        H u m a n Resources D epartm ent Sheffield H allam University                                        ,#                                  R E Q U I R E M E N T S:

                                                                                            C ity Cam pus Pond Street Sheffield S I 1 W B                                                                                            Enthusiasm.
equivalent experience. Whilst a railway telecomms                                                                                                                                                                                    Determ ination.
background would be an advantage this is not essential.                                     Telephone 0114 253 3946
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Desire to change yo ur lifestyle.
Your reward will be a competitive salary and benefits                                       Working towards equal                                                                                                                    O w n car and phone.
package together with the opportunity to develop and                                        opportunities                                                          Sheffield                                                         E XPERIENCE:
expand this new venture.
Please apply in writing q uoting Ref: DDE/24 a n d enclosing your
                                                                                            World wide web
                                                                                            hap: /'kvzvtv. shu. ac. u k!                         i>                H a lla m University                                              O u r sales team come fro m all walks of life.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Experience not essentia).

CV to:M ike Stillings, Personnel Manager, Infrastructure, Jarvis
                                                                                                                                                 E du cation f o r b u sin ess a n d the pro fessio n s                              Full residential tra in in g programme.

Facilities Limited, 2 n d Floor, Arndale House, 24 Trafford Way,
Doncaster DN1 IRA

Closing date: 22 S e ptem ber 1997
                                                                                            PART-TIME ASSISTANT SHOP                                                                                            Driver/W arehouse
                                                                                            MANAGER (1 4 HRS)                                                                                                                     Person
                                                                                            S ta rtin g S a la ry b e tw e e n £ 3 , 5 2 9 a n d £ 3 , 9 0 0
                                                                                            (£4=84 a n d £ 5 . 1 0 p.h.)                                                                                         C P Supplies Ltd. Distributors of Suspended
                                                                                            The PDSA has over 100 modern shops nationwide, retailing nearly new quality                                          Ceilings, Partitions, Drylining & Lighting are
                                                                                            fashion and brie a brae. Wholly owned by the charity of the same name, we                                            looking for a D river/W arehouse person.
                                                                                            have a popular shop in Sheffield and are looking for a talented assistant                                            P referably with a clean driving licence and
                   ORDINARY people lo r a n                                                 m anager to join our team.
                                                                                            You will be fully involved in the running of the shop, helping us to maintain our
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Forklift experience.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Multi drops on a large area and physical,
                    EXTRAORDINARY job!                                                      high standards in areas such as presentation, customer service and stock
                                                                                            control, together with motivating a team of volunteers. T here will be plenty of                                     manual w ork/Fork Lift Driving will b e some
                    ? D o y o u w a n t t o h e l p young p e o p l e ?                     scope for your knowledge and ideas, as well as challenging sales and profit                                                     of the duties required.
              C o u ld y o u u s e so m e e x tr a m o n e y e a c h w e e k ?              targets to meet and beat. In addition, we will be looking for at least one year s
                                                                                            retailing experience. You should be a good organiser, a confident                                                    I f you feel you a r e th e suitable person to fu lfill
      After two years of success, Sheffield Family & Community Services                     communicator and a team player.                                                                                         this position, please fo rw a rd y o u r C.V, t o >
      Department wants to expand its family placement project for young people              Please write for an application form and job description stating for which
      aged 10-16 who are remanded by the court to the care of the Local                     position you wish to apply to:                                                                                                    G e o rg e C astledine,
      Authority.
      We want t o recruit carers f r o m all the communities in Sheffield, to reflect
                                                                                            P e r s o n n e l D ep a rtm en t, P D S A , W h ite c h a p e l                                            W ay,           CP SUPPLIES LTD
                                                                                            F r io r s le c , TELFO RD , Shropshire? T F2 9P Q .                                                                 Unit 4, B axter R oad, Foxhill Indu strial
      the multi-cultural diversity of the city.                                             Closing date for completed applications: 26th September.                                                                     E state, W a d s le y B ridg e,
      We would like to hear from ordinary people, who are flexible, patient and             We re g ret only short-listed cand idates will b e contacted.
      able to understand the needs of the young people to whom they will be                                                                                                                                                   S heffield S6 1JF
                                                                                            Dependent entirely on public support.                      Charity No. 2 0 8 2 1 7
      offering care and support - young people who can sometimes exhibit very
      challenging behaviour.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S ucce ssful c o m p a n y w ithin
      In return we will give you training, regular support and weekly fees, these                                                                                                                                                                           w hite g o o d s industry,
      are made up of a basic fee of £104,00, subject to tax and NI contributions,
      plus an additional allowance which varies from £52.22 to £83.72 depending                                                                                                          Call Star Ads                                                            l o o k i n g fo r

      on the young person’s age.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Field Service
                                                                                                  CO RPO RA TE DEVELOPM ENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Engineer
                                       INTERESTED?
                                                   F o r m o re information contact:
                                                     T he R em an d C a re rs’ Schem e
                                                                                                          A SSISTANT
                                                                                                 re qui red by in no vat ive ex p a n d in g Sheffield based com pa ny ,
                                                                                            Reporting to the Head of Development, the ideal candidate will be of graduate
                                                                                                     calibre with business experience and superb written English.
                                                                                                                                                                                         0114 276 6666                                                £ ! 5 K P .A , ( i n c l u d i n g b o n u s ) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Experience o f white goods,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d o m estic appliances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e s s e n ti a l.
                                                      S p ecialist F o ste rin g S ection                                     D u t i e s w ill i n c l u d e :
                                  F am ily & C om m unity S ervices D e p a rtm e n t       • P ro d u c in g h ig h q u ality p ro p o sa l do cu m e n ts.
                                                                                            • A n a ly s in g co m p e titio n an d re search in g new m arkets.
                                                                                                                                                                                         and we will help you!                                            G a s , C o r g i / A c o p tra in e d ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     preferred.
                                         F lo o r 9, Redvers H ouse, Union S tre e t        • A s s i s t i n g in t h e d e v e l o p m e n t o f e x i s t i n g b u s i n e s s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B a se d at h o m e . V e h ic le and
                            Sheffield SI 2JQ Telephone: 273 4998 or 273 4941                                                                                                                                                                               c o m m u n ic a tio n system
                                                                                                                CVs to Steve Galbraith, A.F.E.
                                                                                                               Bessemer Road, Sheffield S9 3XP                                           We’re here until 7.30pm Monday to Friday                                     supplied.
C O   U   N    C   I   L
T h e S t a r , Thursday, September 1 1 ,1997
                                                                                                                                             S ta r^ A d s                                                                                                                                                              63
                                                                           Situations Vacant                                                                                                                                Situations Vacant



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H if                          F actory
                                 R E T A IL MANAGEMENT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O p eratives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G u n s to n e s , p a rt o f th e N o rth e rn
              M+W was founded in 1848 and its first convenience store opened                                                                                                                                                                    F o o d s G r o u p , a r e n o w lo o k in g f o r
               in 19/8. Now, with in excess of 176 stores all over the country,                                                                                                                                                                 r e lia b le p e o p le .
             continued new store openings equal new and exciting opportunities                                                   O v e A m p & Partners is a leading international firm of consulting                                           N o r t h e r n F o o d s is c o m m i t t e d t o
                                                                                                                                 engineers operating throughout the UK and the world. Our Yorkshire
                   for both Store Managers and Assistant Store Managers.                                                                                                                                                                        e q u a li t y o f o p p o r t u n it y . All
                                                                                                                                 G r o u p has offices in L eeds and Sheffield and is i n v o lved in a wide range                              a p p lic a tio n s w ill b e ju d g e d s o le ly
                    With early starts, a 7-day week and high customer flow, our                                                               of building, industrial and civil engineering projects.                                           o n t h e i r m e r it .
                    management team needs to be highly motivated and flexible.                                                   With a growing portfolio of prestigious projects and clients in the region,                                    To ap p ly, p l e a s e c o n t a c t D ron field
                                                                                                                                            our Sheffield office now has the following opportunities:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J o b C en tr e o n ( 0 1 2 4 6 ) 3 4 4 7 0 0 .
                                                                                                                                                  S tru c tu ra l E n g in eering T echnician                                                   A N o rth ern F o o d s C o m p a n y
                                                                                                                                             with a minimum of 5 years experience o f RC
                   Northampton: Wellingborough: Milton Keynes                                                                                detailing, steel, masonry and timber design.

                          £12,500 (Reviewed a f t e r 12 weeks’ induction,
                                    to include PRP & Bonus)
                                                                                                                                             B uilding Services E n g in eerin g Technician
                                                                                                                                             with a minimum of 5 years experience of
                                                                                                                                             H V A C and/or electrical services design
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gunstones       BAKERY!

                With proven business management skills and at least one                                                                                            draughting.
                year’s experience of managing your own profit centre, you                                                        To be successful you will n eed to be qualified to H N C standard, have                                    Training Co-ordinator
                must be able to demonstrate leadership potential, excellent                                                      extensive AutoCAD experience (preferably Release 13) and be able to                                        Scale 5 E13741-E15092
                                                                                                                                     demonstrate a good understanding of buildings and the building                                         Castle Centre
                      communication skills and commercial acumen.
                                                                                                                                                                                  p rocess.                                                 Y ou w ill liaise w ith e m p lo y e r s /o r g a n is a tio n s fo r o u r
             An attractive salary and benefits package includes the chance                                                       If you would like the opportunity to join a dynamic and expanding office,                                  C areership/Modern Apprenticeship programmes, including
               to gain a nationally recognised management qualification.                                                         please write giving full details of qualifications, experience and current                                 d evelopm ent of w o r k p lacem ents, m o nitoring/review ing
                                                                                                                                   salary to: Justin Evans, Ove A ru p & Partners, New Oxford House,                                        train e es . T D L B A s s e s s o r q u a lific a tio n and an u n d e r­
                  Accommodation, suitable for a single person, is available
                                                                                                                                  3® B arkers Pool, Sheffield SI 2 H B . Closing date for applications is                                   standing of NVQ delivery desirable.
                          as part of our re-location package.
                                                                                                                                                            25 September 1997.                                                              P re v io u s e x p e r ie n c e in th e v o c a tio n a l a re a of e ith e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            engineering, catering, care or business administration is
                                             Interested? Then telephone our
                            24-hour Recruitment Hotline 01703 741458

                             or alternatively write to: Dennis Roots,
                                                                                                                                                                      ARUP
                                                                                                                                                       We are an equal opportunities employer.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            essential.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Closing dale 22nd September 199? Ref: 1486s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            For fu rth e r in fo rm a tio n and a pp lic a tio n fo rm s , p lease
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c o n ta c t the H u m a n R e s o u r c e s T e a m , C a s tle C e n tr e
                          rm Personnel & Training Manager, Misselbrook ,                                                                                                                                                                    (southside), Granville Road, Sheffield, S2 2RL, tel: 0 1 1 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 60 2 1 2 2 to w h o m completed application form s should be
                             & Weston Ltd, Canberra Road, Nursling, J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            returned.
                             Southampton S016 OWB.

                                                                                                                                            T      e a m                    S     e c r e t a r y
                                                                                                                                                    ^ 11,157             - ,£ 11,937 p e r                    annum
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          The Sheffield College is committed to equality of opportunity


                                                                                                                                 W o rk in g in partnership, the N S P C C and Doncaster Social Services D epartm ent have
                                                                                                                                 developed a therapeutic service for children w h o have been sexually abused. ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L o g istic s                                                Itabauto
                                                                                                                                 Providing a full secretarial and clerical support service to o u r Child Protection Team ,            T e c h n ic ia n

                                           E>
                                                                                                                                 you will guarantee the efficient daily operation o f o u r busy office. Establishing and              L a b au to Ltd is p a r t of th e F ren ch o w n e d world-wide
                                                                                                                                 managing the administration o f a n e w team, you will ensure that systems are in place to            en g in eerin g g ro u p Labinal a n d m a n u fa c tu re s wire
                                                                                                                                 im prove and streamline o u r w o rk flow. ^ Challenging and diverse, yo u r duties will              h a r n e s s e s for t h e U K au to m o tiv e m arket.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W e have a v ac an cy for a Logistics T e c h n ic ia n to assist
                                                                                                                                 range from copy and audio typing to m o n ito rin g the team budget and petty cash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       in th e org an isa tio n of supplies a n d servic es. T h e m ain
                                                                                                                                 systems. Y o u will have: ~ ty p in g /w o rd processing skills ~ know ledge o f Microsoft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e m p h a s is of t h e roie will be all a s p e c ts of p ro c u re m e n t
                                                                                                                                 W o rd    pleasant and efficient telephone m an n er ^ excellent secretarial skills. ~                a n d pla nning including liaising with supplie rs a n d
          If you're a self starter with enough energy to power the national
                                                                                                                                 U nderstanding and tactful, you will be able to cope w ith service users w h o could                  m onitoring p rogress.
         grid, we'd like to meet you. We're Kelly. We're energetic. And we                                                       potentially be disruptive, providing a caring and professional response to all visitors. ^            T h e successful c a n d id a te will b e a r e c e n t g ra d u a te with
                are looking for the following for our Sheffield branch.                                                          D ealing w ith often sensitive and em otionally disturbing case material you will be a                a high s ta n d a rd of F ren ch , b o th w ritten a n d sp o k e n .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C o m p u t e r literacy is essen tial a s is a n a p titu d e for
                                                                                                                                 special person w ith considerable personal resources, appreciating the demands o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       w orking w ith figures. A co n fid en t te le p h o n e m a n n e r
                                                                                                                                                                      For an inform ation pack and application
                                                                                                                                 w o rk in g in the child protection system.                                                           will also b e required. B ene fits include a salary of
          You know how to make a cold sales call without getting the cold                                                        fo rm please contact: The T eam Secretary, S S D /N S PC C Post Abuse                                 £ 1 1 , 0 0 0 , P R P , a n d a C o m p a n y P e n s io n S c h e m e
                                                                                                                                 Therapeutic T eam , Rosem ead, May Avenue, Balby, Doncaster D N 4 OAE.                                A p p l i c a t i o n s should b e m a d e i n w r i t i n g ,
          shoulder. You're articulate but don’t know the word compromise.
                                                                                                                                 Tel (01302) 856868, quoting reference no. N O R 155. ~ C l o s i n g date:                            e n c l o s i n g a f u ll CV, to Linda Gascoyne,
          We want you to build existing business. Find new business. Excel                                                                                                                                                             Personnel Manager.
                                                                                                                                 26 Septem ber 1997. ~ Interview date: 13 O ctober 1997.                                                                                                         LABfNAt GROUP
          at everything you do. Now the important part. Around £12-14K per                                                                                                                                                             Labauto Ltd                                  AUTOMOTIVE HARNESS DIVISION
          year plus bonuses, benefits and excellent training.                                                                                            T h e N S P C C is c o m m it te d to equ al opp or tu ni tie s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Shireoaks Road, Worksop S 8 0 3HA
                                                                                                                                                      EXISTS T O P R E V E N T C RU ELTY T O C H IL D RE N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B Y 2 5 SEPTEM BER                     1997


          You know how to make a sale. You’re great on the phone. A superb
          organiser. A communicator par excellence. We want you to recruit
                                                                                                                                                            N S PC C                                                                  CHILDREN BACK AT SCHOOL
          the finest temps around. Grow existing business. Achieve new                                                                                                                                                               THINKING OF RETURNING TO
           heights. The salary? Around £12-14K per year plus bonuses,                                                                                                                                                                         WORK?
          benefits and brilliant training.
                                                                                                                                                                   Telephonist/                                                       Gain the skills and experience you need fo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the jo b you want.
                  Join the team that's putting the excitement back Into
                recruitment. Life's too short to be stuck In the wrong Job.                                                                                        Receptionist                                                                    CUSTOMER SERVICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      • Including C.L.A.i.T. (Computer Literacy and Infor­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mation Technology) ® Interview Techniques @ CVs
       For more Information call us on 0 1 1 4 2 7 9 6 5 7 7


                                                                                                KELLY
                                                                                                                                                                   This is a key positio n w ith in the Company and                                 • C onfidence Building
       Lloyds Bank Chambers                                                                                                                                        as such the successful ap p lic an t m u st be of a                                   Jo b O p p o rtu n itie s A v a ila b le
       1 6 Church S treet                                                                                                                                          smart a p pearance, educated to a high sta n d ard                     If you would like further information call Joan
       Sheffield S i 2GN                                                                        SERVICES                                                           and possess a p lea sa nt a n d helpful personality.                        S H E F F IE L D (0114) 275 7288

                                                                                                                                                                   Experience of a BT Meridian 1 option 11
•••••••••••••••••••••A*                                                                                                                                            Switchboard is desirable but not essential as full
•                  PARK ELECTRICAL SERVICES                                                                                                                        training will be provided.
•    (S p e c i a li s t S u p p l ie r o f I n d u str ia l E lcctric a! E q u i p m e n t )
®   D u e to o u r c o n ti n u i n g e x p a n s i o n a n d g r o w t h w e h a v e th e                                                                         This position will also provide secretarial support
•        f o ll o w i n g v a c a n c i e s at o u r N e w S h e f f i e ld O ffic e .                                                                             for the Company Secretary and administrative
                                                                                                                                                                   s u p p o rt for the C om m ercial S u p p o rt Team and
            Sales/Branch Manager                                                                                                                                   as such, experience of Word Processing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PURCHASING
«                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HOKBRCiaK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EO SIB IU
           Internal Sales Engineer                                                                                                                                 (preferably Microsoft Word) is essential.                           ADMINISTRATOR
    K no w le dg e o f Control Gear, Switchgear, Cable M a nagem ent                                                                                                                                                                   R e q u i r e d to w o r k in a b u s y aeeounLs o f fic e p r o c e s s in g
    a lo ng with Control and In strumentation products is required.                                                                                                                                                                        P u r c h a s e O r d e r s a n d ta k i n g r e c e ip t o f all de live rie s .
                                                                                                (N.R.A.S.W.A. certified
    Existing sales e xperience w ould be an advantage, ho wever                                                                                                                                                                        Applicants m ust have B u y in g experience, be co m p u te r
                                                                                                         only)
    consid eration will be given lo persons with g o o d product                                                                                                                                                                       lite ra te a n d a b le t o w o r k a s p a rt o f a t e a m as w e ll as o n o w n
                                                                                                     C.A.T.V. work
                   kn ow le dge w ish in g to go in to sales.                                                                                                                                                                                                              initiative.
                                                                                                    G o o d ra te s of p a y
             Interested candidates to write with C V to* -                                                                                                                                                                                             S a l a r y d e p e n d e n t u p o n e x p e ri e n c e .
                                                                                                L ong term*, c o n tra c ts in
                                    M r P h ilip K ing,                                               th e R o th erh am                                                                                                                            A p plications in writing to M iss A. Wall,
                   PARK ELECTRICAL SERVICES,                                                      a n d D o n c a ste r area.
                        T r o o n W a y B u s in e ss C e n tre ,                                                                                                                                                                                WM. COOK HOLBROOK PRECISION,
                H u m b e r s t o n e L a n e , Le ice s te r. L E 4 9 H A .                             Contact:                                                                                                                               Station Road, Halfway, Sheffield SI 9 5GZ.
                           Telephone 0116 246 4480.                                                                                                                                                                                                   C l o s in g date: 19th S e p t e m b e r , 1997.
T h e S t a r , Thursday, September 11, 1997
                                                                                                                  A d v e r t is e m e n t .                                                                                                                    1 7




                                                                                                                                                        TUTOR 200 MULTI-MEDIA SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                                                 Intel 200M Hz Pentium®                                  16-bit Stereo
                                                              m                                                                                                  Processor                                               Soundcard and
                                                                 t\0             ,                                                                               16MB Fast EDO RAM                                       30 Watt Speakers
                                                                                                                                                                 1.7GB IDE HDD                                          Joystick
                                                     pent
                                                     ■ P R O C         F S S Q R                                                                                 14" SVGA Colour                                        Windows 95
                                                                                                                                                                 Monitor                                                 Microsoft Family ’97
                                        im w .
                                                            * o -o o -                                                                                           2MB 3D Graphics Card                                    Buy Now-Pay Sept ’98
                                                                                                                                                                 12 speed CD ROM                                         option available




                                                                                                                                                        £699
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 ■* ! *



                                                                                                                                                                                                       ex
                                                                                                                                                                                                      VAT
           i -i&W 'P


                                                                                                                                                                                   H O M E MEDIA O P T IO N
                                          r   '7 V   *        ^ jr -                    |                           *
                                                                                                                                                         Specification as above plus a stack of home entertainment software (Bodyworks •
                                                                                                                                                         Kitchen Gourmet • Design IT! 3D • The Oregon Trail • Home Gardener • Typing
                                                         ^ m s - m m v js a m x ^ s i                                                                    Teacher • Reading Journey       Berlitz French) plus headphones with microphone.


            It's absolutely true. You could
       win £ 2 5 0 Thomas Cook Holiday
       Vouchers just by visiting our
       new Meadowhall showroom this
       Saturday. All you have to do is
       fill in a competition entry form -
       there's no obligation. But as Tiny
       computers really do offer the lat­
       est technology at the lowest                                                                                                                                                   REPAYMENT EXAMPLE
       prices, you may well think                                                                                                                            PC cash price £927.08 (inc delivery £ 2 0 + VAT @ 17.5% ). Pay whole
       there's never been a better time                                                                                                                      balance on or before due payment date interest free. Alternatively, pay 36
       to buy. Or a better range from                                                                                                                        monthly payments of £36.41. Total am ount payable £1310.76. APR 26.9% .
       which to choose.                                                                                                                                      Written quotations upon request. Finance subject to status.




                                        I                                                                                                                                                                  31 MARKET ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MEADOWHALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                                                                                                0114 256 8811
        TINY COMPUTERS LIMITED, REDHILL BUSINESS PARK, BONEHURST ROAD, SALFORDS, REDHILL, SURREY RH1 5YB.
                                                                                                                   www.tinycomp.co.uk
       AH tradem arks ac know le dged. All prices and m anufactu rers specifications are subject to change w ith o u t notice. Please check availa bility before ordering. Goods are offered for sale subject to standard conditions of sa.t available on request.
                                                           E&OE. Intel Inside Logo and Pentium are registered tradem arks, and M M X is a tra d e m a rk of the Intel Corporation. * Price excludes delivery.
                                                                                     fP riz e Draw rules and details a v aila ble from the Tiny Computers M eadow hall, Sheffield Show room .
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                              REF:          D&C/JEL/SW CSF 234/97

FROM:                                         DCU/DEPT:     Discipline & Complaints

TO:                                           EXT:          3010
          i-orce i-inance Officer
          Headquarters                        DATE:         8 September 1997



SUBJECT:       HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - BUDGET CODE

 Further to our brief conversation on Tuesday last, as requested, please find attached a copy of the
approval paper in connection with the accommodation for the Hillsborough Scrutiny Team used as
justification for placing orders for purchases of office equipment against Lafis code LC6L.

To date I have issued the following orders:

a.     B14209 Project 2 x desks at £321.10 each
b.     B14210 Broadstock 3 x chairs at £117.76 each
c.     Fax to Communications requesting on mv behalf they purchase a Pitney Bowes fax machine
       at £595.00 (Order number from                to follow)

Total expenditure to date £1590.48.

Unfortunately, I have not been able to record the commitments against Lafis as my password does
not extend to privacy of Lafis Code LC6L. I am therefore enclosing with this memo a copy of the
orders sent and ask that the commitments be raised within HQ Finance, please. As soon as I am
in possession of the outstanding order number from                 I will forward this to you.

As will be appreciated there is a need to equip the Hillsborough office without undue delay. In
order to comply with financial regulations I also attach a copy of the telephone estimates taken and
my reasons for making the choices to purchase.

I hope the above is helpful to you but if I can assist further please get in touch.




Administrative Officer

Encs

cc      Superintendent Hepworth
        Hillsborough Scrutiny Team
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                    REF:          o:\suptWhillsbor\ab

FROM: SuperintendentA Hepworth                      DCU/DEPT:      Ecclesfield Training

TO:       ACC (L & T) Ian Daines                    EXT:          4701

                                                    DATE:         21 August 1997



SUBJECT:        THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - ACCOMMODATION




Following our telephone conversation of the 12 August 1997, I have made enquiries over the cost
of providing portacabin accommodation at the Heeley site and also visited Heeley and looked at
the spare accommodation contained within that building.

The costings for a portacabin installed on site for six months are as follows:-

Hire of 40' x 12' portacabin w ith tw o end offices and                    £1,420
conference room facilities

Burglar Alarm                                                             £500

Fire Alarm                                                                £250

Carpets                                                                   £300

Heating and Lighting                                                      £140

Conference Table and Chairs                                               £640

Planning Permission                                                       £100


TOTAL:                                                                    £3,350

Planning permission would be required if the portacabin were to remain on site longer than six
weeks and at the present time it takes tw o to three months for such permission to be granted.
There would be additional costs for office furniture, power link up, extra telephone lines and fax
machine but most of these costs would also be incurred if accommodation within the existing
building was utilised.

Without knowing the ultimate size of the team that will be required to work on the Hillsborough
Scrutiny it is difficult to really estimate the size of the accommodation required. I have, however,
spoken with the new head of Discipline and Complaints and he has no objection to the
Hillsborough Scrutiny Team setting up an office on the ground floor of the building, utilising w hat is
presently known as the waiting room. This room is the first office on the right hand side of the
ground floor when one enters the Discipline and Complaints part of the building and is next door to
the present conference room. The room will accommodate 3 people w ith their own desks and
chairs in comfort.
The room is protected by the existing burglar and fire alarms, it is within the security door to
Discipline and Complaints and can be independently locked. The conference room next door could
be used by the Hillsborough Scrutiny Team when required, as could the interview room opposite.
Papers and exhibits from the Hillsborough Enquiry Store would be more oecure as they would not
have to be taken out of the existing building for the team to work on them as would be the case if
a portacabin were to be utilised.

Costs for setting up the waiting room as an office would be as follows:-

2 x Project 1 Double Pedestal Desks                                        £500
(1 desk already in situ)

3 x Executive Chairs                                                       £600

Plain paper Fax                                                            £595


TOTAL:                                                                     £1,695

This cost would also have to be added to the cost of setting up a portacabin office. It may also be
necessary to purchase one or more secure filing cabinets at a cost of £407 each in order that
papers being worked on in the office could be securely stored. Additional telephone lines could be
installed in this office by our own Telecom Engineers without incurring any budgetary costs.

My preference would be to set up the Hillsborough Scrutiny Office within the existing building at
Heeley.     The advantages of this are that the building is more secure than a portacabin,
documentation does not have to be carried backwards and forwards outside the building, the
building is protected by burglar and fire alarms, it is heated and could be taken into use as soon as
office furniture is available. It will also be cheaper and will not require planning permission.

Submitted for your decision please.




Superintendent Hepworth

                                      yW -        X


                                                                            c
                                                                            - 2




       The room is protected by the existing burglar and fire alarms, it is within the security door to
         ISC,P   anc* Complaints and can be independently locked. The conference room next door could
       De use    y the Hillsborough Scrutiny Team when required, as could the interview room opposite,
        apers and exhibits from the Hillsborough Enquiry Store would be more secure as they would not
       have to be taken out of the existing building for the team to work on them as would be the case if
       a portacabin were to be utilised.

       Costs for setting up the waiting room as an office would be as follows:-

      2 x Project 1 Double Pedestal Desks                                                                     £ 50o
      (1 desk already in situ)

      3 x Executive Chairs                                                                                    £600

      Plain paper Fax                                                                                         £5 9 5


   TOTAL:                                                                                                     £1,695

  This cost would also have to be added to the cost of setting up a portacabin office. It may also be
  necessary to purchase one or more secure filing cabinets at a cost of £407 each in order that
  papers being worked on in the office could be securely stored. Additional telephone lines could be
  installed in this office by our own Telecom Engineers w ithout incurring any budgetary costs.

  My preference would be to set up the Hillsborough Scrutiny Office within the existing building at
  Heeley,     The advantages of this are that the building is more secure than a portacabin,
  documentation does not have to be carried backwards and forwards outside the building, the
  building is protected by burglar and fire alarms, it is heated and could be taken into use as soon as
  office furniture is available. It will also be cheaper and will not require planning permission.

  Submitted for your decision please.



                      4 A
                      L 1-



  Superintendent Hepworth                                                         ^       ^                                            ^
. /c   -
                        /    .             /   .   /   .   •!                /        /                                                    *   .   A

if,               r                        ^                                I’i & X j L e & e d            'Cc-t

  '        t--v                                                 <y£-3L->'                 /- * /} f   /S               ■J j


           f is t                                                                             rrU & J -e                      C c *M   S




                                 < & 4 '
                                                                                                                       t

                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                                                                      Ptease quote this number
                                                                                                                                                      when rendering account


  To:                                                                                                                                                B          14209
  r                                                                                          1        From: South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                            Police Headquarters
                                                                                                            Snig Hill
                                  Hnqv. ~ a'V.-~                                                            SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
             ■'   V.O.   >US'~:
                                                                                                      Tel. No. 0114 - 276 8522                           Date

                                                                                                              Invoice to the above address
  L                                                                                          J                Originating Department                                                 r8
  •Please s u d d Iv aoods/carrv
                   j g W M w r V W • W out   as follows*
                                                I 11 w ^9>


  Quantity                                                                                                                                            Disc %       Net Cost


                                                      Oak ■/enee-j? Desks
                                                                                                                           ...                              .
                                                      " : D " l 5 § 3 2 / \ rA 0 6 * l 9
                                                                                                                       ;         •   '............




  Delivery Address

^D elivery
                                        Delivery In 10 Days— A g.£sed_
  Contract/Quotation No.                                                                                     Cash Settlement Terms
                                                                                                                            Subject to the conditions printed overleaf


                                        Est. Cost            Commitment                    invoice                                                   Payments
   item No.              Code          (exci. VAT)            R     D                        Ref     Batch           Net                               VAT               Total




                                                                                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                 — 1--------1---
                                                                                                                              »


                                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                                                                   Please quote this number
                                                                                                                                                   when rendering account


To:
                                                                                                                                                  B          14210
r                                                                                      n                    From: South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                                  Police Headquarters
                                                                                                                  Sntg Hill
                                                                                                                  SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

                                                                                                            Tel. No. 0114 ■ 276 8522               D ate........-

                                                                                                                     Invoice to the above address
l     -n olr                                                                           j                            Originating Department              0*!«»&*■ukda                     .!.« 1 D ;
Please supply goods/carry out as follows:

Quantity                                          Description                                                                     Price            Disc %               Net Cost

      1>
       :                                          H 1 f? h    B q ck     G xft'M ih iv a      H h air>R


                                                  W it h      G as     L i f t   C S 0 6 4                                        £ 1 1 7 , 7 6    E a c h



                                                  C o lo u r         P e a t




Delivery Address
                      A s    :.A b £ ix i£

Delivery Date/Instructions          f)e I    l - ' e r y     C /H    O c t o b e r   As      A g r e e d


Contract/Quotation No.                                                                                             Cash Settlement Terms

                                                                                                                                  Subject to the conditions printed overleaf


                              Est. Cost                    Commitment                Invoice                                                      Payments
 Item No.     Code           (excl. VAT)                    R      D                   Ref                 Batch           Net                      VAT                          Total




                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                 --
                                                                                                                                                                 :     '‘    ■    -
                          South Yorkshire

                          POLICE
                          JUSTICE                with       COURAGE


          DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                             50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                 SHEFFIELD
                                   S8 8UB

                          TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                             FAX, (0114)2523855




FOR THE ATTENTION OF:




COMMENTS   fljLirim.                  f   X    P v tr*^                       J&.Z.Q.
                'f U i,                                                          <■


                                  -           ^c-^3* Qr4<......^ C 4 L



                              *                      vlhc^A.                 *”• $....
                                                                                  0 l* .
FROM:




 NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE)                        ................

 IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY. CONTACT               (0114) 2523861
 >*11cs

O            Project Furniture - T/N 01484-710421
                                                                                       N » T     " T r t*     g    * - * a P *tI7

                                                                                      O frO * S — r i         X     *    fo R ta -A * 6
        2 Oak Veneer Desks 1500 x 750 - Order No 2D715G32/VA08*19
        £494-00 Each Less 35% = £321 -10 Each                                          P ) A f i- 0   •* *

        Delivery If Ordered Today 10 Days                                                                               O a I £




Q p _________ • Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation - T/N 01924-824477

        2 Oak Veneer Desks 1600 x 750 - Order No 20303
        £348-20 Each Including Discount       .                     «
        Delivery If ordered Today 4 Weeks                          H ‘   °

Q   |              [ Godfrey Syrett Limited - T/N 0191-2681010

        2 Oak Veneer Desks 1600 x 750 - Order No QDP 1600
        £595-00 Less Discount £267-75           .                      .
        Delivery If Ordered Today 20 October                        2»|»®


& sC]          IBroadstock Office Furniture PLC - T/N 01625-431979                                          /V v»sT


        3 High Back Executive Chairs With Gas Lift - O/N CS064
        £117-76 Each Including Discount                                             N v to t’                     G » S *f
        Delivery- If ordered Today 2/3rd October               o
                                                                                    £ « v c 7                                         D o e


Cj)               Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation - T/N 01924-824477

        3 High Back Executive Chairs - O/N D12796
        £180-90 Each Including Discount
                                                                                                                        O fc v - O A f e   ^
        Delivery If Ordered Today 4 Weeks                        2-^i®
 J~S
Q jj         | Paragon Business Furniture - T/N 0113 - 2702222

        3 High Back Executive Chairs - O/N 32/30
        £367 Less Discount £244-68 =4-                                       .
        Deliver If Ordered Today 29 September                            Z ^ |° *
                              *r.       viLa*'



               C O N F I R M A T I ON            RE P O P F                        SEP                  PAGE.01




     DhTE   T I ME                        TC/FROf             hO l i t            'S E .:   ? T hi I !.! S
01    9                  )U         H                         Q f i - -■   (J 0    3 4
                             South Yorkshire

                             POLICE
                             duoiioci              w 11 n b u u f t A u r l


             DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                   50 W INDSOR ROAD
                                      SHEFFIELD
                                        S8 8UB

                              TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                                 FAX: (0114)2523855


                                                   ..........$ 1 4 ^ ........................................................ ( ; j f :   "7




FOR THE ATTENTION OF:




COMMENTS:                                  !   X                                                                2.O.

               ^6r* '    t    i   n    t       .                              ..

                A « c +~                                                          ^ C 4 jL




FROM:




NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE): ..... ..............................

IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
  South Yorkshire
  POLICE
  JUS TI CE w i t h COURAGE




C o m p l i m e n t s


  South Yorkshire Police
  Force Training Centre
  Green Lane, Ecclesfield
  Sheffield S30 3WY
                                          Direct Line:.
  Tel: 0114 257 0200 Fax: 0114 245 3891
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                      REF:         o:\suptWhillsbor\ab

FROM:     Superintendent A Hepworth                  DCU/DEPT:      Ecclesfield Training

TO:       ACC (L & T) Ian Daines                     EXT;          4701

                                                     DATE:         21 August 1997



SUBJECT:        THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - ACCOMMODATION




Following our telephone conversation of the 12 August 1997, I have made enquiries over the cost
of providing portacabin accommodation at the Heeley site and also visited Heeley and looked at
the spare accommodation contained w ithin that building.

The costings for a portacabin installed on site for six months are as follows;-

Hire of 40' x 12' portacabin w ith tw o end offices and                    £1,420
conference room facilities

Burglar Alarm                                                              £500

Fire Alarm                                                                 £250

Carpets                                                                    £300

Heating and Lighting                                                       £140

Conference Table and Chairs                                                £640

Planning Permission                                                        £100


TOTAL:                                                                     £3,350

Planning permission would be required if the portacabin were to remain on site longer than six
weeks and at the present time it takes tw o to three months for such permission to be granted.
There would be additional costs for office furniture, power link up, extra telephone lines and fax
machine but most of these costs would also be incurred if accommodation w ithin the existing
building was utilised.

Without knowing the ultimate size of the team that w ill be required to w ork on the Hillsborough
Scrutiny it is difficult to really estimate the size of the accommodation required. I have, however,
spoken w ith the new head of Discipline and Complaints and he has no objection to the
Hillsborough Scrutiny Team setting up an office on the ground floor of the building, utilising w ha t is
presently known as the waiting room. This room is the first office on the right hand side of the
ground floor when one enters the Discipline and Complaints part of the building and is next door to
the present conference room.         The room w ill accommodate 3 oeople w ith their own desks and
chairs in comfort.
 The room is protected by the existing burglar and fire alarms, it is within the security door to
 Discipline and Complaints and can be independently locked. The conference room next door could
 be used by the Hillsborough Scrutiny Team when required, as could the interview room opposite.
 Papers and exhibits from the Hillsborough Enquiry Store would be more secure as they would not
 have to be taken out of the existing building for the team to w ork on them as would be the case if
 a portacabin were to be utilised.

 Costs for setting up the waiting room as an office would be as follows:-

2 x Project 1 Double Pedestal Desks                                         £500
(1 desk already in situ)

3 x Executive Chairs                                                        £600

Plain paper Fax                                                             £595


TOTAL:                                                                      £1,695

This cost would also have to be added to the cost of setting up a portacabin office. It may also be
necessary to purchase one or more secure filing cabinets at a cost of £407 each in order that
papers being worked on in the office could be securely stored. Additional telephone lines could be
installed in this office by our own Telecom Engineers w itho u t incurring any budgetary costs.

My preference would be to set up the Hillsborough Scrutiny Office w ithin the existing building at
Heeley.     The advantages of this are that the building is more secure than a portacabin,
documentation does not have to be carried backwards and forwards outside the building, the
building is protected by burglar and fire alarms, it is heated and could be taken into use as soon as
office furniture is available. It w ill also be cheaper and w ill not require planning permission.

Submitted for your decision please.


                    L c   (o L .



Superintendent Hepworth                                ^

   vv.
                                           r               __          ____ w        ____
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                    REF;          o:\suptWhillsbor\ab

FROM: Superintendent A Hepworth                     DCU/DEPT:      Ecclesfield Training

TO:       ACC (L & T)Ian Daines                     EXT:          4701

                                                    DATE:         21 August 1997



SUBJECT:        THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - ACCOMMODATION




Following our telephone conversation of the 12 August 1997, I have made enquiries over the cost
of providing portacabin accommodation at the Heeley site and also visited Heeley and looked at
the spare accommodation contained within that building.

The costings for a portacabin installed on site for six months are as follows:-

Hire of 40' x 12' portacabin w ith tw o end offices and                    £1,420
conference room facilities

Burglar Alarm                                                              £500

Fire Alarm                                                                 £250

Carpets                                                                    £300

Heating and Lighting                                                       £140

Conference Table and Chairs                                                £640

Planning Permission                                                        £100


TOTAL:                                                                     £3,350

Planning permission would be required if the portacabin were to remain on site longer than six
weeks and at the present time it takes tw o to three months for such permission to be granted.
There would be additional costs for office furniture, power link up, extra telephone lines and fax
machine but most of these costs would also be incurred if accommodation w ithin the existing
building was utilised.

W ithout knowing the ultimate size of the team that w ill be required to w ork on the Hillsborough
Scrutiny it is difficult to really estimate the size of the accommodation required. I have, however,
spoken w ith the new head of Discipline and Complaints and he has no objection to the
Hillsborough Scrutiny Team setting up an office on the ground floor of the building, utilising w hat is
presently known as the waiting room. This room is the first office on the right hand side of the
ground floor when one enters the Discipline and Complaints part of the building and is next door to
the present conference room. The room w ill accommodate 3 people w ith their own desks and
chairs in comfort.
The room is protected by the existing burglar and fire alarms, it is within the security door to
Discipline and Complaints and can be independently locked. The conference room next door could
be used by the Hillsborough Scrutiny Team when required, as could the interview room opposite.
Papers and exhibits from the Hillsborough Enquiry Store would be more secure as they would not
have to be taken out of the existing building for the team to w ork on them as would be the case if
a portacabin were to be utilised.

Costs for setting up the waiting room as an office would be as follows:-

2 x Project 1 Double Pedestal Desks                                          £500
(1 desk already in situ)

3 x Executive Chairs                                                         £600

Plain paper Fax                                                              £595


TOTAL:                                                                     £1,695

This cost would also have to be added to the cost of setting up a portacabin office. It may also be
necessary to purchase one or more secure filing cabinets at a cost of £407 each in order that
papers being worked on in the office could be securely stored. Additional telephone lines could be
installed in this office by our own Telecom Engineers w ithout incurring any budgetary costs.

My preference would be to set up the Hillsborough Scrutiny Office within the existing building at
Heeley.     The advantages of this are that the building is more secure than a portacabin,
documentation does not have to becarriedbackwards andforwards outside                   the building, the
building is protected by burglar and fire alarms, it isheatedand could be taken into use assoon as
office furniture is available. It w ill also be cheaper and w ill not require planning permission.

Submitted for your decision please.




Superintendent Hepworth
                       Si/y}V b&CJ V-iM^                                                                 --"7|3jci|                    t>Qci+**-d
Q f}£ y »                     '~ C -J 3 S      ^vce       m_       >Wx. dU*«<i\cu 'fc *p c j.                      We UH/» 6^ « w m ^                        UK

♦L * w iA    O ^A      a ^ a tx iA n U .                                                                           * * * d tiU v « A




 j\i«vu0l ^<Ax                                                 C jf l ^ ) * ^                     Ih ^ n ts^ -             p e^ a4 r             <W kG z>C cA

 G£Qa>eAe^ ^D*"“              eW ^                            S jtj^                    ®i(                        ^

 k'O             ^ '4^,-tf^/ cJ|                                                      X»<jt       3 +7           |i“-*         .
 \V c .                        V ^O        C » A » t>     p O ^ A               Crs   S ^ P       W*VD     —        A e ^ iw ^             ^C < _

^6 o * * o     .




                              -Sinpl*      Q»tu> UsTMb^                                                                  S'fP.
   Ok                           t-'J SS {<$£&-» 0*+a\                     «*• C a ^           ^
   5 v ^ fr      U o \< A <                        U e v J L fl^      C ^ K jt < > 1 A .      ^C «»   M ^ « \A                         lw -< L    o   U ® * * (^


     b^.                          ft. U j^ A       |> i     dtrT         w \^o         ^ 46^             *- *5 SS          -i^ .
    " J K c J - qJ ^ c c ^    ,
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


U U IM H U b N IIA L                                           REF: AW/HMT

FROM:      Alan Walker                             DCU/DEPT:   Force Solicitor, CJAD

TO:        PC K Greenway                           EXT:        8780
           Discipline and Complaints Department
                                                    DATE:      21 July 1997



SUBJECT:          NEW HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

I enclose a list of press and media reports as promised




Alan Walker
Force Solicitor
Criminal Justice Administration Department
    1   01 Jul 97 Westminster:   In Parliament Last Night:   Press
 Association
                  (Ql:98)
      2 01 Jul 97 Shorts: Straw announces Hillsborough inquiry:
 Financial Times
                     (Ql:14)
      3   01 Jul 97 News: UK: Fresh probe into stadium tragedy
 launched: Financial
                    Times (Q1:48)
      4    30 Jun 97 Commons: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith Will
 Scrutinise New Evidence
                    On The 1989 Hillsborough Disaster In Which 96
 People Died, Home
                    Secretary Jack Straw Told The Commons In A
 S tatement: Pres s
                    Association (Ql:42)
      5 30 Jun 97 Commons: Straw Announces New Hillsborough Probe:
 Press
                    Association (Ql:241)
      6 30 Jun 97 Commons: Liverpool FC Welcomes Hillsborough Move:
 Press
                    Association (Ql:43)
     7   30 Jun 97 Politics: Families Welcome New Hillsborough
 Inquiry: Press
                   Association (Ql:87)
     8 30 Jun      97 Westminster: In Parliament Tonight: Press
Association (Ql:98)
     9 30 Jun 97 Way Of The World: Fast work: The Daily Telegraph
 (Q1:28)
    10 30 Jun 97 LORD CHANCELLOR'S DEPARTMENT / HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER
                   STATEMENT BY STUART-SMITH: Hermes (Ql:24)
    11 27 Jun 97 No more cover-up: New moves over match death
crush: Daily
                   Record (Ql:53)
    12 27 Jun      97 Straw orders new inquiry into deaths at
Hillsborough: The Times
                   (Q1.-62)
    13 27 Jun     97 New Hillsborough inquiry to look at video
footage: The Daily
                   Telegraph (Q 1 :54)
    14 27 Jun 97 Straw sets up review of football tragedy: New
inquiry for
                   Hillsborough families: The Independent (Ql:67)
   15   27 Jun 97 New Hillsborough inquiry: Straw to explain
decision to families
                   of 96 supporters who died in stadium tragedy
eight years ago:
                   The Guardian (Ql:84)
   16 27 Jun 97 News: UK: Straw may open new inquiry: UK News
Digest: Financial
                   Times (Ql:22)
   17 27 Jun 97 Straw to reopen Hillsborough inquiry because of
new police
                   video evidence: Britain: The Irish Times (Ql:50)
   18 27 Jun 97 Hillsborough families' hopes over inquiry: The
Scotsman (Ql:49)
   19 27 Jun 97 The dangers of always blaming the police: As the
Home Secretary
                  looks set to order a new Hillsborough inquiry:
Daily Mail
                 (Q 1 :123)
  20 26 Jun 97 Politics: Film Renewed Call For Inquiry Re-Start:
Press
                Association (Ql:33)
  21    26 Jun 97 Politics: Straw Move Raises Hopes For New
Hillsborough Probe:
                 Press Association (Ql:70)
  22    26 Jun 97 Straw Orders New Inquiry Into Tragedy At
Hillsbro: Jack Straw
                Orders New Inquiry Into Hillsborough Disaster:
Daily Mirror
                 (Q1:22)
  23 26 Jun 97 New Hillsboro' inquiry after lost video is found:
Evening
                Standard (Ql:40)
  24   16 Jun 97 New twist in Hillsborough police claim: Daily
Mail (Q 1 :25)
  25 06 Jun 97 League sides score as Lottery goalposts move: The
Herald
                  ( Q 1:28)
   26 01 Jun 97 Police face law to ban 'trauma' cash claims: The
Sunday Times
                       (Ql:75)
   27 14 May 97 Law: Issue is too big for the courts: Dr Pamela
Ferguson argues
                       that it is time for society, and ultimately
parliament, to
                       confront the moral minefield of life-and- death
decisions: The
                       Herald (Ql:159)
   28 12 May 97 Fans seek Hillsborough memorial: The Independent
(Q1:19)
   29 11 May 97 Social: Fans In Hillsborough Memorial Plea: Press
Association
                       (Q1:19)
   30         10 May 97 Show Business: Rock Bid To Raise Hillsboro'
Campaign Cash:
                       Press Association (Ql:26)
   31 04 May 97 Fans back inquiry: Observer (Ql:8)
   32 04 May 97 Gig of the Week: Observer (Ql:12)
   33          04 May 97 Anfield call for Hillsborough inquiry:
Independent on Sunday
                       (Ql:7)
   34          03 May 97 Soccer: Fans Add Mass Support For New
Hillsborough Inquiry:
                       Press Association (Ql:14)
   35 03 May 97 Soccer: Anfield Stage For Hillsborough Campaign:
Press
                      Association (Ql:14)
  36 30 Apr 97 Hillsborough judge dies: Daily Record (Ql:6)
  37 30 Apr 97 Courts fall silent for Lord Taylor: The Times
(Q 1 : 4 1 )
  38         30 Apr 97 Judge who led move to safer soccer dies: The
Daily Telegraph
         %paaKfi|[=6iBllsborough report and
                 Lord Chief Justice who sought to make judges less
distant: Lord
                  Taylor of Gosforth: The Daily Telegraph (Ql:201)
    40   30 Apr 97 Tributes to a sporting lord: The Independent
 (Q1:13)
   41 30 Apr 97 Football: Football's tributes to Lord Taylor: The
Independent
                   (Q1:50)
   42 30 Apr 97 Hillsborough Judge Is Dead: Justice Lord Taylor
Dies Aged 66:
                  Daily Mirror (Ql:13)
   43   30 Apr 97 Playing a blinder in court and on pitch: The
Northern Echo
                  (Q1:108)
   44    30 Apr 97 Champion of justice who gave football a new
future: Daily Mail
                  (Q1:55)
   45 29 Apr 97 Death: Lord Taylor, Top Judge And Architect Of
Safer Soccer,
                  Dies At 66: Press Association (Ql:163)
   46 29 Apr 97 Soccer: Kelly Leads Tributes To Man Who Changed
Football: Press
                  Association (Ql:42)
   47 29 Apr 97 Lord Taylor, the 'user friendly' judge, dies at
66: Evening
                  Standard (Ql:47)
   48   29 Apr 97 Soccer: Kelly leads tributes to Lord Justice
T ay1o r: Evening
                  Standard (Ql:18)
   49   08 Apr 97 Letter: Grand National fallout: The Guardian
(Q 1 :15)
  50 06 Apr 97 Letter: Scousers can take a joke so long as it's
funny:
                 Independent on Sunday (Ql:21)
  51 06 Apr 97 National courage: Calm and collected, the Aintree
crowd walk
                 away from IRA: The Mail on Sunday (Ql:29)
  52 02 Apr 97 Disaster evidence not new, say police; News in
brief: The Times
                ( Q 1:20)
  53 02 Apr 97 CPS studying Hillsborough tapes: The Independent
(Ql:40)
  54 02 Apr 97 Decision 'in days' on Hillsborough video: The
Guardian (Ql:22)
  55 02 Apr 97 Disaster inquiry decision awaited: The Herald
( Q 1:50)
  56    02 Apr 97 Police deny Hillsborough video shows new
evidence: Footage said
                to be from police camera may lead to new inquiry
into tragedy:
                The Scotsman (Ql:75)
  57   01 Apr 97 Police: Semi Final Disaster Which Claimed 96
Lives: Press
                Association (Ql:36)
  58 01 Apr 97 Police: Families Wait As CPS Studies Hillsborough
Video Film:
                Press Association (Ql:76)
  59 01 Apr 97 Exclusive: The pictures that prove cops lied on
 Hillsborough -
                   New   evidence   forces   fresh     probe   into   soccer
 disaster: Daily
                   Record (Ql:52)
    60  01 Apr 97 Hillsborough inquiry reported reopened: The
 Independent (Q 1 :13)
    61  ' 01 Apr 97 Exclusive: This Is The Truth: We Find
 Hillsborough Tragedy Tape
                   Hidden For Eight Years Vital Video From Camera
 Cops Said Wasn't
                   Working:   Mirror  Discovers   Police  Tape  Of
Hillsborough Disaster:
                   Daily Mirror (Ql:122)
   62 01 Apr 97 Darlington - Dawn of a new age: Switch brings
pledge of better
                   social services deal: The Northern Echo (Ql:49)
   63 01 Apr 97 Hillsborough video probe: Daily Mail (Ql:18)
   64 30 Mar 97 Judges think it's fine to starve a handicapped
woman to death.
                   It won't be long before the lethal injections
start: Observer
                   (Q1:116)
   65 29 Mar 97 CITY COMMENT: When love of money shows love of
country the red
                  card: The Daily Telegraph (Q 1 :45)
   66 27 Mar 97 Hillsborough coma boy still a Reds fan: Daily
Record (Ql:24)
   67 27 Mar 97 Joy for parents as Hillsborough victim 'talks'
back: The Times
                  (Ql:81)
   68 27 Mar 97 Sign of awareness from Hillsborough victim: Brain
damage fan
                  'speaks' via touch pad: The Daily Telegraph
( Q 1:65)
  69    27 Mar     97   Fan's   recovery   'unique':    Soccer   victim's
emergence from
                 vegetative state began in 1994: The Guardian
 (Q1:63)
   70 27 Mar 97 Devine case raises questions about reliability
of PVS, says
                 doctor: The Irish Times (Ql:107)
   71 27 Mar 97 1995 Supreme Court decision recognises not the
person's right
                 to die but the State's right to let die: The
Irish Times
                 (Q1:106)
   72  27 Mar 97 Right-to-die doubts raised: Debate renewed as
Hillsborough
                 victim 'awakens': The Herald (Q1 :80)
   73 26 Mar 97 Health: Haunting Tragedy Of Hillsborough: Press
Association
                 (Ql:31)
   74 26 Mar 97 Hillsborough man 'recovering' after eight-year
coma: The Daily
                 Telegraph (Ql:54)
   75 26 Mar 97 Hillsborough survivor 'awakes': Vegetative state
man
                 communicates with family after eight years: The
 Independent
                    (Q 1 :51)
     76 26 Mar 97 Hillsborough victim 'awakes' : PVS man aware after
 eight years:
                   The Guardian (Ql:69)
    77 26 Mar 97 Hillsborough victim becomes 'aware': The Herald
 (Ql:38)
    78   26 Mar 97 A flicker of hope for Hillsborough victim:
 Evening Standard
                    (Ql:31)
    79 23 Mar 97 City Honour For Cracker Writer: Jimmy McGovern
 Is To Be Granted
                   The     Freedom Of  Liverpool   For   His   Drama
 Documentary On The
                   Hillsborough Disaster: Sunday Mirror (Ql:9)
    80 23 Mar 97 Blair moves into shadow of the Sun: Scotland on
 Sunday (Q1.-155)
    81   21 Mar 97 Cheltenham limit; Sports Letter: The Times
 (Ql:14)
    82 21 Mar 97 Football (The Battle of Porto): Horrific visions
 of
                   Hillsborough - Moran's shock at stadium mayhem:
Daily Mail
                   (Q 1 :88)
    83 09 Mar 97 Active Sport: Stand out from the crowd with an
official ticket:
                   The Sunday Telegraph (Ql:67)
    84 06 Mar 97 Politics: Howard To Consider New Hillsborough
Evidence: Press
                   Association (Ql:29)
   85 27 Feb 97 Football disaster probe is in doubt: Daily Record
 (Ql:17)
   86 27 Feb 97 Doctor's challenge over Hillsborough: The Daily
Telegraph
                   (Ql:42)
   87    27 Feb 97 Hillsborough families pin inquest hopes on
doctor's evidence:
                  The Independent (Ql:49)
   88 27 Feb 97 New hope in Hillsboro' campaign: The Guardian
(Ql:52)
   89 27 Feb 97 Doctor may be key to soccer inquiry: The Herald
(Ql:72)
   90 27 Feb 97 Football: French 'death traps' row hits World Cup
- Football
                  bosses are pressing the government to pull down
the fences: The
                  European (Ql:48)
   91 26 Feb 97 Legal: I Didn't Know My Evidence Was So Vital -
Hillsborough
                  Doctor: Press Association (Ql:73)
   92 20 Feb 97 Caring Grob Did So Much For Us .I'm Here To Help
Him: Daily
                  Mirror (Ql:40)
   93 15 Feb 97 City honours drama writer: Daily Record (Ql:5)
   94   14 Feb 97 Social: Liverpool Set To Honour Hillsborough
Writer: Press
                  Association (Ql:24)
   95 31 Jan 97 Standing orders; Sports Letter: The Times (Ql:18)
     96 31 Jan 97 Hillsborough Plea: Liverpool Fans Start Internet
  Hillsborough
                         Petition: Daily Mirror (Ql:7)
     97 29 Jan 97 Sport: On This Day In Sport: Press Association
  (Ql:14)
     98 22 Jan 97 Elementary, dear Holmes: The Times (Ql:49)
     99 '21 Jan 97 Football: Mixed reception for Labour terrace
  talk: The
                        Independent (Q1 :57)
    100 21 Jan 97 Football: Science solution for terrace safety:
 Daily Mail
                         (Q1:29)
    101     20 Jan 97 Politics: Labour Pledges Safety First On
 Terraces: Press
                        Association (Ql:35)
   102 20 Jan 97 Politics: Labour To Tackle Pleas Over Terraces:
 Press
                        Association (Ql:40)
   103 15 Jan 97 The Hell: Football: Stress Behind Kenny Dalglish
 Liverpool
                        Departure: Daily Mirror (Ql:12)
   104 10 Jan 97 Call for party safety review: The Herald (Ql:22)
   105 10 Jan 97 Business Comment: Two halves: The Herald (Ql:40)
   106     10 Jan 97 Business Comment: Two halves.: The Herald FT
 McCarthy (Q 1 :44)
   107 09 Jan 97 Chief defends the policing at party: The Herald
 (Ql:57)
   108 06 Jan 97 MP claims police were without radios at rally:
 The Herald
                        (Ql:35)
   109     06 Jan 97 Crowd 'seconds from disaster': The Scotsman
 (Ql:32)
   110 05 Jan 97 Police: Police Radio Shortage 'Risked Hogmanay
Hillsborough' -
                       MP: Press Association (Ql:35)
  111           03      Jan    97   When     it's  right  to  profit
 frBI r~Z‘ihJJ-=pNJ^|z—BN=zicially-licensed life of Frederick
                       West, explains why it should be portrayed on
screen: The Daily
                       Telegraph (Ql:100)
  112 02 Jan 97 Record View: Better safe than sorry: Daily Record
(Q 1 :16 )
  113 01 Jan 97 Hillsboro Dad's Fury At 'Dancing On Grave' Slur:
Ingham
                       Slammed: Daily Mirror (Ql:32)
  114 21 Dec 96 Damages appeal; News in Brief: The Times (Ql:5)
  115      21 Dec 96 Hillsborough damages: police to appeal: The
Independent (Q1:10)
  116 21 Dec 96 Police to contest damages: The Guardian (Ql:13)
  117 21 Dec 96 Police to appeal over Hillsborough award: The
Herald (Ql:19)
  118 21 Dec 96 Shameful Kick In The Teeth: Leader On Hillsbrough
Compensation
                       Appeal By Yorkshire Police : Comment: Daily
Mirror (Ql:31)
  119 20 Dec 96 Police: Police Appeal Against Hillsborough Man's
Pounds 200,000
                       Award: Press Association (Ql:62)
    120   20 Dec 96 Soccer: Premier League urged to fund ground
  improvements: The
                     Guardian (Q 1 :33)
    121 19 Dec 96 Bishop in disaster inquiry call; News in brief:
  The Times
                     (Q1:11)
    122 1'9 Dec 96 DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE / SPROAT CONFIRMS
  COMMITMENT ON
                     FOOTBALL GROUND SAFETY: Hermes (Ql:45)
    123  19 Dec 96 Bishop backs new probe on Hillsborough: Daily
 Mail (Ql:19)
   124 18 Dec 96 Politics: Howard Pledges Rethink On Hillsborough
 Disaster:
                    Press Association (Ql:29)
   125 18 Dec 96 Howard to consider new Hillsborough inquiry: The
 Independent
                     (Ql:57)
   126 18 Dec 96 Howard's Words Of Hope For Hillsboro Families:
 Michael Howard
                    Gives New Hope To Hillsborough Families: Daily
 Mirror (Q 1 :23)
   127 17 Dec 96 Commons: Howard Pledges Rethink On Hillsborough
 Disaster: Press
                    Association (Ql:87)
   128 17 Dec 96 Politics: Hillsborough Families Lobby Parliament:
 Press
                    Association (Ql:29)
   129    17 Dec 96 Police to get post-disaster counselling:
 Government to fund
                    debriefing sessions following pounds 1.2m court
pay-out to
                   Hillsborough officers: The Independent (Ql:68)
   130  17 Dec 96 Cash crisis hits soccer grounds: The Guardian
 (Ql:45)
  131    17 Dec 96 Howard Stalls On Hillsboro: Michael Howard
Finally Watches
                   Hillsborough Drama-documentary: Daily Mirror
 (Ql:12)
  132   16 Dec 96 Politics: Howard Views Hillsborough Disaster
Film: Press
                   Association (Ql:40)
  133 15 Dec 96 Letter to the Sports Editor: Pointing the finger:
The Sunday
                   Telegraph (Ql:12)
  134 15 Dec 96 Hillsborough police came from disgraced squad:
Key detective
                   was under investigation, reports Graham Ball:
Independent on
                   Sunday (Ql:90)
  135 13 Dec 96 Voice of Scotland: We need a new disaster probe:
Daily Record
                   (Ql:97)
  136   12 Dec 96 Politics: Straw Probes Hillsborough Evidence
Claim: Press
                   Association (Ql:20)
  137 12 Dec 96 Pounds 200,000 damages for Hillsborough victim:
Daily Record
                   (Q l :28)
     138 12 Dec 96 Pounds 201,000 for half-brother of football crush
  victim: The
                     Times (Ql:69)
    139 12 Dec 96 Hillsborough fan wins pounds 200,000: The Daily
  Telegraph
                     (Ql:96)
    140 12 Dec 96 Pounds 200,000 for soccer disaster brother: Life
  destroyed by
                      post-traumatic       stress   disorder    after
  Hi11sborough: The
                     Independent (Q l :54)
    141 12 Dec 96 Pounds 200,000 for soccer disaster brother: Life
  destroyed by
                      post-traumatic       stress   disorder    after
  Hillsborough: The
                     Independent (Q l :73)
    142 12 Dec 96 Dead fan's brother gets pounds 200,000: The
  Guardian (Ql:74)
    143 12 Dec 96 Shorts: Damages for Hillsborough man: Financial
 Times (Ql:8)
    144 12 Dec 96 Liverpool        fan wins damages: Judge upholds
 Hillsborough claim:
                    The Herald (Ql:79)
   145 12 Dec 96 Pounds 200,000 For Brother Of Hillsboro Victim:
 Award Opens
                    Door    For   More     Claims: Half-brother    Of
 Hillsborough Victim
                    Awarded Damages: Daily Mirror (Ql:60)
   146 12 Dec 96 Just Award: Courts Award Damages To Hillsborough
 Fan : Comment:
                    Daily Mirror (Ql:15)
   147 12 Dec 96 The 'victim culture': How the price of pain is
 growing: Evening
                    Standard (Ql:181)
   148 12 Dec 96 Leading Article: Culture of compensation: Evening
 Standard
                    (Ql:51)
   149   12 Dec 96 Brother's pounds 200,000 award for trauma of
 stadium tragedy:
                   Daily Mail (Ql:53)
  150 11 Dec 96 Courts: Pounds 200,000 Damages For Hillsborough
Relative: Press
                   Association (Ql:112)
  151    11 Dec 96 Pounds 201,000 for the anguish of Hillsboro:
Evening Standard
                   (Ql:72)
  152    10 Dec 96 No justice yet for Hillsborough: Phil Scraton
wants full
                   disclosure of evidence and how it was got: The
Guardian (Ql:44)
  153 09 Dec 96 Letter: The Hillsborough disaster from one who
was also there:
                   The Guardian (Q l :24)
  154 09 Dec 96 Letter: The Hillsborough disaster from one who
was also there:
                   The Guardian (Ql:23)
  155 09 Dec 96 32,000 Want Justice For Hillsboro': Football Fans
Call For New
                  Hillsborough Inquiry In Wake Of TV Docu-drama:
 Daily Mirror
                    (Ql:18)
    156 08 Dec 96 Rasps and Roses: The Sunday Mail (Ql:31)
    157 08 Dec 96 Soccer: Hillsborough: The story that had to be
  told - Powerful
                    and dramatic television film provides new
  evidence on police
                   assertions and mystery of the 'faulty' security
  camera Rogan
                   Taylor on the moving look at Britain's worst
  football disaster:
                   The Sunday Telegraph (Ql:95)
    158 08 Dec 96 'My son was alive at 4pm - he could have been
 saved':
                   Hillsborough: a mother's anguish: Independent on
 Sunday (Ql:79)
   159 07 Dec 96 TV: Hillsborough Coroner: 'I Could Have Heard
 More Evidence':
                   Press Association (Ql:66)
   160 07 Dec 96 Howard considers fresh inquiry on Hillsborough:
 The Times
                   (Ql:67)
   161   07 Dec 96 Police promise on Hillsborough: The Daily
 Telegraph (Ql:42)
   162 07 Dec 96 Drama heightens the facts of Hillsborough: The
 Power of TV -
                  Controversy rages over powerful documentary on
 the soccer
                  disaster that claimed 96 lives: The Daily
 Telegraph (Ql:99)
   163 07 Dec 96 Police reject claims in Hillsborough film: The
 Independent
                   (Ql:51)
  164 07 Dec 96 Us on us: The British view: The Guardian (Ql:22)
  165 07 Dec 96 Hillsborough TV drama revives fight for inquiry:
The Guardian
                  (Ql:52)
  166 07 Dec 96 25,000 Mirror Readers Demand Truth On Hillsbro:
Daily Mirror
                  (Ql:47)
  167 07 Dec 96 We Want Justice: Readers Ring In Weeping After
TV Drama On
                  Hillsborough Disaster: Mirror Campaigns For Truth
On
                  Hillsborough Disaster: Daily Mirror (Ql:141)
  168   07 Dec 96 Sign Your Name And Give Them Justice: Mirror
Campaign For New
                  Hillsborough Inquest: Daily Mirror (Ql:75)
  169 07 Dec 96 The new love of my life, by battling Hillsborough
father: Daily
                 Mail (Ql:55)
  170 06 Dec 96 TV: Hillsborough Police: No Need For New Inquiry:
Press
                 Association (Ql:103)
  171 06 Dec 96 Exclusive: The lies that haunt me - Hillsborough
ambulance hero
                 hits out at cover-up that scarred him for life
 - Ex- paramedic
                   Tony Edward saw fans die at Hillsborough.      He
 tells Sandra
                   Ratcliffe why last night's TV dramatisation could
 at last bring
                    justice: Daily Record (Ql:150)
    172  06 Dec 96 10,000 Readers Demand: Reopen Inquest: Mirror
  Readers Call For
                    New Hillsborough Inquest: Daily Mirror (Ql:28)
    173 06 Dec 96 Police rule out new Hillsborough probe: Evening
 Standard
                    (Q l :39)
    174 06 Dec 96 Inquest plea after Hillsborough film: Daily Mail
  (Ql:15)
   175 05 Dec 96 Commons: MP Urges More Say For Soccer Clubs On
 Policing: Press
                   Association (Ql:48)
   176   05 Dec 96 TV: Plea To Howard On Hillsborough 'Perjury'
 Claim: Press
                   Association (Ql:53)
   177 05 Dec 96 Leader:time To End This Cover-up: Mirror Comment
 On
                   Hillsborough: Daily Mirror (Ql:47)
   178   05 Dec 96 Hillsborough The Real Truth: All Britain Must
 Watch The Most
                   Harrowing TV Programme Ever Made: ITV Programme
 To Show Truth
                   About The Hillsborough Disaster: Daily Mirror
 (Ql:22)
   179 05 Dec 96 Helpline for TV Hillsboro drama: Evening Standard
 (Ql:9)
   180 04 Dec 96 Was truth buried with the dead?: Viv Hardwick
 reports on
                  tomorrow night's TV drama about the Hillsborough
disaster - and
                  hears that relatives of the victims are finally
having their
                  side of the story told: The Northern Echo
 (Ql:122)
  181 02 Dec 96 Hillsborough probe call: Daily Record (Ql:7)
  182 02 Dec 96 Hillsbro Families' Tears At TV Film: Families
Attend Private
                  Viewing Of Hillsborough Disaster Film: Daily
Mirror (Q l :13)
  183 02 Dec 96 Hillsbro Families In Call For New Probe: TV Drama
Sparks Fresh
                  Anger: Hillsborough Families Call For New Inquest
After Private
                  Viewing Of Film Portraying The Disaster: Daily
Mirror (Ql:52)
  184 30 Nov 96 The Eye: Profile: Jimmy McGovern: Truth will out:
Jimmy
                  McGovern    talks  with    James  Rampton:    The
Independent (Ql:122)
  185   28 Nov 96 It's the most shocking TV drama ever: Daily
Record (Ql:36)
  186   28 Nov 96 TV rekindles Hillsborough dispute: The Times
(Ql:74)
    187 28 Nov 96 Police 'were aware of crush' at fatal match: The
  Guardian
                     (Ql:58)
    188 28 Nov 96 TV Film Rap For Hillsboro Cops: TV Documentary
  On Hillsborough
                    Disaster To Challenge Police Version Of Events:
  Daily Mirror
                    (Ql:8)
    189   28 Nov 96 There are people to blame, and we must blame
  them: It's wrong
                    to accept that disasters like Hillsborough are
 no one's fault.
                    Cracker author Jimmy McGovern, whose TV film
 about the football
                    disaster is broadcast next week, says it is our
 duty to name
                    names: Evening Standard (Ql:126)
   190    27   Nov 96 TV: TV Programme 'Has Fresh Evidence On
 Hillsborough': Press
                   Association (Ql:66)
   191 27 Nov 96 'Startling new' TV claim over Hillsboro: Evening
 Standard
                    (Ql:57)
   192    26   Nov 96 Show Business:      'Sue Me' Challenge Over
 Hillsborough Disaster
                   Film: Press Association (Ql:39)
   193    25   Nov 96 Show Business:      'Sue Me' Challenge Over
 Hillsborough Disaster
                   Film: Press Association (Ql:43)
   194   23 Nov 96 Diary: The Times (Ql:28)
   195   23 Nov 96 Head to head: Paying up for trauma - Let's all
 sue for
                   compensation. Hillsborough police did, even a
bullied schoolboy
                   did, so why shouldn't we all? Ian Walker believes
it's our
                   right, but fellow lawyer Martin Mears says our
passion for
                   suing has gone too far: The Guardian (Ql:185)
  196    22 Nov 96 Leading Article: Death and dignity: The Daily
Telegraph (Ql:41)
  197   21 Nov 96 Littlejohn: It's criminal to cash in on the
Dunblane tragedy:
                  Daily Mail (Ql:26)
  198   18 Nov 96 A claim they are unlikely to win: The Herald
(Ql:92)
  199 18 Nov 96 Police may sue for stress of Dunblane: Daily Mail
(Ql:34)
  200   17 Nov 96 Interview: Haunted by Hillsborough - Jimmy
McGovern Jimmy
                  McGovern created Cracker, ITV's obsessive police
psychologist.
                  Now his own fixation with the 1989 disaster has
put him at odds
                  with the law: The Sunday Telegraph (Ql:234)
  201 08 Nov 96 Smaller grounds feel the pinch as lottery hits
Football Trust:
                  Shortage of funds stops stadium revolution: The
 Guardian
                     (Ql:62)
    202    06 Nov 96 Letter to the Editor: Policemen's duties and
  claims: The Daily
                     Telegraph (Ql:26)
    203    06 Nov 96 Letter to the Editor: Policemen's duties and
  claims': The Daily
                     Telegraph (Ql:23)
    204    05 Nov 96 Law Report: Police can claim damages over
  Hillsborough: The
                     Independent (Ql:83)
    205   05 Nov 96 Court is told of suicide attempt: The Herald
  (Ql:17)
    206 04 Nov 96 Courts: Half-Brother's Hillsborough Death 'Led
 To M a n 's
                    Depression': Press Association (Ql:30)
   207 04 Nov 96 Way of the World: Police priorities: The Daily
 Telegraph
                     (Ql:48)
   208    04 Nov 96 Football: Middle classes living in fear: The
 Herald (Ql:78)
   209 02 Nov 96 Letter to the Editor: Unmanly police?: The Daily
 Telegraph
                    (Ql:19)
   210    01 Nov 96 Politics: MPs Call For Cash For Hillsborough
 Families: Press
                    Association (Ql:19)
   211 01 Nov 96 Fury at disaster payout: Daily Record (Ql:18)
   212 01 Nov 96 Hillsborough police win appeal for trauma money:
 The Times
                    (Ql:85)
   213   01 Nov 96 Police can seek damages for Hillsborough: The
Daily Telegraph
                    (Ql:49)
  214 01 Nov 96 Hillsborough Verdict: Officers should not have
 faced the risk
                   of injury,    appeal judges rule:      The Daily
Telegraph (Ql:104)
  215    01 Nov 96 Leading Article: When policemen complain: The
Daily Telegraph
                    (Ql:60)
  216 01 Nov 96 Disaster police win right to sue: The Independent
(Ql:52)
  217 01 Nov 96 Fury at Hillsborough ruling: Police officers who
rescued
                   victims of football disaster win battle for
compensation in
                   appeal court: The Guardian (Ql:71)
  218   01 Nov 96 'There's one rule for police and another for
fans': The
                   Guardian (Ql:42)
  219 01 Nov 96 Shorts: Hillsborough appeal allowed: Financial
Times (Ql:12)
  220 01 Nov 96 Anger at police damages: Families of Hillsborough
disaster
                   victims condemn compensation ruling for officers:
The Herald
                   (Ql:85)
    221  01 Nov 96 Families' Fury At Cash Bid By Hillsbro Cops:
  Disaster Ruling
                    May Open Floodgates: Hillsborough Police Win The
  Right To Claim
                    Trauma Cash: Daily Mirror (Ql:40)
    222 01 Nov 96 Football: FIFA order all the fences to come down:
  Evening
                    Standard (Q l :46)
    223  01 Nov 96 Football: FIFA plea for end of fences: The
  Scotsman (Ql:17)
   224 01 Nov 96 Wages of tragedy: Anger as Hillsborough Police
 win damages
                    case: Daily Mail (Ql:74)
   225 31 Oct 96 Courts: Hillsborough Families Angry After Police
 Win Pay- Out
                   Appeal: Press Association (Ql:114)
   226 31 Oct 96 Soccer: FIFA Demand Fences Come Down: Press
 Association (Ql:27)
   227 31 Oct 96 Hillsboro police win fight for damages: Evening
 Standard
                   (Ql:47)
   228 30 Oct 96 Euro attempt to        chuck out   thecheque-book
 stories: James
                   McKillop examines the rise of big money in the
 search for
                   exclusives in newspaper circulation wars: The
 Herald (Ql:103)
   229  24 Oct 96 Football mourns a true fan:Phil Shaw         pays
 tribute to Matthew
                   Harding, the late vice-chairman of Chelsea: The
 Independent
                   (Ql:123)
  230 18 Oct 96 83 die in Guatemala football crush: The Times
 (Ql:25)
  231 18 Oct 96 Tragic echoes of Hillsborough: The Independent
 (Ql:58)
  232 18 Oct 96 Stadium crush kills 78 fans: Guatemala announces
three-day
                  mourning after worst disaster in history of World
Cup: The
                  Herald (Ql:78)
  233 17 Oct 96 Soccer: FA Chief Mourns For Guatemala Victims:
Press
                  Association (Ql:22)
  234 17 Oct 96 Soccer: Fences 'a Disgrace' In Disaster Stadium:
Press
                  Association (Ql:51)
  235   17 Oct 96 Sport: Soccer Disaster Recalls Hillsborough
Tragedy: Press
                  Association (Ql:151)
  236   17 Oct 96 83 soccer fans die in avalanche of bodies:
Evening Standard
                  (Ql:50)
  237 02 Oct 96 Cuffed And . Cloughed: The Real History Of Soccer
By The Stars
                  And Supporting Cast: New Book Features Stories
And Anecdotes
                  From The Players : Football Mania: Daily Mirror
 (Q1.-114)
   238 16 Sep 96 The Dalglish Story: I felt my head would explode
 and knew I had
                     to quit Liverpool - Day One of an absorbing
 insight into the
                     superstar manager who stunned football: Daily
 Mail (Ql:410)
   239      26 Aug 96 Arts/Edinburgh: Ghetto master - Michael
 Billington hails the
                    winner of the Guardian Student Drama Award at the
 Edinburgh
                    Festival: The Guardian (Ql:68)
   240       03 Aug 96 Exclusive:     Gateway To Hell: Agony Of
Hillsborough, By The
                    Grieving Families: Jimmy McGovern TV Drama To
Reconstruct The
                    Hillsborough Disaster: Daily Mirror (Ql:93)
  241      17 Jul 96 Courts: Judgment Reserved: Press Association
 (Q l :8)
  242     16 Jul 96 Education: Honesty is the best policy - Local
authorities are
                    becoming more adept at dealing with tragedies:
The Guardian
                    (Ql:75)
  243 16 Jul 96 Hillsborough police appeal: The Herald (Ql:39)
  244     15 Jul 96 Courts: Hillsborough Police Challenge Damages
Ruling: Press
                    Association (Ql:68)
  245 15 Jul 96 Obituary Letter: Ernest Armstrong: The Guardian
(Q 1 :14)
  246 10 Jul 96 TV: Avoiding pitfalls of recreating tragedy - Not
everyone is
                    backing Jimmy McGovern in creating a drama
documentary on the
                    Hillsborough disaster: The Scotsman (Ql:34)
  247     09 Jul 96 Show Business: 'No Punches Pulled' TV Drama
Focuses On
                    Hillsborough Disaster: Press Association (Ql:30)
  248 09 Jul 96 Cops Snub Soccer Film: A Pounds 1.5million ITV
Drama Is To
                   Recreate The 1989 Hillsborough Disaster: Daily
Mirror (Q l :9)
  249     08 Jul 96 Show Business: 'No Punches Pulled' TV Drama
Focuses On
                   Hillsborough Disaster: Press Association (Ql:30)
All material subject to copyright.
                                                              -




           **     TX   CONF I RMhi T I ON   RE   GRI v*            AS   OF     18    JUL        9 7   15:44   PRGE.0 1


                                                                                       P




        DhTE       t im e                t o / f f on             M0 DE      I I I N , ' SE C   PG5    STATUS
0   1    7/ 1 3    15:41     S .Y .P ,   CHI EF . D E p 7 .       UE - - S       0 3 “ Si 0     O7      0K
                           South Yorkshire

                           POLICE
                           JUSTICE               with         COURAGE


             DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                    50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                        SHEFFIELD
                                          S8 8UB

                             TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                                FAX: (0114)2523855


TO: ........... ....................................




FOR THE ATTENTION OF.         ... fe r 0 '




COMMENTS                       ^                      * * 1 . 1 10 7




FROM:



NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE): ............ .....................

 IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
    efc*                                         HOM E OFFICE
                                      Queen A n n e ’s Gate L o n d o n SW'IH 9A T
   stffsD;-                                         D:n;t !in 0i-213
   \ ^ T                                                          3\v f l p p j ^ p i X   p=

   0 .-V W .-.V   POL/87   1027/1/2
   K-* r,-,V(.V




   The Clerk to the Police Authority

   The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                         4 December 1987




                              I
  Dear Sir


  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87

    FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS        “
                                                                  *: '
                                                                f .       ’
    There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
    payments to be made from the police fund to Beet expenditure incurred
    by police officers in defending proceedings in tort.* Also, acting in
    pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and
    efficient police force for its area, the police authority lias
    discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all Jcinds'iDf;
    legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
    pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole
    are involved.       The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
/-■^police authorities to help them in considering requests on behalf of
^ o f f i c e r s for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
    and agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
    associations.

  2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
  individual cases is that, where a police authority considers ;that an
  officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties (or) that
  the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officersho uld
  have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
  services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.     The
  following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
  classes of proceedings. Payments Bade to officers in accordance with
  this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                               1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crown Prosecution Service

2.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence.   If he is acquitted, he
should,   like any other defendant,       look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses.   If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to sake a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.    There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty.   This may arise for example in test ca»«s
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.


Private Prosecutions
4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties i a j w ®
confidence that, if    he acts in good frith and exercises
judgement reasonably, his police a u t h o r i t y s u p p o r t him. If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in thin way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds.   In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where tie costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.


CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
eivll Actions    Against   the   Chief— QftlgftC— tSL— HfgnqfUl ,ACfcB— fif
constables
6.  Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chi«* officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which inciudes *P«cial «^*tables

SStua°lffiair
            dS a ^ a n \ ^ n t 0sr)C#8inM 7hen9 p ^ r f ^ c l 1^ ^urpSJted
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
       costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
       costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in connection with the
       settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
       police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
       cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
       whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


       civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers

       7.   Alternatively, the plaintiff may be awarded damages against an
       individual police officer, though ha cannot racovar the damages
       twice over against the chiaf officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
       Police Act 1964 apecifically empowers a police authority "to auch
       extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund any damages
       or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs himself,
       and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of a claim.
       This   provision applies to actions against officers of the
       authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
       area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
       police area.    In considering whether to give financial assistance
       the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
       officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
       reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek hie
       costs from the plaintiff? should the       costs not be awarded or
       awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
       to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ‘ into account the
       reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
       claimed.
       8.  Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
       police officer may be brought in some cases.  In auch cases it is
       important that any discussion of the merits and    quantum of the
       proposed settlement should involve allthe parties named in    the
       claim together with advisers even if      they are represented by
       different advisers.


       Civil Actions Under the Data Protection Act 1 M 4

-  1   9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
'Or    individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy,^loaa
       or unauthorised diaclcsure of personal data ia entitled to
       compensation from the data user. In the absence of any case law on
       these provisions, it is unclear whether the «ct* covered by
       sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to vhich the
       paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, section 48 of
       Act 1964 does not apply.      However, the position ia broadly the
       same.     Under section 38(3) (a) of the 1984 Act constables are
       treated as servants of the chief officer for the purpoaea of the
       Act.    A chief constable ia therefore liable for the acta of his
       officers falling within aectiona 22 and 23 in the aame vay aa he is
       liable for their torta under section 48 (i) * .              ®
       police officers is less clear but it is possible that in some ca*J
       the chief constable might be regarded as having liability for their
       ‘c t s i t follows that it would b. prop.r tor th. polic. authority
                                                                          \


to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability.  It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
obtaining, checking and racording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should meet
his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.

10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to Beet the
costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
the same matters as in exercising their power under section 48(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, Beet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.


Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions fpr Def M o t i on

11.   There may be occasions when financial
from a police authority to enable an officer — ----„ —      .
bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority has
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
police grant only if the following criteria are all met:-

     (a)   the defamation is serious;

     (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;

     (c)   it has attracted public attention;

     (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in the
     interests of the force or of the police service as a
     whole; and
     (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the ease position as any other
citizen and must be expected to seek his own remedy.             But an
allegation against a particular officer Bay well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or be an « « « P l e '
                                                   of iwider
against the force or a significant section of it.         In «uch cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
may reasonably be expected to help to defend the reputation of the
force.




                                                                     4
     INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES A?TD TRIBUNAL

     Legal Representation for Chief Officers

     12.  Any interested arty may be legally represented at an inquest
     but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
     and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled to be
     legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
     Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
     for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
     officer to b* legally represented on behalf of the force.


     Legal Representation for Individual Officers

     13. Separate representation for individual officers whose interest
     is involved may be necessary. For exaaple, there will be occasions
     when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
     be expected to represent the separate interests of such officers
     and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
     be represented.   In such cases the authority should give financial
     assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
     authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
     are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connection with
     the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
     might give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
     police authority would be liable under section 48(1) of the Police
     Act 1964 or for which financial assistance might be approprii|||
     within the terms of this circular.


     APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

     14.   An officer wishing to seek financial assistance from his
     police authority should have the opportunity in advance of! as well
     as on the conclusion of the proceedings to submit to the chief
     officer an application for financial assistance. The chief officer
     should put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
     authority for decision.   The officer should normally be given the
     opportunity by the police authority to make representations to them
-O   if he wishes to do so.
     15.   if it decide* to give financial assistance, the authority
     should inform the officer concerned that, if the
     which they based their decision to grant the a s s ista^ceis ■£own>in
     subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or incomplete, the
     authority will normally expect to recover the money                  :It is
     satisfied that no calpable misrepresentation i*as n^nv® J v « a a » d that
     to recover the money would involve the applicant in substantial
     hardship.   On the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
     assistance and then discovers in the light of
     that such assistance would have been warranted, then financial
     assistance should be granted in order to meet the reasonable co,t*
     incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.


                                                                              5
-Assistance   fr o T n   Police Federation Funds

16.  Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in w onnection with criminal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offences of causing the death or injury of any parson, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covarad by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance.   Zf the police authority doas not consider
the request to fall within the tarms of this circular, the
Federation may then consider the application within the tarms of
Regulation 19.   Zf the officer receives legal assistance from the
Federation the terms of Home Offica Circular Mo 26/1967 will
continue to apply.

17.   General anquirias about tha contant of this circular may be
addressed to Mr Waqhorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.

                                                   Yours faithfully




                                                   M J ADDZSOH
        16 JUL ■’ 97
             i ‘~          ... ‘
                                   ?: 54
                                        ’ , . i
                                                  FROM
                                                  ' IV   —
                                                                 V.P.   Ch:        P. DEPT.                           PAGE. 001
                                                                                                                                   \
f       .    /V     O              K j2 u A        ( .4 (asi . - A M j C X M
    -        ■         .                                     ‘                 I




                               SCRUTINY ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



                               STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE STUAHT-SMITH



                               "j have today started work on the scrutiny of possible new evidence
                               relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. M y objective is to establish

                               w h eth er there is any significant evidence which was not previously

                               available to Lord Taylor's inquiry, to the inquests, or to the prosecuting or

                               disciplinary authorities.



                               "If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have

                               affected the outcome of any of the various proceedings,                i will then 'advise

                             th e Hom e Secretary w hether in my opinion there should be a further public

                              inquiry, and the prosecuting and olscipunary .authorities and the A ttorney

                               Genera! w hether the fresh evidence is such that they should reconsider the

                              decisions they have already taken.                                                  ■



                               "S will shortly be inviting written representations from those interested and

                              wili then decide w hom I wish to see in person. But I can confirm th a t after

                              th e sum m er \ w m go to Uver’pooi to meet the relatives o f th o s e killed and

                              th e ir legal representatives,



                              "The meetings i have will be private and i wili not be making any public

                             com m ents on the evidence or representations which are made to m e during

                             the course of the scrutiny, i hops to report my findings to the Home

                             S e c re ta ry to w a rd s th e end o f th e year.



                              "Anyone w ho considers that they are able to submit material to me should

                             contact my secretary via Room 5 2 8 , Home Office, 6 0 Queen Anne's G ate,
                             London S W 1H 9 AT, "




        14 JIJL "3 ?       I£-34
                                                                                              £171.   4S6B


        1d   J UL   ‘ 9 r‘         y ■- 0 5                                                                                 ■m |
                         i 0!            ft b   0F          '( b j L: L ' 3   <’   1G : 1 0   F H G E; . 0 i

                                                       ~    Y   P




Dfi TE   TIME                 TO/FROM   MODE               M I NGE CR GB             STATUS
         16:09   J   H    D             UF - ~ S     0 0 r4 4          0£              0K
                                South Yorkshire

                                POLICE
                                JUSTICE       with    COURAGE


                   DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                   50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                       SHEFFIELD
                                         S8 8UB

                                TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                                   FAX: (0114)2523855



TO: .........................




FOR THE ATTENTION OF:




COMMENTS. ........




 FROM.



  NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE):                 ...............

  IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
    IS   J UL   ’ 97     7:54      ---------- ' "   '   “   '' " ISF . D E P T .                         PAGE    .



F        A      O        Kj l -A   C     i

                                                            vJ
                       SCRUTINY ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



                       STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH



                       "I have today started work on the scrutiny of possible new evidence

                       relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. M y objective is to establish

                       w h eth er there is any significant evidence which w as not previously

                       available to Lord Taylor's Inquiry, to the inquests, or to the prosecuting or

                       disciplinary authorities.



                       "If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have

                       affected the outcome of any of the various proceedings.              I will then advise

                       the Hom e Secretary whether in my opinion there should be a further public

                       inquiry, and the prosecuting and disciplinary authorities and the A ttorney

                       Genera! w hether the fresh evidence is such that they should reconsider the

                       decisions they have already taken.



                       “I will shortly be inviting written representations from those interested and

                       wili then decide w hom I wish to see in person. But I can confirm th at after

                       the summer i will go to Liverpool to m eet the relatives of those killed and

                       their legal representatives,



                       “The meetings I have wili be private and i will not be making any public

                       com m ents on the evidence or representations which are made to me during

                       the course of the scrutiny. I hope to report my findings to the Home

                       Secretary towards the end of the year.



                       ^Anyone w ho considers that they are able to submit material to me should

                       contact m y secretary via Room 5 2 8 , Home Office, 5 0 Queen Anne's G ate,

                       London S W 1H 9 A T ,"




     14 JUL ’ 3? 12=34                                                             £171 27 3 46S0       PAGE.02
J u n 30 1 9 : 0 8 1 9 9 7   - H
                               HOME SECRETARY'S DECISION RE THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                                                                                        5
R e q u e s te d b y : 14SY 2536
  Page 1                                             i YORKS. POLICE

PRIORITY       : LOW                             2 JU L1997
ORIGINATOR : 1 4 S Y 2 5 3 6
                                                APQUARTERS
CREATED AT :                                    LINE &



MESSAGE TEXT



I PROMISED LAST WEEK THAT I WOULD LET YOU KNOW AT THE EARLIEST APPROPRIATEMOMENT ABOUT THE
HOME SECRETARY'S DECISION IN RESPECT OF A NEW INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGHDISASTER.

THE HOME SECRETARY HAS INFORMED PARLIAMENT THAT THERE IS TO BE A JUDICIAL EXAMINATION "TO
ASCERTAIN WHETHER ANY EVIDENCE EXISTS RELATING TO THE DISASTER AT THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
ON 15 APRIL 1 9 8 9 WHICH WAS NOT AVAILABLE:

A) TO THE INQUIRY CONDUCTED BY THE LATE LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR, OR

B) TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR THE               PURPOSE
OF DISCHARGING THEIR RESPECTIVE STAUTORY RESPONSIBILITIES; OR

C) TO THE CHIEF OFFICER OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE IN RELATION TO POLICE
DISCIPLINARY MATTERS;

AND IN RELATION TO (A) TO ADVISE WHETHER ANY EVIDENCE NOT PREVIOUSLY AVAILABLE
IS OF SUCH SIGNIFICANCE AS TO JUSTIFY THE ESTABLISHMENT BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
HOME DEPARTMENT OF A FURTHER PUBLIC INQUIRY; AND IN RELATION TO (B) AND (C) TO DRAW TO THEIR
ATTENTION ANY EVIDENCE NOT PREVIOUSLY CONSIDERED BY THEM WHICH MAY BE RELEVANT TO THEIR
RESPECTIVE DUTIES;AND TO ADVISE WHETHER THERE I S ANY OTHER ACTION WHICH SHOULD BE TAKEN IN
THE PUBLIC INTEREST".

YOU WILL SEE THAT THIS FALLS CONSIDERABLY SHORT OF A FULL PUBLIC INQUIRY AT THIS STAGE. A
SENIOR JUDGE WILL LOOK AT SUGGESTIONS MADE RECENTLY THAT THERE I S NEW EVIDENCE WHICH HASN'T
BEEN LAID BEFORE THE THREE PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS: LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY, THE
INQUEST AND THE JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE INQUEST FINDINGS.

IT I S MY FIRM BELIEF THAT THE HOME SECRETARY, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS, AIDED BY THEIR PERMANENT CIVIL SERVANTS, WILL HAVE READ THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
POLICE'S ASSESSMENT OF THE SO CALLED NEW EVIDENCE
AND PROBABLY WILL HAVE COME TO THE SAME CONCLUSIONS AS OURSELVES, THAT THERE I S NO NEW
EVIDENCE.


HOWEVER,IN THE INTERESTS OF OPENNESS- A QUALITY ON WHICH WE PRIDE OURSELVES IN THE SOUTH
YORKSHIRE POLICE- THE HOME SECRETARY HAS TAKEN THE PROCESS OF MAKING A DECISION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT TO HOLD A FURTHER PUBLIC INQUIRY OUT FROM BEHIND CLOSED GOVERNMENT DOORS AND
HAS PUT IT INTO THE EXPERIENCED HANDS OF A SENIOR LORD JUSTICE OF THE COURT OF APPEAL.

WE WILL HELP THE PROCESS IN ANY WAY THAT WE CAN,TO HELP TO UNDERWRITE ITS FAIRNESS AND
Ju n 30 1 9 : 0 8 1 9 9 7    - HOME SECRETARY'S DECISION RE THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -
R e q u e s te d b y : 14SY 2536
 Page 2



OBJECTIVITY.



WE REMAIN THE ONLY PARTICIPANTS IN THE DISASTER WHO HAVE STOOD UP AND ACKNOWLEDGED OUR
CONTRIBUTION TO THE COMPLEX CAUSES OF THE HORRIFIC EVENTS. THOUGH WE MIGHT WISH OTHERS WHO
CONTRIBUTED WOULD DO THE SAME THAT IS A MATTER FOR THEM. WE MUST LOOK TO OWN STANDARDS.

DESPITE THE SHARED CONTRIBUTION TO THE D ISA STER ,IT IS IMPORTANT TO KEEP REMINDING OURSELVES
THAT 96 PEOPLE DIED,LEAVING FAMILIES DESOLATE WITH GRIEF. DIFFERENT PEOPLE COPE WITH GRIEF
IN DIFFERENT WAYS ESPECIALLY GIVEN THAT THEY LOST PEOPLE DEAR TO THEM IN SUDDEN,UNEXPECTED
AND INNOCENT CIRCUMSTANCES. THEREFORE, THOUGH WE MUST CALMLY AND RATIONALLY MAKE OUR CASE WE
MUST ALSO BE PATIENT AND UNDERSTANDING.




RICHARD WELLS
           iae'39yd                                                                                         sr'i’sY   hn r '2:2
'.**       100 ‘3 9 ttd 1 W L 01             **




,,rim sg     * 9.-3 9 3 $97           -   TSIJjKX -   OUTGOING -         (TEX.EX©s:u.oplS-,
R e q u e s t e d by: TEl>EX
 Page I


PRIORITY               ; L OW

O RI G IN A T OR       : 14SY19»6

CREA T E D AT          :: 26/06/9? 19.26:53




M E S S A G E TEXT



                                    A l l D I S T R I C T 3 / DEPASTMEifTS



Many members                 raff will have picked up tns news today, on radio, tel^'-aion and local
                                annoiOTJSement is expected from the Home Secretary shortly to tail us of
                         on whether or not to re-open the Hillsborough
      •            inqxiii'y    .




            ’nrif-identxal discussions which I have had with the Home Office, I want to tell you that
           .. ’:b» n.at:.".'!Te of the Home Secretary's dwisioa.
•u,.._,,rYf,r> just as the aome secretary is bound to report his decision to s>«^lj«wenr rirai;
 'which he"plans to do on Monday afternoon at around 3.00 pm), so toe                       j that
corf ;der.S. Iality-

concerns =tre- already being expressed in force about the nature of th><             3
d««Aaio», which is surrounded by speculation and addition, as often happ«as when paople
Cki-fU '■ r..MOV tiW Cull, facts.

r     ii u,-. ;,-i another telex to the Force as soon as j can on Monday afternoon, Meanwhile, I
      vrr,;       '-.mat me in my assurance that I have laid before the Home Secretary and hi# civil
'ie.rvs.nt-j -
             ’M.V strongest possible case to indicate that there is, in our professional view, iw
..^•r <«■i - i u o n which       base a further full inquiry.  I have also sought a personal meeting
     h ■hf» Home Secret'.'?"/' f-o that I can state our position clearly. Whatever the Home
      *?tarv'3 decision, you know that I will have the best interests of the force at heart in
--;r response a«d I promise that you will be amongst the first to know. In this, you can also
j-vo assured that my principle concern will be the feelings of our people directly involved in
lhe pisefcei and its aftermath.




                                                                                     Chi.ef cons table   26/6/9?




                                     X    f H ” OrJ                          - / v W •A'/O----



           ’ 0 0   "
JU L   ’ 97    13:36      FROM    S    V P                                        PAGE. 001




                                   South Yorkshire

                                   POLICE
                                   JUSTICE             with     COURAGE


                    DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                             50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                                   S8 SUB

                                       TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                                          FAX: (0114)2523855 .


                                 ■^(0.                    .....................




       FOR    THE ATTENTION      OF:




       COMMENTS: ...

                                                  « -*> ■ ¥    -*a




       FROM; ...............



        NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE)

        IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
         30       J UL          ’ 97             13:36           FROM         S Y R                                                             PAGE. 0 0 3




                  Arc.cj i£>                                                       l


2*                               .



t' Z
 •
                    A AC,,..- - .

                            /    fi*
                           ■
                                  0.
                                  • '.
                                 c.’
                                / .''-I/',                     /<r           ,#
                                 . ....                  ...


              &.V..                             ?/




     ^■ 6 "-■                            '- , • .v*



     /^Wv                  Z^'1-

                    -/*
                    ■-.'-O'                 /            ;,/•>>■''fa"
                                                                     "V




     (/                                                              *3r/&«s spCfvCseJ                          /^C*?               /u^x-^f'T^gf^       CJOye?!&

 eJ)              js K g        Lx)a                  -S^jt                                     *>y~-
     /        f                          '••'     /                   -!‘




                     A                   /hsC&st'rj
 fbjLLto hi n<'tft-•fi'i                                                    Ca-rfw-iJ     ':■




                     .p*s                                                                                             ...     .......




/y;                                                      '$£y£                          o^~

          rityCg. i/ 'i/cs                       ^'jp-vV: . ^>c>>w r>w X<.                -.^Qc£&--'      — «J:N „    ^         j       ' ^^7    .      Whf*
                           ^                                                 . xj                       z^Lbt^€^*t   v-vj 5 ^ ' '"^i..

,Osrt,^-^L-"S-t^iM-n>
                    ,_....P^sa^^T' .                                         .. /4t^4tA4. t^jL.                                         C 4 *•£'*■’^
                                                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                          *      *      TOTAL     PAGE.U03     * *
     30    J UL     ’ 9?     13:36         FROM   S Y R                                                     PAGE. 00E




              A&cfik/rOMW




10e Kcu^e                                  to.afar«taJ.                     wift:      ^ sk                            *+*
4 '
  At         e$aji>^W.efc!fc J                                                        §&ruLCr<j ^   Ctopfd* $1 4 ^

fnWWwU-jk •btJtfVlfoc,                     9 |tx l ^ fm&V te)fe0. a                        c^w ^vjf 0^*n^sU          A%*4


0    ^ M .    wmJJSa 4o U©rd                              S^W^V^S^v^t- Vs o a V $>» peni*^'^.. 4-t>

          ' ^ VVf                        O' $VA frAXt&W)                   -k* CvJr <M>TCJ>>      ^.0^        t   p^j OtoOA
Oo ^         ^04^          ^Tfe«*y   Q w'f'X j    y«V\M    CB-ihJT c-c ^    V^CMA.   <V^gftynLf



    C^MO § M U / 4 U y




    fXX.X~<
   S9       J UL   ’ 97   14:34    FROM   S   V P                                              PAGE. 0 0 2




             Ac    c




lO(B- KcU)€. oJjuieuAO CO*o^perc«|j9^                          w \\t o£d        'N&\Iw £a ,          Jrt Vt*v*3
d 4k                                                                       8cM£nj   on cwf*^ «| 4U.

wSkW*u6jw                         ^9   |ijd i » n ^             ^


J) V    k   - O i t & A 4o Uerd                S W T     -W % L     ^   a o W $>* perw.*v*A*        ca^fci^

\$L     ^vyf                      ^ ^                          4^ £V> *fc*T7>v ^                 , |V> &«wy*
oo ^         HUia* ^nfriw Q v^-h;         v^'viJ    t£fX »eA     V^wv 9 ^ W \I ,


              ^MUr«U^

 t*



   p r tc .
     £9     J UL   ’ 9?    14:34       FROM      S   Y P                                          PAGE. 0 0 3




£<\       hcc      |i&\ N M H                    Mb.


J -° \ -o u *s \ 1 < W 7


          ft A ^ l l v ^ U - .
vVMoWo^^'k t)voc*^
         c*fi* C J t e M i M
           Su^LsUfl^ip




           rn^Wiisi            £ g v **}   '



3                                  QzUz-s       <^&ljLi)       M       ^
pftiV'o^ ^K^t^ra^iW aS| Mo*£o»s»                           a   <»»^ m »v '.




Bd A<c |»fc                                    Hfc » n
           ^wXv|          iw

 f ^ S ft- 1 ^41^ At&*
                   0ew^^N




    < ^     9 juaX        e ^ t ^ w

    d ^ W          V»      ge~s       U»^!-.* c U U > '            ^       ^*h   W   T   W»1«W^   <*fto     H
    ^ T a^Sw a i a JOn     ,
      £9   J UL    ’ 97     14:34       FROM        S   Y P                                                                                     PAGE. 0 0 4




 Pea-to       ras          £otw*^cU

l?e : C k pl#i        ©dLwterf'a^




                                                        <fe\                                                      <#•** CKf£v

0 ^ — *4&4l W H a W          ik*^*     ^SulbsjM                                                                   is A^s/^




6a^        Ac^| ^           iNiwrt:                     U=>


fn*fo Wc»wv*              S<v&k&A




                                                                                               *
                                                                                                         CuJh OC^rr’i ^V>> V4W&.


                                                                                                   C<>^<^                                      9 ^ ^           3M8,<JUSMt
                                                                                                      ArO C>®^> ®*» % ■$%»W                              3*V     •■ ■




 ^ (usj^ sw ,4 s <^ovmt <Sg^x, dleJSsk ^ ^ a^ms-,,**‘V >-                                                                               <|
gSU ,-<^ i V *JkV^.                     '4^5                                                          } AerfM- ^                             $ j>a   m   .. 4a^«v
                          4^»‘ '§■&«    ^ j. p^lr
                                #■           $ &£&*«. % a#**                                      ^        Hikse^ 41^.                                    v^A*^£j
            Cl ,                       . <S%   *t   4 \iA ^    § ■« ** **   ?*.--V ~- .   „ .r.G i C jB ^X m UC    Vfc*&S JH xlu>‘* u
                                                                  PAGE. 0 0 5
       £9   J UL   ’ 97   14:35    FROM   S   Y P




£ l|               |      jmt**M              JoSr


pA

        Pi &<U4*»^C3ws




            ^ 5, AndLti^^S.^

        ,    \j\ChiO               T/$ I 'f T S t


                                                                  U*Ckt_£S

               ■f &       »        T&Z.




                                                     **   TOTAL   PAGE. 0 0 5   **
7 16:03      FROM: SOLICITORS BUS UNIT   01512252356                 TO: 0 1 1 4 2 5 2 3 3 5 5        PAGE:0




                          H illsborough Fam ily Support G roup




        30 July 1997


    ? C tirfiftnway
    South Yorkshire Police
    Dascipline & Complaints Dept
    Windsor Road
    Shef field
    SB SUB

    UC.riX’ S X I


    l refer to my request of 17 July that you release the statement of
    2^-       W a i t e r : He has now been supplied with a typed version from
    ’'ae h ^ r«ta*-'iat of Lord Justice Stuart-'Smith.      I* should be
    y.i..t-itefui xi you would supply me with a copy of hia oriqinal
    statement signed by him.

    You iB trti thiiui ly




    « n ftujLing^on
    Solicitor




                                         vim 'C m iM & i m&cmr* uv                         rn^si«Kk
   i’    '                                                                                 Mit,j,
T ;■■•'A:   5 T t:i '
' .1 ■ ■:     0
                                     South Yorkshire

                                    POLICE
                                    J U S T I C E w i t h COURAGE


                  DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                           50 WINDSOR ROAD
                                               SHEFFIELD
                                                 S8 8UB

                                       TELEPHONE: (0114)2500700
                                          FAX: (0114)2523855


TO: .............................. :kk£L               ................................................




FOR THE ATTENTION OF:




COMMENTS




 FROM:



 NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE):

 IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPY, CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
            A c c | l b |r4M*f     Hi)




U3e Kaye oduwa^ co*op4rcd&A                                wifc oHfl, wdk <^U4oG\ t ttewe^w vi«*a
<3i*Rt                     $1 Iso^ci du&Gu- 2fkus>t-SM^M §cfu£Gntj $*\ a«ped5 c| *■&£.
MttfeW^U &sa/fery *9 |td                        wwaV ^   4 a oU^ii^ cUl^Ke^ a^r**^ rv%*4

^)         wnKan 4© U®fd ^t&Sob S W -SW-t \o ©<|W             pefinvMtaA 4ti Cs^(2^
        ^'Vvf                 0/<\Xi’*WO ^ 4<3 C*A^ «feC^rcrv» @lv> fc^cr*-^ , fV» OftOA
OO     ^   *£&&* ^ B « s QvW^v j         vasM    l&tX&t#    V^»V^ C*^€«v%l .


 C^|M@ $J*£4/4k^




     l£j&*P #*
     f*\ v W f
Ms      4       ArcUUsnt        uoy\

                     *\    JQi&frG lf^>    id&'t'J&i/ir^

              t3 0



G>    e*x            n




                2»dH



              f*?J




                              /4 U * * * U e ..
                                                                  Ipy^u^i   /°iS'?              Vdfh^




                      f o j f / M tf                 I i^j


^ 2> ? U < ^             fCfCy^



                                                  &<•*?




     /v^g /               ^'IP-'V'V ^C^Svr^wX*            jQeX^*r/ .                                     v-e^
      LOO                                                                      £ q ..G*^~~Jf^4~

                                       ^    ...                te^4* 4               & S Z 6 Aj C.if<+y CfcS'*? ^

                                                                                            CL V ^ o .
5)
          ftcc                          Mb.

         ”0 uU^




 Vkll£oW«H^|^\ lhvA<X&</                      A*Msj
             C ^ 4_CXWVCUtf
                »u*XaU»^p
 D*jfc



 <£ec** ^ S £ AdUI«*^£**
 £ a ; m w i * S i *€Vt** -T)CA*fM%>t
 9 nc^t 4-® sy<^ &£&v <AaJL£«j U *0uA^ ( ^ ^ 7 lasp^S*^ * e *i*3 ^ 4C<
  poWoUjA                         o
                                  «J
                                   *]
                                    | C A o ^ v •Vr»^y\W.




<§>
         A-cc |        >    b   t   o     > n


  ji«i ^wkUj          n<n


  f A S ft- M t » i i A >
  hUMcte^ Cu>«A>». Pfe>/AfcA*\                  Q<*Ma^




  cS^ftSK
          fo*d        C ^ k ^ U

      d « ^ 4     W    Vb#*«#     kS&A*   (WdftA   ^        l<W?   Cep&4   ^

                       *
       •3uJuv i w i



        SkjuU*             €dtuiMoko




 Pe^i             K'lftS     ^otwis^rclo

f^GL 1 Ckfio


 %    N O ^ 4*                                                                £ q ■Jvd^ m i              y*\L

                                                    ^    ^ KdS ^p Wt^         a^ «***, <§**» ck » 6 » 'eA**#*®** " f « W
 ojAt-4&c. M J U W i f u ^ |Ljdb#Jl                                 ®*v ^(TnC^Uwm                ij A f M




&|       AO       l   { iti i M f A H        (fcb l o i .


         kowv«             SotefeyfiA




                                                                                ^         qJ U v x l                 o^tw       \-

                                                                                          CjuJt a c m n      9*0^           ,


                                                                                     Cp ^d*        d^&*£2u R»^        9 “^ ^ * $e»iiJik*

                                                                                       A $ ©fe-®^ f>* ^ 9\iW             fl^Li
£*.       OmdUet^s            (Yl^Jt i n ^ k m


             4e<^©^ GdJJxr djokktk A* ^axml i^ V \ m ^aa& a^                                       cjrpte* *j spdCM*i$
                           ^jloju^      4©       ^<kM J l m ^ i ^        % v & j h M f Acttm.                       CU*u*u 4^®un

^ipak^N                          ft- 6*feH£-      CuSGCm $ Gfc**-                   4.® *-«&&»»£. 4Kt                      lAtdtJnCcJ
+*> ^ * 4 , # W        w     <yv o « « % m   5   4vuw*   f c i * * SkW* ( ^         C * \W f c   <£«* O f n ^ * ,
s
fej h e c   | it> | n * m    (+& togr




     ^   fccMjiv^Cfcyk
                P n >*^




 @&\     i/i'dUo ' l ^ c    T/$ I + f SX

0    nz^t     4o                   detect   &t%   i ^ -)   Kj^ewdUA.^   U'Ck-«
•'T-»                                          i
5   DEC    ’ 9?   I E ; 45     F ROM       S.Y.P.     CHIEF.DEFT.                            PAGE.001


                    South Yorkshire

                    POLICE
                    JUSTICE       with      COURAUE
                                                              E~f\CJ                CfJUAHJ



      3 December 1997
                                                                                       ju j
                                                                                                 )
      The Rt Hon Lord Justice               1-Smith
      Room 528
      Home Office
      50 Queen Anne’s Gate
      LONDON
      SW1H 9AT




      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Scrutiny

      At our meeting on 25 November 1997, i undertook to look into two topics and to furnish you
      with further information,

      The first issue is my apology for the errors of South Yorkshire Police. I enclose a folder of
      press cuttings from March 1991 and January 1992, a press release of December 1996 and
      press cuttings from i;-      ;er 19S6. These cuttings record only a small number of the
      times I have apologises     me Forced errors, there have been many others but we do not
      appear to have records of them.

      The second issue s our response to the requests for material held in our archives. I attach
      a schedule ot            received between June 1997 (the announcement of the Scrutiny)
      and 3 December ‘v        the date of preparing the schedule). The nature of the requests
      varied from a single kern to complete body files containing many statements, photographs,
      plans etc,

      If I can be of further assistance on these or other issues, please do not hesitate to contact
      me.




      Richard Weils




                     Police Headquarters
                     ■'«*% Hill
                     Sheffield S3 SLY
                     Ifel: 0114 220 2020 Fas 0114 252 3243
                     D ikx* Dial No:


    D EC   ’ 3                                                                              F r t ' s£
5   DEC   ’ 97    I S : <45   FROM   S.Y.P.   C H I E F . DEPT.                                    PAGE. 0 0 2




      HD                             Nam e                            Date on               D ate o f
      No                                                           Request Letter            Reply
     HD79        IAN.DAVID W HELA N ______________
                 Body file                                        "20/T6/97           ” 3/11/97
     HD102       ANDREW BROOKES
                 Photo                                            06/06/97             17/06/97
                                                                                       19/06/97 _______
                 Statement^andphotos                              21/06/97            “03/07/97
                 Assistant Chief Constable’s letter                                    30/07/97
                                                                                       08/08/97
                  Photographic and video material                  11/08/97           "14/08/97
                                                                                       28/08/97
            Photographic materia!                         14/08/97                     04/09/97
            Body file reguested by L Brookes              01/09/97                     04/09/97
           _Body file [e g u ^ e d by_L_Brookesfor HFSG _ 24/10/97                     05/11/97
            Body file requested bv HFSG                   17/11/97                     18/Ti797
     HD114 CARL LEWIS
            Body file                                     06/08/97                     12/08/97
                                                                                       28/08/97
                 Statements and video tapes                        01/09/97            22/09/97
                 Statement pages                                  [09/09/97            22/09/97
                 Chaser letter                                     08/09/97           ”22/09/97
                 ALAN MCGLONE                                                      u—       $
                 Body file                                         06/08/97         12/0^/97^
                                                                  .UdS&L    _______ 1 9 /0 8 /9 7 V ^ _ _ _
                  Statement                                        29/08/97         08/09/97
                 " oiatemen'!                                      03/09/97         22/09/97
                   Chaser letter                                  '19/09/97         22/09/97
                   THOMAS FOX
                   Bodv file                                       06/08/97            12/08/97
                   Schedule_qfstatements of 27 witnesses
                  Statement"                                      "06/08/97           ’ T2/08/97
                                                                                        08/09/97
                  Letters to statement authors requesting
                  permission to release statement
                  WARDROPE                                         21/08/97            02/09/97
                  MOLE                                             21/08/97            27/08/97
                  MCDERMOTT                                        21/08/97            No reply received
                  RYAN                                             21/08/97            22/08/97
                  GODDARD                                          21/08/97            31/08/97
                  MACKRELL                                         21/08/97            11/09/97
                  LOCK                                             21/08/97            11/09/97
                  WALKER                                           21/08/97            24/08/97
                  MCROBBIE                                         21/08/97            undated
                  KELLY                                            21/08/97            undated
                  GOULDING                                         21/08/97            27/08/97
                                                                   12/09/97            18/09/97
                  BICHARD                                          21/08/97            Date not recorded
                  MCDERMOTT                                        21/08/97            02/09/97
                  BATTY                                            21/08/97            26/08/97
                  Enquiry letter                                   27/10/97            07/11/97
                                                                   07/11/97            12/11/97
5   DEC   ’ 37    I E : 46   FROM   S.Y.P,     CHIEF.DEPT.                                      PAGE.0 03




                                    Name                            Date on     !        Date of
     HD No
                                                                 Request Letter          Reply
     HD114       Transcript of video tapes TB1 and TB2
                                                                28/10/97            04/11/97
      cont
                 Explanatory letter                             05/11/97            06/11/97
                 Explanatory letter                             10/11/97            11/11/97
                 Request for statements:           Robinson,
                 Dalglish, Motson                                   61
                                                                03/>^/97            17/09/97
                                                                                    22/09/97
                                                                                    03/10/97
                 Letter to authors:
                 Dalglish                                        15/09/97           No reply received
                 Robinson                                        15/09/97           30/09/97
                 Motson                                          15/09/97           17/09/97
                 Phillips and Wells Report______
                 Request for Philips report                      undated            "T6/09/97    *
                                                                                     19/09/97
                 Request for Wells report                       29/09/97             29/09/97
                                                                                     06/10/97
                 Page 4 of Philips report                        12/10/97            14/10/97
                                                                                     22/10/97
                 Request for Wells report                       12/10/97             14/10/97
                                                               h 6 /1 0/97           03/Tl/97            1
                  Re Wells report                               27/10/97             04/11/97
                  R e q u js tfo r names of statement authors__
                  Letter of request                              "19/09/97 ~         26/09/97
                  Sample page                                   '02/10/97            06/10/97
                 _Ambulance_Loq_s______________________
                                                                 "06/08/97          1)8/09/97 “ “
                  Specific information                            29/08/97          Pi 7/09/97
                                                                                     31/10/97
                  Letter to Ambulance Service               17/09/97                 02/10/97
                  MCEWAN
                  Request for statement                  I- 12/08/97                 21/08/97
                  Statement Hd Walker^ RJlpuL^worth_____
                 _RequestJor_^atement____________         '17/07/97                 “08/08/97
                 "Requesffor statement 27/05/89           "14/08/97                  18/08/9f        ~
                  Statements David Illingworth              12/08/97                 12/11/97
                  Request for statement
                  Statement Wadsworth
                  Request for statement                     12/08/97                 12/08/97
                                                            03/11/97                 11/11/97
                                                                                     12/11/97
                  Video R.JH 1, 2, & Map 9
                  Request                                        12/10/97            14/10/97
                  Exhibits Database
                  Request                                        05/09/97            02/10/97
                  Coroners exhibit C535
                  Request                                       [24/09/97            30/09/97
                 ^Enquiry letter                                 27/10/97            03/11/97
                  Explanatory letter                             06/11/97            06/11/97



                                                                                                PAGE.0 03
5   DEC   ’ 37    12:46       FROM    S.Y.P.    CHIEF.DEPT.                                  PAGE.0 04




     HD   No                          Name                         Date on             Date of
                                                                Request Letter         Reply
     HD114        Statement Dr Colin Fen*?!______________
      cont        Request                                      '23/09/97         "29/09/97
                  Explanatory letter                            29/09/97          30/09/97
                  GRAHAM ROBERTS
                  Bodyjije________ ---- ---------- ------- 16/08/97              21/08/97
                  Statement                                     03/09/97         23/09/97
                 _Chaser letter_________________________        18/09/97         27/10/97
                  Letter to auThor of statement                "22/09/97         20/10/97
                  LANGLEY
                  Statement request                             12/08/97         19/09/97
                  Letter to_author of^staterrient______________ 21/08/97         03/09/97________
                  Chaser letter                                "22/09/97         22/09/97
                  Letter of apolodv for confusion               02/10/97         03/10/97
                  DR JACOB
                  Statement request                             26/09/97         26/09/97
                                                                26/09/97         29/09/97
                                                                                 02/10/97
                                                                                 03/10/97
                  Photo PR4/27
                  Request                                       28/10/97          04/11/97

                  Request for statement                         30/10/97         _05/1_1_/97________
                  Letter to author                             "21/11/97
                  ANTHONY EDWARDS
                  Request for statement                        ' 11/11/97         12/11/97
     HD115        JAMES ASPINAL
                  Photo                                         07/07/97          25/07/97
                  Body file                                     22/08/97          29/08/97
                  Statement and video still                     03/09/97          23/09/97
                  Statement                                     05/09/97          23/09/97
                  Update letter                                 19/09/97          23/09/97
     HD116        MARTIN TRAYNOR
                  ID photo                                      11/07/97          30/07/97
                                                                                  08/08/97
                                                                12/08/97          21/08/97
                                                   _________
                  Statement                                    "12/09/97         ~19/09/97
                  Chaser letter to 12/09/97                     18/09/97          19/09/97
     HD11?        PAUL CARLISLE
                  Statement                                     25/07/97          30/07/97
                                                                                  08/08/97
                 [Statement                                     12/08/97          21/08/97
                  Body file                                     20/08/97          27/08/97
                                                                                  10/09/97
                  General letter re body file                   15/10/97          16/10/97
                                                                                  27/10/97
     HD118        CHRIS EDWARDS
                  Photo                                         29/07/97          30/07/97
                                                                                  07/08/97




                                                                                             PR6E.004
          97   i:   46     FROM   S.Y.P.   CHIEF.DEPT                                PAGE . 00J




     HD119     Photos C326A, 449, 489, 490
                                                        30/07/97         31/07/97
                                                                         08/08/97
                                                        11/08/97         o*M /s 7
                                                        29/08/97         08/09/97
               Further photos                           27/10/97         04/11/97
               C 326A enquiry                           26/11/97         03/12/97
                                                        02/12/97         03/12/97
     HD120   GARY AND STEPHEN HARRISON
           i Material from body file                    06/08/97         18/08/97
             Letter from Coroner wi?h identical copy of 15/08/97         21/08/97
             Harnson letter dated 06/08/97
     HD121 CHRISTOPHER AND MARTIN TRAYNOR
             Photos                                    “09/08/97          18/08/97
             Body file                                  22/08/97          27/08/97
                                                                          01/09/97
               Re body file                             29/08/97          01/09/97
               Video still and statement                30/09/97        I 08/10/97
               General letter                           15/10/97          16/10/97
                                                                          27/10/97
               Body file                                28/10/97          07/11/97
     HD122     KEITH MCGRATH
               Body file ghotos                         14/08/97         19/08/97
               Photos                                   30/08/97        [15/09/97
               Chaser letter                            18/09/97         22/09/97
               Photos                                   "TF/TT/97        T9/7i79“"~           !
               IAN THOMAS GLOVER
     HD123     Photo and stills Map 9                    10/08/97        19/08/97
                                                        "19/08/97     ““ 29/08/97        ~~   '
                                                        "12/11/97        f8/Tl/97"
     HD124     WILLIAM PEMBERTON
               Photos                                   14/08/97         20/08/97
                                                        22/10/97         03/11/97
               Photos and statement                     09/09/97         02/10/97
               Chaser letters                           undated          10/10/97
                                                        21/11/97         26/11/97
     HD125                                                0
             Statement                                  2//Q8/97         21/08/97
     HDYii      VIN WILLIAMS
                 7 file                                 20/08/97         22/08/97
                  ;-ment                                26/09/97         03/10/97
     HD127 , , j LIN SEFTON
             Photos and statement                       21/08/97         22/08/97
             Explanatory letter                         26/08/97        [01/09/97
             Statements                                 14/09/97         23&30/09/97
      H128 GARY HARRISON
             Body file                                   22/08/97        27/08/97
             Photos                                     "12/09/97""      23/09/97'




5   DEC   b7   13:09                                                                 PAGE.005
5   DEC   ’ 97   I E : 47    FROM    S.Y.P.    CHIEF.DEPT.                                   PAGE. 0 0 6




     HD No                           Name                         Date on             Date of
                                                               Request Letter         Reply
     HD129       PHILLIP STEELE
                 Body file                                    22/08/97           27/08/97
                 Statement and documents                      09/09/97           22/09/97
                 Statements                                   12/09/97           22/09/97
                 Chaser letter                                18/09/97           22/09/97
     HD13G       NICHOLAS JOYNES
                 Body file                                    22/08/97           27/08/97
                 Statement pages_______ ________________      18/09/97           22/09/97
                 Statement gages and photos                   03/09/97          "23/09/97
                 Statement pages                              29/09/97           02/10/97
                                                              01/09/97           02/10/97
     HD131       GRAHAM WRIGHT
                 Body file                                    22/08/97           28/08/97"
                 Statements                                  121/11/97           26/11/97
     HD132       PHiLLIP HAMMOND
                 Body file                                    22/08/97           27/08/97
                 Photo and video                             ,28/08/97           22/09/97
                 Enquiry letter                               23/09/97           24/09/97
                 General letter re body file                   15/10/97          27/10/97
     HD133       PETER TOOLE
                 Bodj file                                    19/08/97           27/08/97
                 Statements                                   21/11/97           26/11/97
     HD134       MWL 10/33A                                   20/08/97           28/08/97
     HD13S       Not families - survey                        22/08/97           05/09/97
     HD136       MICHAEL KELLY
                 Body file                                    22/08/97           15/09/97
                 Statement                                    undated            10/10/97
                                                                                 22/10/97
                 General letter                              r 15/10/97          16/10/97
     HD137       ADAM SPEARITT
                 Body file                                    28/08/97           See note 4
                 Statements and body file                     30/08/97           15/09/97
                                                                                 07/10/97
                 Statement                                    27/10/97           03/11/97
                                                                                 13/11/97
     HD138
                 Questionnaire                                28/08/97           12/09/97
     HD139       RICHARD JONES
                 Body file                                    31/08/97           18/09/97
     HD140       COLIN WAFER
                 Body file                                    23/08/97           19/09/97
     HD141       SARAH/VICTORIA HICKS
                 Body files                                   29/08/97           19/09/97
     HD142       GARY CHURCH
                 Body file                                   ‘ 03/09/97          19/09/97
     HD143 I
                 Statement                                    Undated            22/09/97
     HD144       Not families - student request               18/09/97           23/09/97
     HD145       PETER BURKETT
                 Body file                                    22/09/97          I 24/09/97



5   DEC   ’ 97   13:09                                                          PAGE. 00b
5   DEC   ’ 97    I E : 47   FROM   S.Y.P.   CHIEF.DEPT.                                       PAGE.0 07




     HD No                          Name                          Date on                  Date of
                                                               Request Letter              Reply:     .....
     HD146        GARY JONES
                  Body file                                   28/09/97              30/09/97
                  Photo                                       07/10/97              09/10/97
     HD147        GORDON HORN
                  South Yorks Policeproperty form             10/09/97           30/09/97
                  Death certificate                         ‘ 26/11/97          “03/12/97
                  Body file                                   07/10/97           14/10/97
     HD148        PAUL BRADY
                 L_Body file                                  06/10/97              14/10/97
                  Statement                                   31/10/97              03/11/97
     HD 149       FRANCIS MCALLISTER
                  Body file                                   06/10/97              14/10/97
     HD150        STEPHEN ROBINSON
                  Bodj file                                   31/10/97          ^20/11/97
                  Letter to mother of Robinson                06/11/97    -
                  Letter to Mr BoneJHillsborough Scrutiny)    13/11/97
                  Enquiry letters                             2 1,11/97             21/11/97
     HD151        JOSEPH CLARK
                  Body file                                   24/10/97              13/11/97
     HD1S2        THOMAS HOWARD
                  Body file                                   24/10/97          M 3/11/97
     HD153        DAVID THOMAS
                  Body file                                   27/10/97              13/11/97
     HD154        ARTHUR HORROCKS
                  Body file                                   27/10/97              13/11/97
     HD155        STEPHEN O’NEILL
                  Body file                                   27/10/97              13/11/97
     HD156        LEE NICOL
                  Bod_y file                                  27/10/97              20/11/97
                  Letter to mother of Nicol                   07/11/97
                  LetteMo Mr Bone (Hillsborough Scrutiny)___ 13/11/97           ■      *
                  Enquiry letter                             “21/11/97
     HD1S7        DAVID MATHER
                  Body file                                   29/10/97              13/11/97
     HD1S8        JON GILHOOLY
                  Body file                                   20/10/97              13/11/97
     HD159        CHRISTOPHER EDWARDS
                  Body file                                   20/10/97              13/11/97
     HD160        HENRY BURKE
                  Body file                                   20/10/97              13/11/97
     HD161        ERIC HANKIN
                  Body file                                    15/08/97             20/08/97
     HD162        COLIN ASHCROFT
                  Body file                                   20/10/97              13/11/97
     HD163        SIMON BELL
                   Body file                                  22/10/97              17/11/97
                  Letter to next of kin (NOK)                  12/11/97             13/11/97
                  Fax from HFSG with authority from NOK        17/11/97             17/11/97




          '97     13:05                                                                        PAGE: . 0 0 7
5   DEC   ’ 97   12:47     FROM   S.Y.P.    CHIEF.DEPT.                                              PAGE. 0 0 8




     HD No                        Name                             Date on                    Date of
                                                                Request Letter                Reply     _


     HD164       BRIAN MATTHEWS
                 Body file                                     20/10/97                 13/11/97
     HD165       PETER MCDONNELL
                 Body file                                     14/10/97                 13/1*1/97*
     HD166       EVE HUGHES
                 Body file                                 "17/11/97               [20/1*1/97
     HD167       PAUL MURRAY                               1
                 Body file                                     19/11/97                 26/11/97
     HD168       B BENNETT
                 Body file                                     19/11/97                 26/11/97
     HD169       DAVID BENSON
                 Body file                                     19/11/97                 26/11/97



     KEY

     1       HD No - Hillsborough Disaster Number: a reference number allocated by Constable
             GREENWAY solely for administrative purposes. This number is allocated when the
             first request is received which relates to that person. The dates on the schedule
             refer only to requests after the scrutiny was announced. Hence, while the HD
             numbers are sequential, the dates are not necessarily so.

     2.      HD114 relates to all requests from the Hillsborough Families Support Group.

     3.      Name; the name of the deceased or deponent to whom the request. In the “Name’’
             column are also listed requests for access from, for example at 144, a student
             undertaking a research paper.

     4.      Duplicate request received two days later.




                                                                                 :*:+    TOTAL. .    P A 'liE , 0 W0
    DEC   ’ 97   13:10                                                                               PAGE.608
                                                        Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire                           Hillsborough Scrutiny


              POLICE                                    50 Windsor Road
                                                        Heeley
             JUSTICE      with    COURAGE
                                                        SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 2963113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                            °i R obuduJ         /*H7
To:                              f-fo


For the attention of:

Comments:



                      UfM.P Cqf%d>> Sj

                                          / 4v*i/S




From:

Telephone Number:                       L £#0^7
Number of Pages (including this page)                I 'J

In the event of a poor copy, please contact;-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
0 9 - DEC. • 9 7 ( T UE )      13 : 00                                              T E L =01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 I 3      3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION             RE P O R T   **




  TRANSMISSION
  T R A N S A C T 1O N ( S )   C OMPL ETE D




   NO.       D ATE/TIM E             DESTINATION                          DURATION         PGS            ST AT US     MODE


    115      DEC.      9    12:53                  01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 ?   0" 0 7 ' 4 0 *   017            OK           N ECM
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MESSAGE FORM
Rec'd:                                                 No:
Phone:

Location:                                              Sub Div:
Type:         CB         Za   makkq

Source:
                         Tu*      ((

Detail:                                        I'l
Tag req'd:     YES/NO                                  Level:
Link:                                         Ilf .
                                              =*>
                         INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:        TIME:

. . .\         0 . HRS   DATE:   .3 O . l .    i.O .   ./.        RECEIVED




                                 .(_A£D jlGIQ. .(1o^t.|QcK<^




                              . . .{& •-(ji


              :c w             :D   k   :< S      o          2 ^ "
         RC

Gen/21
                                   INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:            TIME:

.............................HRS   D A TE :..................................   RECEIVED




       RC
             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MESSAGE FORM
Rec'd:                                                           No:
Phone:

Location:                                                        Sub Div:
                         #
Type:

Source:


Detail:

Tag req'd:     YES/NO                                            Level:
Link:



                                                             X
IDENT:         TIME:

                 .HfiS        --.D A TE :............../ .                      RECEIVED
                   i
                   \




                         G b L r ...£ o c ^ .


                         ..    AsA................




                                               ' J Z J * ..................
                                 . . . S .'frv c s . t o . 3      ..............................
                                                f - W ? . ................
                                   pV\cs^rO. fPf..U t . c ^ O ....
        RC

Gen/21
                              INCIDENT LOG
IDENT:            TIME:

...............   . . . HRS   D A TE:............./ . . . . . . / ................ RECEIVED
3 19/1996




1

iL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT

Chief Superintendent and the Force Solicitor. Duties
ninistrative, clerical and filing systems, undertaking


80 wpm shorthand, have proven secretarial experience
ication skills. Internal applicants only.




;u
■PARTMENT)



•PARTMENT)


irina to include input of court results onto OSU
fL   u   &   tL u   4 /   4 *   —

A zO

         r r
   uoae                  Commissioning              I      Initia

    150                  P.D.I. Service



             Livery
Date         Time on        Time off      Hrs.min       Initials




                                                        Craftsn
   Code                 Commissioning                     Initial

    152                      Livery


Whilst carrying out services & repairs all safety precaution
equipment,dust masks & barrier creams.Health & Safety p

       Vehicle washed & cleaned

Police livery specification type-:

Police lighting specification type-:
LICE AWARD 1995

COMMENDATION




1993, police w ere called to a dom estic
 Sunnyside. A sergeant and constable
w tw o youths ru n from th e scene. T he
a house o n the estate w ith a view to
 The sergeant left th e house to check on
ereupon he w as confronted b y th e tw o
e. H e then shouted for back up, the
t u n der attack b y the tw o youths and
he sergeant had b een stabbed 9 tim es in
 ew ton saw the attack and im m ediately
;nt to the o fficer’s aid. H e struck one o f
re th at the y o uth w as carrying a knife,
e scene. M r N ew ton th en cradled the
 him      Thp             AiA n’t   rPennn/4
% yz,    to                J                         - 7 y d * *




                                              I
                                    &>€'€*&Wr°']
                                             +*-y*



   ~ P ^ c c -3   ~^L<3rCt~*   /•   *t^vt«6 d f t £ j              " Z


    A
              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



                                                                                Your reference:

                                                                                Our reference:

                                                                                Date:   ' 3 ^ * 11997




    I Wo         vj       Irv    COr\         -vv. Ii«*            2      Ouvwv V vL w

    Aa *                  — ■



                            co-tylUe               ^           ^         C&~ea


                                                                                  A U jL o o O fL           c w
                 U L u L S.*            & O t V            cw


       f                                   0 t* l | l Y        *                        f a

                 Cl____________ D                                                             r
                                                          VW           C fle>    t'e^uKc'O           ^

                 p o .iV * -* C e A u iY


             R*1*-        pluWycwflvic              &l*»                                             C'TAvcJ

                      ^         f\jM    '^eXr             c^Uou^                           ci/utJi

                            ‘/C?/                                      kJ**GL      Llx-«u^y          J
                 (SMclt*             * k >L

            p i u ^ Y 18] ^            TKI (                       ^-4^-C W       2     CTrew^           (-{,iJgjj


            r\t^c*Ww             A-C£J t V

*           f\4 cjcj|%ijc*          yM,0 V     '                       ‘V'j'Lx-P


V          CiW        <^>p'iV
nJ*    $                                              J       ^

a d rx **-   a l^ tir      a j^ X .    o rt^          fy - J J * '     jZ ~   ti^ J^
^j                |r*vww                    ubfi                     ixj y|


j kklefeutt-^ ^                             O^   u     -m         CA^>r(o-             i'v|,
                                                                                           v|jp,i


.jkUi^aj^                                                              £i«(*jr4ar          ivh/f%J

jfciVftv*** K*j         Uxx/Q         ‘& 0 * 5<2fc(                           t & { r jf*t)
               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
               R o o m 1106
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, S W 1 H 9A T
               Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



                                                                                      Your reference:

  <5           orU,                   Pall
                                         UCa ,                                        Our reference:

                                                                                      Date:




T W o            \d               U        COr\ K / m , if^'Oici' ^             cutv                    m-iti
           I                                                                                     nJ
m a                                   **



       V         H* .                                          ^                               r c < J l J h ^



                                                       O       (V    «au*

                 [j L U 1 ^                           0 Pv|,v ^ v                             f a




                                                                'dfjlW        C A-o
                                            U.    4

                        V» A tyoKd J,

               ^"#{W pltob^a^ivic                                        -J                                  C fA tc l
                      ^                          -^<4r ^                                        *>vtj£
                      ^rvt/c^                    p|w|^                           fc*     U x**
                                                                                                    ^    i



                          .•'!:       l
                                                 ^*^-1     f
                                                               TH V^             ;Tt£3L t f c i ^            MiiJcji
-    ivdK ^       d-v                                         ^      ift it I r 41

*“                s j   «~»*.>c*4Um*cA - ),-W"*^"^                  jv»

     ,/                   jv*"-*    U M j h s s j -^fl   >*       |4'| ^1 ^

                                                 4                C ^j-»( f*i >      ivj^l


     jf% K<*VA*>^ v£J                                                         I
                                                                      l« ja f s i ar luj * I r^)

     ,|                    A




       G •>ro g
                                                              Discipline & Complaints Department
              S o u t h Y o rk s h ire                        Hillsborough Scrutiny


              POLICE                                          50 Windsor Road
                                                              Heeley
              J U S T IC E   with     C O URAG E
                                                              SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                             Facsimile Transmission

Date:
                                9       OecmjU*,            Ity7

To:
                                                                 ScrujLu^
For the attention of:

Comments:


                                Pi
                                            8«A9




                                    % . y    llcr^j   v)




From:

Telephone Number:

Number of Pages (including this page)                      2>^
In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
0 9 - D E C . ' 9 7 ( TUE)   08:19                                                  TEL:01142963113       3113         P. 0 0 1




  **    CONFI RMATI ON         REP ORT   *«




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)              COMPLETED




    NO.      DATE/TIME               DESTINATION                          DURAT I ON       PGS   STATUS     MODE


    112      DEC.     9      8:02                  01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 7   0 ” 1 7' 2 9 '   038   OK         N    ECM
16 January 1998

Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW 1H 9AT




Hillsborough - Report to the Home Secretary

Thank you for your letter of 14 January 1998. I am grateful to you for the opportunity to
offer my observations on the draft of that part of the report which deals with apologies. The
comments which follow do not detract from my feeling that you have very ably captured the
essence of this very difficult issue.

I have shown your letter to Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines and Superintendent Alan
Hepworth. Alan was sure that my predecessor as Chief Constable, Mr Peter Wright, had
apologised for the police’s errors. Alan has found a press release of 4 August 1989 which I
attach for your information and you will see that Peter Wright did apologise. In view of that,
I feel that paragraph 1 might be amended as shown in Appendix One.

In paragraph 2, I suggest a footnote be added to explain that the press release predated
the death of the 96th victim.

In paragraph 7, line 4 , 1 suggest that the wording be “.. failing to ask for a postponement of
the kick o f f ...”

In paragraph 8, lines 4-5, I suggest that the wording be "... and is reflected in the
apportionment of liabilities to pay claimants in civil proceedings”. I suggest the deletion of
the words, “whatever may have been the attitude of the previous Chief Constable ... “ (lines
5-6).

May I stress again how much I value the opportunity to offer these observations.

You will see that I have suggested above some amendments to paragraphs 7 and 8.
Whilst I would be content with these if Sir Murray felt minded to follow them, we would be
even happier if he would consider a re-writing of those two paragraphs as suggested at
Appendix Two. If his Lordship cannot accede to the wording of Appendix Two then the
above suggested amendments would become operative as our ‘fall back position’.
My request for a more fundamental rewrite is because I am concerned that the focus of
public attention on the causes of the disaster has been upon South Yorkshire Police even
more than we deserved. I do not shy away from our mistakes but, as I said in my press
release after the “Hillsborough” television film, from which you quote, “we were found
wanting and have faced up to our responsibility for our role but we were not the only ones
who played a part...”.

If you wish to discuss these matters please do not hesitate to telephone me or Ian Daines.
May I repeat my appreciation for your courtesy and consideration in this difficult matter.




Richard Wells
APPENDIX ONE



Para 1
One frequent complaint made to me by victim’s families was that the police had
never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I discussed this with
Mr Richard Wells who took office as Chief Constable in mid 1990. He has
drawn to my attention a press release by his predecessor, Mr Peter Wright,
issued on 4 August 1989 on the occasion of the publication of Lord Taylor’s
interim report. Mr Wright said,

“I accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry in so far as they relate
to South Yorkshire Police. The fact that we are held to have contributed to the
terrible tragedy of Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all members
of the Force, and both personally and on their behalf I once again extend my
heartfelt regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury”.

Mr Wells said that he often uses the occasion of public speeches to express his
and the Force’s regret. Mr Wells gave me some examples (and there are many
others).
APPENDIX TWO



Para 7

At my meeting with him, Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s interim
report he had acknowledged on behalf of the Force that there had been four
main errors:

i)       failing to ask for a postponement of the kick off,

ii)      not taking steps to prevent further admissions to the already full central
         pens,

iii)     not blocking off the tunnel when gate C was opened,

iv)      not distinguishing distress from disorder.


Para 8

Mr Wells accepted the finding of Lord Taylor that the principal cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control.

Lord Taylor also criticised others and Mr Wells pointed out those other parties
had not been so prominent in apologising for their errors, indeed if they had
done so at all.        South Yorkshire Police had apologised and accepted
responsibility for their contribution to the causes of the disaster.
16 - JAN.' 9 8 1F R 1) 09:24                                                     TEL-.01 1429631 13      31 13                   P. 002



                                                                      South Yorkshire Police
           PRESS                                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                      •N lG HILL
                                                                      • H I M I B L D SaSLV
           RELEASE                                                    TBLtFMONE (0743) 7 0 BB22
                                                                      T B L IX 547090




                                                                                                  4 August       1989


                     STATEMENT OF PETER WRIGHT, CHIEF CONSTABLE, SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLTrF
                     IN RESPONSE TO THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REPORT

                    The report of the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor has been received bv
                    me and I have noted the criticisms that have been directed aeainst
                    member, of the South lor k s U r . Police both individually and Joll.cciv.ly.

                    To make it clear to all concerned I would say at the outset thir T
                    accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry insofar as thev
                    relate to the South Yorkshire Police.                                y


                    ofeH fll^hChaC       h6ld C° h2Ve contribu^ d to che terrible tragedy
                    pfrca    Sri S U8i 3 Matter 0f pr0found sadness to all members of the
                    F ce, and boch personally and on their behalf I once again extend mv
                     eartfelt regret t0 those who have lost loved ones or suffered injurj.

                    v T J-             J a y l o r and all concerned may be assured that the South
                    th       "          1CS W l U Pursue every action available to them to ensure
                         1              nvent could not occur again.   I am grateful for the
                    haZleri’    h ' made regardinS           manner in which the Force has
                    r rnn    T    c o n t r o l and public order events generally and for his
                    recognition of the heroic efforts of .any of my officers on the day.


                   ^ tL T s Se^ et?ry,haS/ Sked me f°r 4 report on che acci°“ I propose
                   to take m the light of the Inquiry and this will be pursued    Before
                   respondrns t0 the Ho.e Secretary it vili be necessary f“                           « ' t o conlult
                   The P o U c H ™ i T POl»Ce Auch°rltJr> th* Ere c t o r of Public Prosecutions
                   the Police Complaints Authority, and others.

                   In =jr report to the Police Authority c= 21 April l?So , ,„dic.r,,„
                   this !vsnr           t responsibility for police action in connection'with"^
                     i s event.         In pursuance of this responsibility, and in the light of

                             - r 6 T a y l 0 r ’S f i n d i n g S ’ 1 have            - »y Chairman i S
                   hf^e t L L reSi EnaCi011 t0 the P0lice AucI^ t y so that aember. will
                   i!d ni nff             t0 consider    continuance as Chief Constable
                   and my Office is now at their disposal.                       -caoie,




                   Embargoed until 1,00 pm, 4 August                1989




      16   .JHf,      93                                                         W1 1 4 £ 9 b                           h.jE .   00:
                                           IN CONFIDENCE
          *                                                                       South Y o ik s fc i^Po,ice
s-




               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                              Chief Constable^
               R o o m 528
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, S W 1 H 9 A T
               Direct Line 0171273 4347 Fax 2703



R B Wells Esq QPM                                               Your reference:
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                                          Our reference:
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY                                                 Date:        |      January 1998




 HILLSBOROUGH - REPORT TO THE HOME SECRETARY



 You kindly visited Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 25 November to discuss a number o f issues
 arising out o f his scrutiny o f evidence relating to the Hillsborough football stadium disaster.

 2.     One o f these was the question o f the apologies which you have made on behalf o f
 South Yorkshire Police. You gave the Judge some examples, including a video, and
 mentioned four main police errors.

 3.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that his report to the Home Secretary would confirm
 that the force had gone on record as apologising. He added that he would show this part of
 it to you before submitting it to the Home Secretary. The Home Secretary does o f course
 plan to publish the report.

 4.     Work on the report is at an advanced stage and I am enclosing a copy o f the part o f it
 which deals with the apologies. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would appreciate any
 observations you may have as soon as possible.




     C F BONE
     Secretary to the Scrutiny




                                           IN CONFIDENCE
     G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
                                      IN CONFIDENCE




draft


1.      One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police had

        never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have discussed this with

        Mr Wells, the Chief Constable. He told me the allegation is not true. He said that
        he was continually going_on public platfomis to express his and the Force’s regret.

        He gave me some examples (and there are many others).



2.      In a press release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:



                “If there seems to be any sense of relief in South Yorkshire Police today it
               should not be mistaken for celebration. I have the profoundest sense of
                                <'»
               sorrow for the 95 deaths that occurred, any sense of relief that we do feel is
               diminished by the desolation of the families who lost loved ones. We have
               come to the end of another phase of the long, slow process of understanding
               and healing. ”


3.      In a television interview on the same day there was the following exchange:


               Trevor Hicks: “I was gladdened w>hen I heard his announcement earlier
               where for the first time publicly I have heard the Chief Constable publicly
               apologising and expressing regret to the families . . . . ”


        The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf o f the
        Force that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:


                “I would not have said it if it wasn’t true ... as I say, as a parent with all


                                      I N C O N F ID E N C E

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236


 ( t)    T*—   jyw*—*-» r              v*~-
                                      IN CONFIDENCE



               the feelings that I can muster, to Mr Hicks and everybody else who has lost
               loved ones here, we are, not just the Chief Constable but all of the officers
               involved are terribly sorry. It is an inexpressible grief to have to bear and I
               know words don't count for much but they are sincerely meant. ”


4.     In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:



               “I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could. I can only say
               sorry so much, but by God, we are sorry. ”


5.     In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:



               ‘The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure o f the police to
               order the closure of the tunnel leading to the terracing as a “blunder of the
              first magnitude ”. South Yorkshire Police has consistently and unequivocally
               accepted the truth of this finding. I repeat it now. How can anyone fairly
               describe this acceptance of responsibility as evasion?


               Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord Justice Taylor
               concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the disaster - the
               layout of the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion arising at the
               turnstiles, inadequate signing - were some . . . . I repeat that blame
               apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor has been accepted by South Yorkshire
               Police. ’


6.     Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ‘Hillsborough’ Mr Wells

       issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:


               “I am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families for the
               police’s part in the tragedy and I repeat that every time I have the
               opportunity. We were found wanting and have faced up to our responsibility


                                      IN CONFIDENCE
G:\HiLLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
                                        IN CONFIDENCE



                 for our role, but we were not the only ones who played a part in it and it is
                 time for others, including the fans, to do the same and for the families to try
                 to start building bridges. ”


7.     At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s Interim

       Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had been four main

       errors:



       i)        failing to-detey'the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at Leppings     |
                 Lane;



       ii).      not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens

                 were full by 2.50 p.m;



       iii)      not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was opened and
                 not blocking off the tunnel - this was the critical mistake; and



       iv)       not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not reacting

                 sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.



8.     But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor (see

       Chapter 1, paras        ), and that the police did not bear the sole responsibility for the
       disaster although he accepted that they took the largest share. This is in accordance

       with Lord Taylor’s findings and is reflected in the settlement reached in the civil
       proceedings.      Whatovor-may ha¥o boon thealliludC Of tfte previous Lmex
       Constable-, I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police

       have never apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.




                                        IN CONFIDENCE
G:\HiLLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
16-JAN. ' 9 8 ( F R I )   09:25                                                   TEL: 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 1 3     3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFI RMATI ON       REP ORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
 TRANSACTION(S)            COMPLETED




   NO.     DATE/TIME              DESTINATION                           D URAT I ON      PCS            STATUS     MODE


   133     J AN. 1 6      9:24                  0114   2523481   8481   0“ 0 0 ’ 5 4 '   002            OK         N ECM
                                                         Discipline & Complaints Department
              S o u t h Y ork s h ire                    Hillsborough Scrutiny

        w     POLICE                                     50 Windsor Road
                                                         Heeiey
                                       AG
                                                         SHEFFIELD S8 SUB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                      / & -/• 9 8 .
To:

For the attention of:       /         A

Comments:                 PtM                               if
                         /&/>                        .




From:

Telephone Number:

Number of Pages (including this page)               2. -
In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
                                                     South Yorkshire Police
                                                     POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                     SNIQ H IL L
                                                     SH E FFIELD S 3 8LY
                                                     TELEPHONE (0742) 7 6 8 6 2 2
                                                     TELE X 647998




                                                                                                 4 August 1989


STATEMENT OF PETER WRIGHT, CHIEF CONSTABLE, SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE,
IN RESPONSE TO THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REPORT

The report of the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor has been received by
me and I have noted the criticisms that have been directed against
members of the South Yorkshire Police both individually and collectively.

To make it clear to all concerned I would say at the outset that I
accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry insofar as they
relate to the South Yorkshire Police.

The fact that we are held to have contributed to the terrible tragedy
of Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all members of the
Force, and both personally and on their behalf I once again extend my
heartfelt regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury.

Lord Justice Taylor and all concerned may be assured that the South
Yorkshire Police will pursue every action available to them to ensure
that such an event could not occur again.    I am grateful for the
comments he has made regarding the manner  in which the Force has
handled crowd control and public order events generally and for his
recognition of the heroic efforts of many   of my officers on the day.

The Home Secretary has asked me for a report on the action I propose
to take in the light of the Inquiry and this will be pursued. Before
responding to the Home Secretary it will be necessary for me to consult
with members of my Police Authority, the Director of Public Prosecutions,
the Police Complaints Authority, and others.

In   m \r   t-   c* v*   - K - t * Q   t" V io   Q          ^   91   £■»-»*«• -4 1   1 OQQ   T   n. TICii.   C 2.   Sd

I accepted full responsibility for police action in connection with
this event.  In putsuance of this responsibility, and in the light of
Lord Justice Taylor's findings, I have written to my Chairman and
offered my resignation to the Police Authority so that members will
have the opportunity to consider my continuance as Chief Constable,
and my Office is now at their disposal.




Embargoed until 1.00 pm, A August 1989
16   JAN   ’ 98   8:41       FROM    S.Y.P.     CHIEF,DEPT.                                        PAGE. 0 0 l

                                              7/V CONFIDENCE                           South Y Q 5 M » P0lice

                                                                                           I5f !*N
                                                                                                 V&o-
                  THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                            i   OhietConstaW e_
                  Room 528
                  50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, S W 1 H 9 A T
                  Direct Line 0171273 4347 Fax 2703



      R B Wells Esq QPM                                                Your reference:
      Chief Constable
      South Yorkshire Police                                          Our reference:
      Smg Hill
      SHEFFIELD S3 8LY                                                Date:         { I f January 1998




                         M   r      lA/eUj


       HILLSBOROUGH - REPORT TO THE HOME SECRETARY


       You kindly visited Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 25 November to discuss a number o f issues
       arising out o f his scrutiny o f evidence relating to the Hillsborough football stadium disaster.

       2.     One of these was the question o f the apologies which you have made on behalf of
       South Yorkshire Police. You gave the Judge some examples, including a video, and
       mentioned four main police errors.

       3.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that his report to the Home Secretary would confirm
       that the force had gone on record as apologising. He added that he would show this part o f
       it to you before submitting it to the Home Secretary. The Home Secretary does o f course
       plan to publish the report.

       4.     Work on the report is at an advanced stage and I am enclosing a copy of the part of i t
       which deals with the apologies. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would appreciate any
       observations you may have as soon as possible.




       C F BONE
       Secretary to the Scrutiny




                                               IN CONFIDENCE
       G:\HtLLSBOR\MAtN\W6LLS.236
JAN    ’ 98     8:41        FROM   S.Y.P.      CHIEF.DEPT.                                     PAGE

                                               IN CONFIDENCE




  1.          One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police had
              never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have discussed this with
                            I
              Mr W ells, the Chief Constable. He told me the allegation is not true. He said that
                                   Vnu (kcvtt'\                 S|bMaiu-«
              he was continually going^onjjublic platforms to express his and the Force’s regret.
              He gave me some examples (and there are many others).


  2.          In a press release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:


                       “If there seems to be any sense of relief in South Yorkshire Police today it
                     should not be mistaken for celebration. I have the profoundest sense of
                                        < ✓>
                     sorrow for the 95 deaths that occurred, any sense of relief that we do feel is
                     diminished by the desolation of the families who lost loved ones. We have
                       come to the end of another phase of the long, slow process of understanding
                     and heating. ”


  3.          In a television interview on the same day there was the following exchange:


                       Trevor Hicks: “I was gladdened when I heard his announcement earlier
                       where for the first time publicly I have heard the Chief Constable publicly
                       apologising and expressing regret to the families


              The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf o f the
              Force that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:


                       "/ would not have said it if it wasn’t true ... as I say, as a parent with all


                                               IN CONFIDENCE
  G:\HILtSBOR\MAINVWELLS.236
16   JAN    ’ 98      8:42        FROM   S.Y.P.     CHIEF,DEPT.                                       PAGE. 0 0 3

                                                   IN CONFIDEN CE



                                feelings that I can muster, to Mr Hicks and everybody else who has lost
                             loved ones here, we are, not just the Chief Constable but all of the officers
                             involved are terribly sorry. It is an inexpressible grief to have to bear and I
                          know words don't count for much but they are sincerely meant. ’’


       4.          In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:


                             “I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could.    I canonly say
                          sorry so much, but by God, we are sorry. ”


       5.          In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:


                             ‘The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure of the police to
                          order the closure of the tunnel leading to the terracing as a “blunder of the
                          first magnitude”. South Yorkshire Police has consistently and unequivocally
                          accepted the truth of this finding. I repeat it now. How can anyone fairly
                          describe this acceptance of responsibility as evasion?


                          Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord JusticeTaylor
                          concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the disaster - the
                          layout of the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion arising at the
                          turnstiles, inadequate signing - were some . . . . I repeat that blame
                          apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor has been accepted by South Yorkshire
                          Police.’


       6.          Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ‘Hillsborough’ Mr Wells
                   issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:



                             "/ am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families for the
                          police ’s part in the tragedy and / repeat that every time I have the
                          opportunity. We were found wanting and have faced up to our responsibility


                                                   IN CONFIDENCE
       G:lHIUSSOWMA»WWELILS,236
IB   JAN    ’ 98          8:42        F ROM   S.Y.P.    CHIEF.DEPT.                                       PAGE


                                                        IN CONFIDENCE



                             for our role, hut we were not the only ones who played a part in it and it is
                                 time for others, including the fans, to do the same and for the families to try
                             to start building bridges. "


       7.          At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s Interim
                   Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had been four main
                   errors;

                                                   <k
                   i)        failing to-^efcty-the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at Leppmgs         |
                             Lane;


                   ii).      not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens
                             were full by 2.50 p.m;


                   iii)      not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was opened and
                             not blocking off the tunnel - this was the critical mistake; and


                   iv)       not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not reacting
                             sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.


                   But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor (see
                   Chapter L paras            ), and that the police did not bear the sole responsibility for the
                   disaster although he accepted that they took the largest share. This is in accordance
                   with Lord Taylor's fiadings and is reflected ift the settlement reached in the civil
                   proceedings.         WhMC¥c» may have beoa the attitude UfTfe previous (Jh'fST
                                    I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police
                   have never apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.




                                                        IN CONFIDENCE
       G:\HILLS80RWAINWVELLS.236
1 6 - J AN. ' 9 8 ( F R 1 > 1 1 : 3 8                                           T E L : 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13    3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFI RMATI ON          REP ORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACT!ON(S)             COMPLETED




   NO.       DATE/ TIME             DESTINATION                          DURAT I ON   P GS            STATUS     MODE


    134      J AN. 1 6    11:31                   01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 7   0"07'13”     Oil             OK         N ECM
                                                          Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire                             Hillsborough Scrutiny


              POLICE                                      50 Windsor Road


             J l'S T ;C         CO   !" K A
                                                          SHEFF!        S3 SUB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:
                     li> (JchMJUCVfij ityQ f                        ^
To:                                             c     /      z       f e a m


For the attention of:        A//C 0

Comments:             S > T f \ T £ M T O? AtOTfH?^y


                      I ttw W          fd w     * ' f a                           f

        M t h o w     ia^nMttszk              **>




Telephone Number:                 Ol Ity 'L^OJo<^7
Number of Pages (including this page)

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - interna! Extension 3083/3084
  * *    IX   C 0 NF I RMPIT 1 0 N REP 0 RT




DATE      TIME                 TO/FROM        STATU
 1/ 19    1 4 : 'dd               0 1 ? 1c     OK
Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106                                            Our Ref:         D&C/AMH/NT HD 114
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
S W 1H 9A T                                          Date:            19 January 1998




Mr




RE: IDENTITY OF CASUALTY BEING TREATED IN HILLSBOROUGH GYMNASIUM UNDER
FIGURE 6 AT APPROX. 4.00 PM INVIDEO "VRM 2"

I refer to your telephone conversation of 14 January 1998, with Ken Greenway regarding the
above and our subsequent conversation the following day.

In order to try and identify the casualty receiving treatment, we have checked the ambulance logs
for references in particular to females carried from Hillsborough around and after 4,00 pm on
15 April 1989 with negative result. W e have also checked the statements of fire officers who
entered the gymnasium, but none of there relate to specifically named individuals. In addition we
have checked the female body files that remain here in the Hillsborough Archive for fire service
statements and in relation to the visible clothing of the casualty receiving treatment. Once again
we have not been able to identify the person.

Ken Greenway and myself have also repeatedly checked and viewed VRM2, at the appropriate
time when the casualty under the number 6 in the gymnasium was receiving treatment, to see if
we could identify whether the casualty is Sara Hicks or not. W e are of the view that the casualty
is not Sara Hicks for the following reasons:-

     a)   The casualty's jeans are very light blue colour, Sara's were dark blue, almost grey.

     b)   The   belt   on   the   jeans   of   the    casualty   is     black,    Sara's   was   brown.

     c)   The casualty is wearing light blue socks,    do not believe Sara's were this colour, I can
          not be positive on this point.




                                                 The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                 Superintendent Hepworth
                                                 Tel (0114)296 3084              Fax (0114)2963113
      d)   The casualty is wearing trainers. Sara's footwear was missing from her body when her
           clothing was first listed.

      e)   The    casualty's  footwear     is  black   Adidas  trainers      with   black   soles
           (the white Adidas stripes can be clearly seen on the sides).      Sara's footwear was
           described as being a pair of brown Dr Marten boots.

      f)   The casualty appears too be a well built person, having thick ankles, large thighs and
               even bearing in mind they are in the recovery position a broad posterior, Sara was
               slim, weighing 60kgs (9 1/2 stones),

      g)   There appears to be a stain on the seat of the jeans worn by the casualty, which is not
           apparent on the photograph of Sara's clothing,

      h)   I am not even certain that the casualty is female,

      i)   The casualty is located in that part of the gymnasium where people who were alive
           received treatment and it is quite probable that they survived.

I have forwarded you a still from the video under separate cover and I think this illustrates points
a) to h) above. I am sorry we cannot be more helpful, for in addition to being unable to identify
the fireman, we cannot identify the 4 people in civilian clothes, either.




6

A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Superintendent Hepworth
                                                   Tel (0 1 14)296 3084   Fax (0114)2963113
                                                    Discipline & Complaints Department
              S o u t h Y o rk s h ire              50 Windsor Road


              POLICE                                Heeley
                                                    SHEFFIELD
             JUSTICE      with   COURAGE
                                                    S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:

For the attention of:

Comments:




 From:

 Telephone Number:               OUH ZSSiocn           ^

 Number of Pages (including this page) *sL ju,

 In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
 South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
 Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
                                   .1               ■{/u
            G j* f    .li'v'N -C

                                        n
^           \oW-iL                       ^

                             < - ^ H >
                                                    '^V€^°4



              2   -       3

                      v                      ,< e   ^
                                    <

    h        -3o -                 Ctw,

    ) t j r I °ii




               r <*-\

V       ^    5-                    'X*/ 2           /P'y
-I1RE POLICE

                                         Ref:
                                         Station/Dept:
                                         Date:


NAL INJURY TO ........................................................................

r the accident personally by the officer concerned, where capable,

stained...........................................................................................




J details of any claim being made
erleaf if necessary......................




ind when? (time and date)




itor/hospital visited

terns (g) to (i).
            South Yorkshire

            POLICE                                           R ichard W ells qpm, MA(Oxmx coigt.
            JUSTICE         wi t h   COURAGE                 Chief Constable




2 December 1997

The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 528
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW 1H 9AT




Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster

Thank you for your letter of 25 November 1997 in which you referred to the closing date of
5 December 1997 for submissions of fresh evidence.

I have no fresh evidence to offer but I shall be responding under separate cover to the
questions you raised when we met on Tuesday 25 November 1997.




Richard)




             Police H eadquarters
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield S3 8LY
             M r e -m    276 6532 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                          Direct Line: 0114 2523400
                                                                                South Yorkshire Police

               THE H ILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                             2<rm)V 1997
               Room 1106


 f
 R B Wells Esq
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



                                                                    Your reference:
                                                                                      Chief Constable




 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police                                             Our reference:
 Snig Hill
 SHEFFIELD S3 8LY                                                   Date:     V S       November 1997




     I am writing to you about the timetable for my scrutiny o f evidence relating to the Hillsborough
     football stadium disaster.

     When the Home Secretary appointed me to carry out this task I said that I expected to be able
     to let him have my report by the end o f this year. My work on the scrutiny is now well
     advanced. I have looked in great detail at all the points which have been put to me by the
     Family Support Group and others. Unless important new evidence is presented to me I
     believe that I shall be able to keep to the timetable which I outlined when I began and I would
     like if at all possible to do so. I think this would be in the best interests o f all concerned.

     It would be a great help to me if any further evidence which parties would like to
     submit could be at this office by close on Friday 5 December. I am writing in similar
     terms to the Family Support Group, to the Chief Officer o f the West Midlands police, and to
     others whom I have approached in the course o f my scrutiny.




ft   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




     G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SYORKS. 173
11 - NOV. ' 9 ? ( T UE )    16:34                                                    TEL:01142963113           3113      P. 0 0 1




  *»   CONFIRMATION           REPORT   **




 TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)             COMPL ETED




   NO.       DATE/TIM E            DESTINATION                              DURATION       PGS     S T AT US     MODE


   082       NOV. 1 1      16:32                 01 14   2523481     8481   0” 01' 2 6 '   003     OK            N ECM




                               South Yorkshire                                     Discipline & Complaints Department
                                                                                   Hillsborough Scrutiny

                              POLICE                                               50 Windsor Road
                                                                                   Heeley
                              JUSTICE with               COURAGE
                                                                                  SHEFFIELD S8 SUB


       TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

       FAX: 0114 296 3113

       INTERNAL FAX: 3113



                                            Facsimile Transmission
       Date:                                //                         W77
       ^0;                                       C a               •*«*-

       For the attention of:                /hdtud stkXdl*
       Comments:


                                                                                                 A m * ■>/„/„
                                                         Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                         Hillsborough Scrutiny

              POLICE                                     50 Windsor Road
                                                         Heeley
              JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                         SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 2963113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                     ) / d c r & e jt- b e l

To:

For the attention of:

Comments:                 Mt/f*
                                                    c_




From:

Telephone Number:                3CriTk

Number of Pages (including this page) 3

In the event of a poor copy. Please contact: -
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
           South Yorkshire

           POLICE
           J U S T I C E wi t h COURAGE




             DRAFT REPLY TO HOME SECRETARY -1 1 NOVEMBER 1997


HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I very much regret that I should have to respond to a letter from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of
the Hillsborough Family Support Group to yourself, which I have received courtesy of the
Liverpool Echo News Desk for I do not believe that such correspondence should be
conducted via the media.

W e have sought to co-operate fully with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the
release of information to them within the guidelines given to us by Her Majesty's Coroner
under Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984 and within the legal advice South Yorkshire
Police received with regard to the confidentiality of statements that do not fall within Rule
57, when we write to the statement author seeking their authority to release documentation
to the Hillsborough Family Support Group or to individual families. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith is fully aware of this policy. W e have also been quite open with the Scrutiny Team
and supplied any documentation requested.

Trevor Hicks is being disingenuous in suggesting that it is the fault of South Yorkshire
Police that the Hillsborough Family Support Group and individual families cannot meet the
time scales for submissions to the Scrutiny for as yet there is no cut-off date. If the group
wish more time to make their submissions it is in my view a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith perhaps in consultation with yourself. Certainly South Yorkshire Police would not
object provided that the reason for the extension was not laid at our feet. Neither would I
object to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith taking custody and control of the Hillsborough evidence
and documents, but I fear that delivery of information from the archives would take longer
than at present.

Moving now to the four examples used by Trevor Hicks to highlight the problems
encountered:-

1.     The four important photographs received by the Group on 6 November 1997 were
       also accompanied by two that had only been requested on 27 October 1997. Also
       within seven working days of the original request, the Group's Solicitor had been
       supplied with laser copies of three of the photographs and an original photographic
       copy of one of them. At this time it was made clear that there would be a delay in
       providing photographic copies.

2.     Families are still waiting to receive all or part of their loved ones body files. This is
       simply not true. No family is waiting to receive all or part of body files. Two families
       are waiting for actual photographs from the body file as opposed to the laser copies
       originally sent. Within the last two weeks we have received eighteen word


           Discipline and Complaints Department
           Windsor Road
           Sheffield S8 8UB
           Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3855
           Direct Dial No:
     processed, identically worded requests from different families, who in the main have
     had no previous contact with South Yorkshire Police to supply a copy of their
     deceased's body file to the solicitor acting for the Hillsborough Family Support
     Group. This figure represents 72% of the requests previously received during the
     period from April 1992 to the end of September 1997.              Staff are presently
     processing these requests and the majority will be dealt with this week.

3.   Without further information I am unable to comment on access to medical records
     being denied to the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.

4.   Again I am not sure what medical records the Hammonds have been told did not
     exist that have been made available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I can be certain
      however, that Mr Hammond has been supplied with all the statements from his late
      son Philip's body file, including the autopsy report supplied as long ago as 8 May
      1992, which have been supplied to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

5.   South Yorkshire Police and its officers are equally as interested in the outcome of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny, as the Hillsborough Family Support Group and
      took forward to its conclusion. Equally they would like to be concluded for all time
      and would not wish to leave room for doubt to be cast in future, which could arise if
      the families do not feel they have sufficient time to make their submissions.




NB    The final paragraph should address the final paragraph of Trevor Hicks letter which
      seeks to make future confidential submissions to charge the terms of reference for
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny. I feel any change should be resisted now as
      they were set in July 1997 and have been operative for over three months. It is a
      little late to move the goal posts.
 •;      11 NOU ’ 97 0 9 :5 6 FROM PRESS AND PR SYP                              Tu 3113              h   . y,i." 0.3
11/11/yY               09:21        LJUERPOOL ECHO NEUS DESK - 01142523154 B154                                     NO. 0 6 ?
: ;i n      •>,' 00:.'Vs   i* -\ v u.i<a» <»•*«/««*.                   ----                                                     CJ02

                                                                                                  v5S
            vDROf/.,


  ^ -■                 O
                                                                                                    S(; ppQV-
           syp?o’?'
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group


           Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
           Home Secretary
           Home Office
           50 Queen Anne's Gate
           1/Ottdon
           SW lH 9AT
                                                                                             9 November 1997
                                                                                           BY FAX AND POST

            D ear    Mr Straw,

            rt* : Hiljgborongh S.cruiiM

            i; in with deep regret that we fee) we have no alternative bat to write to you to seek your
            intervention in the timetahle for the scrutiny. Since your announcement o f the scrutiny on the
             <0lh June the problems o f slow or non-disclosure o f information by South Yorkshire Police
            and others have continued unabated. . It is of such scale and regularity as to render any
            arguments ol mistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe tt is a
            deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
            outcome o f the scrutiny.

            We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
            Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements. aJl
            our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our case are being thwarted.

             'y ou will recall irom our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
             (and apparently control!!) of the, evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
             Police when clearly their role in and afler the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
             Rather than the spint o f “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
             t>f the problems o f the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

             They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
             It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
             nr delay o f information.

             1'.xamples of the problems we are encountering are:-

              i ) As late as the 6® November we received four important photographs - they were requested
              o v e r three months ago!!1


                                                       VICF-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                  TREASURER
      <flAIRMAN                                                                                    M r s . i. T 'r a y n O f
                                                       P. H a .* v jr r tc m d
   11 NOV ’9? 09^56 FROM PRESS AND PR SYP                                           TO 3113                        P   0 3 ,- P R

                                                     * * « Pir!!5.:,B“ i 2.523154 8154                                    No'.06?   503




  2)Sevcral femifces are stiU waiting to receive all or parts o f their loved ones “bodyfifes”

   3 )Gn the -24* September our solicitor was denied access to nodical records despite having
   writvejn suthorty frow the re(stives concemed> Access is still bsio§ denied..

   4)Medical records o f the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
   Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

   The initial “deadline” for submissions was Is' September but this had to be relaxed when it
   bccame clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with reqiussts for
   information until late August. The HFSG mad* preliminary submissions mid-September and
   lodged others on the 25* September. Both o f those documents made a dear that our efforts
   were being hampered by the painfully stow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

    Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the tom o f the year" full consideration o f newly
    disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence ii could not form pan o f any deliberation or
    conclusion.

    h is our belief that Lord Justice Smart Smith should take possession aid control of all the
    doc\iments/cvidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely c h s c l t o al}
    parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the fenulies o f the deceased.

    We further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for s i ^ s i o n s and
    iheir proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the feimfces and the
    public as fair and exhaustive.

     All o f us wan. Ms m a tte r concluded, but having waited for so rany y ea s Ae
     V<,u   to in tr o d u c e a o n e o r two month extension to thetimescale to e n s u r e all
     he properly in v e s tig a te d and " s c r a t m w d " . It is t h e fe n c e s v ie w t h a t o s . S our t a ctonce
     f r r justicc to be d o n e a n d dearly it must be “seen to he done properly if fitth »
     process is to be regained by the many thousands o f voters who wrote to you, attended
     justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

      We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns ttM ntrlo the
      Vcnm o f R e fe r e n t you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Sroth and these nay also g>ve
      rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

      Yours sincerely.




       1revor Hicks
      t "hairman. - 1!F$G




NftU ”=)? m:?d.
          11 NOU ’ 97 11=28 FROM PRESS AND PR SYP                                                                 TO 3113                                  P .0 2 /0 2



                       S o u th Yorkshire

                      POLICE
                      JUSTICE             with         COURAGE
                                                                                                                         Date.......

                                                                                                                         Time             £:.£<?.fctw.-

                                                                                                                         District..................


                                                                MEDIA ENQUIRY FORM




CALLER .....                                         ................... ................................ O F..... ............................................
                                        V)
TEL NO. ......                                       ............ DEALT WITH/BY............                                               ...................................

ENQUIRY....                                  ....                    .. r£.... fc&mLsA,.........................................
...Aia8.S.l©w\~................ S                          - . .................t..................... i.C.Srfftf..                                        . ,       +.........
,...W......^OrlJ^..S.kwS^...4...ILqmaa.....-................................................................




RESPONSE                             Xhrtr.... ................................................................. (U....UJ&,.... X^aM
                              vml.       |L«U            frfS .te ......           L u es.

...L^.          *v#*.                                                                                                           .4***               Aft--..fH^6^-
                                                  .S/f.Crt,                                     UJbfe/.^                         .................................................
                                                                                                 4 I                                ^
                                                                                                                                                                             ..

...« « $ W&t                                      ....................................................................................

 os»C                                        prsarf^^vo^                    f.c^.vu<<ri4.              .^J$C         /iT..,^j..<?£/.>•...«/rf.ssr'..,                   1**&■

                              b?-                                          .(**       & «.         . jA a L m &A.£                                                   .............

.....f^v^.......................                                                                                 *...........                                          O^'dj&M 2,

         ,Ro...^....^...^iMWi^*                                .tto.s**Auk...

 X                                                    Lu>..                     ...j«V**Ja .            .       .      .              f*..

so u rces.                 M©k...vA.u«a                  toAwA:            M . . 3 ...... c « L i ^ . . . . U . . . ^ . . . . . ^ . ^ - . . - t ^ . . . . . ^ ^
     ^O V w v J^X > t\                        ,            ly>        |AA<^MN-W^~e                                                       M>-vJc^K.tL ^               La
P&PRD/mediaenq.doc                                                                                                                                                2 May 1995
      .______^                 t_.
11 NOU ’ 9? 11=28 FROM PRESS AND PR SYP                TO 3 1 i :                  P .0 1 /0




             S o u th Yorkshire

             POLICE
            JUSTICE     with    COURAGE




                      FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION




DATE:

TO:          ,.               ..




MESSAGE:     .           .r.eftoni....,                             .......>■>>.

                         .»                     /                             !.




NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE):

FROM:
        Press and Public Relations Department

TEL NO: 0114 220 2020 x 8103/ 8150/ 8151/ 8152/ 8160
Direct Dial Numbers: 0114 252 3151/52
FAX NO: 0114 2523154        INTERNAL: 8154
                                                                 Discipline & Complaints Department
               S o u t h Y o rk s h ire
  i JSl                                                          Hillsborough Scrutiny



 w             POLICE
               JU S T IC E      with   C O URAGE
                                                                 50 Windsor Road
                                                                 Heeley
                                                                 SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX; 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                                Facsimile Transmission

Date:                                     S-

To:

For the attention of:

Comments:                       M feckJl                                         00


                      •fc       0& £;i«4ftC * C o p y       (I
                                                £ 7 7 ci
                                 o ^ ( C | < a j , ( 4.1             Hi^rVOS



      * Pi Piotovw eA)K<3 ovfe Sk UoU m H                                 1*      w®                           ^
          e iw (                          IL               k<»                 £***                       **

           |? 3 o                        <wj                          ^3»                     I f* ® 0'
                    <A<LcA*u.                              CU9 y t b i

From:
                             ------------------------------                              h w « v *ma<-s
Telephone Number:                      0|lv< 2 * M 0 „ ?                                 SUlM-(f>f^ij
Number of Pages (including this page)                            A2>                     & M&Mar* (ubJt
                                                                 •                       (rXU f a . {y fi+ * r e ttd
In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department                              £fdf / i ^   fcfa qJi
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3 0 8 3 /3 0 8 4 ^ ^ o f o c ^               f

                                                                                                               ‘n       P
0 8 - D E C . ' 9 7 (MON)     14*24                                                   T E L : 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13       3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION             REP O RT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  INCOMPLETE:            RETRANSMIT        PAGE(S)




    NO,     D A TE/TIM E             DESTINATION                            DURATION         PGS            S T AT US     MODE


    108     DEC.     8      14--I5                   01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 7   0" 0 8 ' 3 3 "   016             I NC         N ECM
0 8 - D E C , ' 9 ? (MON)    16:10                                         T E L : 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13      3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION            REP ORT   *«




  TRANSMISSION
  INCOMPLETE:            RETRANSMIT      PAGE(SS




   NO,      DATE/TIM E              DESTINATION                  DURATION        PGS             ST AT US     MODE


    109     DEC.     8      16>02                  01712732007   0" 0 8 ' 2 1"   013              INC         N ECM
0 8 - D E C . ' 9 7 (MON)    16:23                                                TE L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13       3113      P, 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION            REP ORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)              COMPL ETED




    NO.     DA TE/TIM E             DESTINATION                          DURATION       PGS             S T AT US     MODE


    110     DEC.     8      16:17                 01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 7   0” 0 5 ' 30"   012             OK            N ECM
0 8 - D E C , * 9 7 (MON)    16:44                                                 T E L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13       3113         P. 0 0 1




  *     *   CONFIRMATION        REPORT      <>




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)              COMPL ETE D




      NO,    D A TE/TIM E           DESTINATION                          DURATION         PGS             S T AT US     MODE


      111    DEC,    8      16:44                 01 7 1 2 7 3 2 0 0 7   0" 0 0 ’ 3 3 ”   001             OK            N    ECM
                                                       Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                       Hillsborough Scrutiny

              POLICE                                  50 Windsor Road
                                                       Heeley
             JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                      SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 2963113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:

For the attention of:

Comments:


                           fc




                            A<tXA*      t>-*4




From:

Telephone Number:               0 „v     z^Voq7
Number of Pages (including this page)                 0

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
            '   9 7 (WED)   07:54                                        T EL:03142 963113         3113      P. 0 0 1




*    *     CONFIRMATION        REP ORT   **




TRANSMISSION
TRANSACTION(S)               COMPLETED




    NO,     D A TE/TIM E           DESTINATION                 DURATION         PGS    S T AT US     MODE


    1 16    DEC, 1 0        7:37                 01712732007   0" 1 7 ' 0 8 ”   040    OK            N ECM
 •
incident        110         □ 91 £ 9 7 O P 931                     DOCUMl-';NT I?I"'.COR'D P R I N T

                                                                                         O F r ICC-IIS R L P O R T      NUMBER        R124

                                                                                                                                   Station

Stir n ame                   0URMAN

F o renames                  PAUL

Age                                                                      Date       of       birth

Address                      S »Y O R K S . P O L I C E , H A C K E N V H O R P E


Occupation                  P O L PSLJD01

Telephone

Number       of P a g e s

Dated                       F804&9                                                                                             Signed


              PAUL    6URHAN - POLICE                 S E R G E A N T 2001          -    *E1*




              On Saturday            1!5 A p r i l    19&9,      1 was. e m p l o y e d            as    the S e r g e a n t   on S e r i a l

              13    performing          duties        in t he      West       Bland          in    connection with             t he F.A.

              Cup     Semi-final          at    Hillsborough             football             Stadium        Sheffield?         between

              Liverpool          and N o t t i n g h a m forest           Football                Clubs.




              Inspector          Bu.1 las w a s       the    officer          in o v e r a l l          charge    of    this    serial.

              My    serial       consisted           of   that     as   shown           on    the       attached       Serial     order

              with     the     exception          of P o l i c e     Constable!                                          _______________




              1 commenced           d u t y at       Hackenthorpe             Police          S t a t i o n at    8.30     a.m.     on    15

              April     1989,       when       ’E1 ’ o f f i c e r s    were        transported              by P o l i c e    vans      and a

              double        decker      P.S.V.        to Hi 1 I s b o r u g h S t a d i u m             where    we w e r e    then      seated

              in S e r i a l s     in the N o r t h S t a n d           for    briefing.                 This    briefing       was      given

              at    1 0 . UO a.m.       by C h i e f       Superintendent                IHjckenfield — the O f f i c e r                 in

              overall        charge       of    the       policing       of    this          event.
                                                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                             R 124

Following            the      briefing           and    light          refreshment,          I    an d m y Serial,          took     up

our      duties          and were          in s i t u       by    1 1 , 1 5 a.m.       Although          I and my Serial

were         directly         responsible              to    Inspector          Bullas,          I and    those       officers

on my Serial                 regularly work                 the    West      Stand     at H i l l s b o r o u g h     and    1 have

good         knowledge          of w o r k i n g       that       detail.




With         the    consent          of    Inspector             Bu.1 las?     1 deployed          officers         on m y

Serial         as    to      their        individual             and    specific       du t i e s .      On    normal       matches

it      is    the    accepted             practice          to    keep    the      whole     l e n g t h of     the    very       front

row      of    the W e s t         Stand     t ha t     overlooks            the   Leppings            Lane    terraces

sterile,            t h is    is n e c e s s a r y      to?




(a)                   Prevent those               in the         seated      area     of    the    West       Stand    dropping

stand         tickets         to     those       on    the       terraces       below.




(b)                   P revent mis si l es being                    thrown.

(<::>                 Prevent those               in the L e p p i n g s        Lane       terraces       from      climbing

up      or    b e in g    pulled          up by       those       in the       West    S t a nd and       thereby

gaining            access       to      the W e s t     Stand Seats             having      only        paid    for

entrance            to    the      terraces.




(d>                 Genera), ly m a i n t a i n             order       and?




(e)                 To    ensure          that    no    flags/banners               are     dropped       over      the

advertisement                 boardings           affixed          to    the    t o p wall        at    the    front

of      the W e s t       Stand.




On      the    occasion            of     this    match,          however,         tickets        for    the    front       row    of

the      West       Stand       had       been    sold,          therefore,         it was        not    possible       to    keep

the      front        row of         seats       sterile.
                                                                                                                                        PAGE
                                                                                                                                        R1




A l t h o u g h we      had     been          i n f o r m e d at         briefing           that       the    gates         would       be

o p e n e d at     1H n o o n           there         was     a steady           flow       of L i v e r p o o l      spectators

into      P e n 3 of         the L e p p i n g s             Lane    terraces              and    a fe w      family         groups          into

the    West       stand        from          1 1 * 3 0 a.m.         onwards.




T h ose    fe w    fans        at       th a t     time       were       in the m a i n well                 behaved         and

cheerful.             Although               my    supervisory              duties          c a u s e d me      to    patrol        the

concourse/bar                a r e a at           the      rear     of    the W e s t        Stand and              the     two    entrance

gate      areas       giving            access          to    the W e s t        Stand       in the          main     I remained

most      of    this     t i m e at           the       front       of    the C e n t r a l        area       of     the W e s t        Stand

where      1 had a g o o d                  view      of     those       in the W e s t           S ta n d a nd was           looking

directly          down       onto           the    fans       in the        Leppings             Lane       Terraces.             These

terraces          and West              Stand         continued           to     fill       without          any     problems.




About      12.4i> p.m.              a       number         of y o u t h s       entered          the W e s t        Stand     and when

looking         out     of     the          back      of     the    W e *t Stand            onto       the    pitch         they    took         up

a    position         leaning               over      the     s m all     wall        at    the    front        r i g ht     hand       corner

of    this      stand?         looking             down       onto       the     terraces           below.           One     of    the

youths         unravelled               a    large U n i o n Jack                f l ag     and    dropped           it     over    the

edge      of the w a l l            thereby             obscuring           a    particular             advertisement

boarding.             I shouted               across          the P o l i c e         Constable             1494 N a ylor          to       tell,

the    youth       to    remove              it to         prevent        the a d v e r t i s e m e n t         hoard        from       being

obscured.             This w a s             d o ne     without          any     problem          or    ill    feeling            towards

the    youths.           However?                 a middle          aed     woman          (50    ish)       wh o    wa s    sat    in the

West      Stand       n ea r    to w h e r e            I was       stood        at    the       time a n d w ho            was

obviously alone                 complained?                   to me       that        it w a s      not      fair     to a s k      the

youth with            the      flag          to    remove          it.      She       went       on to       explain         that       a

similar         flag     was        be:*ng d i s p l a y e d             in the        centre          of    the S p i c m K o p            by

the    Nottingham Forest                          fans?       but    they        had       not    been       instructed            to
                                                                                                                                          FAG!"
                                                                                                                                          R 1 24

remove       th e i r s ™       When       i    explained              to    her       th a t     the N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t

one    was     not    obscuring                anything            or a n y a d v e r t i s e m e n t s ?            but       that       the

Liverpool           flag       had    been          doing        so    she       s t i ll    took       exception              to    this         and

complained           that       our       actions           were       provocative                and    unfair           against

Liverpool           fans.        She       then went              on to          complain            that     it wa s          ludicrous

that    the L i v e r p o o l         fans          were        in the       West       S ta n d and Lepp i ng s                    Lane       end

when    they        should       h av e        ha d       the S p i o n K o p          end      of    the     ground.




1 received           hundreds             of    similar            complaints               throughout           that          day       both

before,       during           and after              the       tragic       events          that       later        ensued.              It

was    quite        obvious          to me          that        there       wa s    a great           deaJ      of    Liverpool

'hurt    p r i d e ’ because               of       this        even       before       the       tragedy        occurred.




The    area     that        filled         the        quickest             was     P e n 3 of         the L e p p i n g s           Lane

terraces        and       1 saw       that          by 2 . 0 0        p.m.       the    fans         were     cramped, in t h i s

section        of    the       terraces.                  Around       2.00        p.m.      I saw a y o u t h who                   1 would

describe        as    approximately                       20 years          with       very       light       blond        shoulder

length       fair     hair       wearing              a    very       vivid        grey      open       necked        shirt          and       blue

jeans    who        was     stood         on    to p       of a small, wa l l                abutting          against              the       sma.lL

wa) 1 at, the         front          of    the W e s t           Stand.            This      youth       it appeared, to me

was    intent        on     climbing            up a n d         gaining           access         into       the W e s t        Stand.                I

approached           him       from       the       front        of    the       West       Stand,       leaned           o v er     and

told    him     to    get       down and              stand       b a ck     in the          terraces.               At    this          t im e    he

would    on)y        be a n a r m s            length           b e l o w me a n d          upon      hi m    realising              that         1

could    not        reach       him       if he           lowered          himself          and      knowing         that       I    could

not    get     to h i m        because          of        the    full       capacity            of    this      section             of    the

terraces         (Pen 3)         he       looked           up at me          and       said,         "fuck      off",          two       or

three    times,           at    the       same        time       making          a two       fingered           *V*       sign       towards

rne.    I again           told       him       to     get       down when           he a g a i n        t o l d me        to    " F u ck       off"

and    gesticulated              with          "V*        signs       as    previously.                 I could           smell          drink
                                                                                                                               PAGE
                                                                                                                               H ISA-

on    this      man's    breath,




I was      so    incensed          by t h i s    attitude          and. c o n d u c t          that      I left         the    West

S tand and went           down       through          the    tunnel        into          the     Leppings         Lane

terraces         (Pen 3).           1 could        not      gain access              into        this      Fen    because           of

the    crowding         there.         From      the     rear      I was        able          only    to    get     a    view       of

the w a l l      where     the y o u t h        had    been       s to o d .        He    ha d    disappeared             from          the

wall     by this        time.        I returned             to    the    front           of    the W e s t       S t a n d -and

eventually         saw that          this       youth       had moved           towards           the      front        of P e n 3.

I can be         specific          about     being       pretty         close        timewise            because         records

will     show     that    after        the      incident          with     this          youth       I changed           my    radio

at    the P o l i c e r o o m w i t h i n       the    Ground.




Upon     returning         to      the W e s t     Stand after             the       r a dio      change,         the     fans

both     in the W e s t         Stand      and Leppings              Lane       terraces             had    continued              to

swell.          It was    about        this      time       I noticed           stronger             traces       of a l c o h o l

on fans         breath and          their       general          manner        and attitude                became        more

aggressive         and    unruly.            1 had a f u r t h e r             repetition with another

y o u t h who     had    climbed        o nt o     the      top    of    the        metal        railing         dividing           Pens

3 and      4 at a       p o int     where       it a b u t t e d     up aga.inst               the W e s t       Stand.            He

was    also      trying       to    gain access             to    the W e s t        Stand.           He    likewise,

knowing         that    I could        not      reach       him    gave        me    'V*' s i g n s        and    told        me    to

"Fuck      off".        This       youth     refused         to get       d o wn.             He w a s     wearing        a dark

grey     jogging        to p a n d     blue      jeans,          medium        brown,          short       hair,        aged ?3-30

years.          I do    not     think      I would          recognise           him again.




I had      two    similar          experiences           with a further                   two y o u t h s .




Around S.00 - 2.15                  p.m.     I saw a y o u t h           in P e n 3 of               the L a p p i n g s       Lane

Terraces.          I describe            this      y o u t h as      -follows:— a p p r o x i m a t e l y                H O —23
                                                                                                                                   P AGh.
                                                                                                                                   R1S4

years,        heavy       build with              thick         very       curly       dark      b r o w n hair,          wearing       a

dark     green       chequered             sh i r t .        This      youth was              stood      on    ta p of       the

barrier        (that       was       to    later          collapse)             being      supported           by his        friends

:i.n the      crowd.           He    had       both       his h a n d s     raj s e d      in the a i r          a n d was

springing           up a n d        down with             his       body        on to p      of this         barrier        w i t h his

hands      and arms            above       his       head       encouraging              his     colleagues           in t h e i r

singing        and    chanting.




On    occasions           when       he    fell        off      the    barrier           he w o u l d        climb    back        up on

top,    having        been a s sisted                  and      supported             by his       friends          and     continue

as    before.         This          he    did     on      the    left       hand       side      of     the    barrier           when

facing        out    of    the W e s t          Stand        looking            towards         the     pitch.




Around        this    same          time       I sa w a f u r t h e r            youth        d e s c r i b e d as    approxirnately

20 years         with      long          blond       hair and          wearing          a dark          red    jogging           top and

bJue     jeans,        (I w o u l d        not       recognise             him again),                "Ihis y o u t h       kept

climbing         onto      the       rig ht      hand        side      of       this    barrier         and      once       on to p

kept     launching             himself          bodily          off    the       top     of     the     barrier       with        his

arms    and      hands         outstretched                in f r o n t         of    him.       H is    actions          were

e x a c t l y as     though          he w e r e        diving         into       a    pool      of w a t e r .       Th e    crowd      was

so    compressed           in f r o n t         of     him      that       he    had    no      likelihood           of     failing

and    hurting        himself             seriously,             but       kept       landing         on the        top     of    the

heads      and      shoulders             of    those        in f r o n t        of    him.        I saw him          dive        off

this     barrier          at    leas t         1 0 - S 0 ti m es .          On       one     of the     latter       occasions           I

saw    this y o ut h           nearly          get     into        a fight with a youth                       directly           in f r o n t

of    hirn,    1 can       only          presume          that    this          was    because          of    the    stupid        actions

of    the y o u t h w h o           had    been        doing      the       ’d i v i n g ’ .       I can       say    that        I would

definitely           recognise             the       large       built          youth with            the     dark    curly        hair

and wearing           the       dark       green          shirt       if    I were         to    see     him a g ai n        because

whilst        watching          accounts             of    the     tragedy            on S u n d a y     morning          (16.4,89)
                                                                                                                                    PAGE
                                                                                                                                    R 1H4

at    rny    home       address,            on the      television             -Yyorkshire               Television

(Calendar)              I s a w a shot             of   t h is     same       youth       in the L e p p i n g s           Lane

terraces           and       immediately            recognised            h i m as        being        the     same      y o u t h who

had. b e e n       diving          about      on t o p     of      the    collapsed              barrier.




I tried        to a t t r a c t          the a t t e n t i o n      of    these          two y o u t h s       to     stop     their

stupidity,              but m y a t t e m p t s         were       futile       -    1 could           neither          get    to    them

nor a t t r a c t        their        attention.




As    kick-off           time       drew      nearer       the      numbers          ctf L i v e r p o o l       fans       in d r i n k

became        more       and more            obvious       as      it w a s     so w i t h        their       marked          decline

of    general           behaviour            and    increased aggressiveness.




Around S . 35            p.m.       to      kick-off       time,         numerous           youths         climbed         up f r o m

out    of     the L e p p i n g s           Lane    Terraces          (Pens         3 a n d 4)         into      the W e s t        Stand

and were           assisted           by     those      already          in the W e s t          Stand.              1 made

attempts           to    stop       them,         but   every       one       1 caused           to    stop another              ten

must     have       gained access                  into    the      West      Stand.             X was       obstructed             from

functioning              efficiently               because         1 had       to    fight        my way         through         and

over        legs    of       those       sitting        in the        front         row     of    the W e s t         Stand.




Around        kick-off             t im e    '.large n u m b e r s       of    persons           in the W e s t           Stand

complained              to me       vehemently            t h at    there       was       trouble          in the         front      of

P e n 3 of         the L e p p i n g s        Lane      terraces          in t h a t        someone          had a p p a r e n t l y

gone     down       on       the    flo or .        This     1 had        not       observed and               could       not      see

when        drawn       to m y a t t e n t i o n        because          looking          into P e n 3 all                1 could         see

was    a mass           of    heads         and    shoulders         only.           I    could        not     see      any    of    the

barriers           at    this       t im e    because        of     the       compressed              bo d i e s .

To m y       left       I saw       Inspector           Bullas       and Police              Constable               '.d167 F r o s t     wh o

were        trying       to    inform Police               Control            of a n      incident           in P e n 3.            Radio
                                                                                                                                      PAGE
                                                                                                                                      R1£4

communications                   were     particuiariy                ba d a r o u n d        this        time.          Mayhem       then

broke       out.           I sa w      four      youths         from Pens             3 and 4          climbing           up a n d     over

the    fence          onto       the    perimeter              track       and more           c l im b       up f r o m     the

terraces          below          into     t he W e s t         Stand,.          1 saw a flood                  of P o l i c e     Officers

come    to       t hi s     perimeter            fence         on th e       pitch         s i de    of      the    fence,        fans

continued             to    flood       o n to      the    perimeter              track       and      spill        over     onto      the

actual       playing             surface.            I saw a P olice                  Superintendent                  run    onto      the

pitch       to    the       referee           and    stop       the       game.




Hatters          went       from       ba d    to w o r s e .         I sa w       fans       tearing           and      breaking        the

wire    mesh          of    the     perimeter             fence       whilst          those         f a ns     in the       terraces,

particularly                in P e n s        3 and       4,    continued             to    climb         o ve r    the     perimeter

fence       spilling             onto     the       perimeter             track       and     playing           ar ea.




As    time       went       by    I then         saw      bodies          being       carried          onto        the    p i t c h at m y

end    of    the       ground.            My     int i a l      thoughts           when       mayhem           first      broke       loose

was    that       of a       pitch        invasion,             which,          because        the        game was          only a few

minutes          in    play       1 could           not    understand.                 It wa s         only w hen           bodies

continued             to    be    carried           out    of    the       terraces           that        I realised            something

of a m o r e          serious          nature        had       occurred.




The    reaction             of    those        in the          terraces           below and            those        in the W e s t

Stand       was       one    of     pure       hatred against                   the    Police.               1 wa s      shouted       at

and    jostled             called       such        names       as    a    'Fucking           murdering             bastard”.            Many

fans    in the W e s t              Stand        s h o u t e d at         me.      "Do      something              for    fucks       sake      ~

people       are       dying        in t h e r e " .           I sa w P o l i c e          Officers            enter      Pens     3 and        4

from    off       the       perimeter            track         by w a y      of    the      s m all       gates       to a s s i s t     the

injured and                crushed.            The     fans       in t h e s e        pens w e r e           counter-productive

in a s s i s t i n g        the     Police.            Instead            of m o v i n g      back        to    relieve         the

pressure          and       give       the P o l i c e         Officers           more      room       in w h i c h       to wor k,         I
                                                                                                                                   PAGIr
                                                                                                                                   R1H4

saw    the     fans     surge       forward          to     Fight,         ab u s e ,      i ns u l t    and     spit        on the

officers        trying        to    help       the     injured,,             The      fans      reaction            o b v i o u s 3y

made     the    s i t u a t i o n worse,            thereby making                   the    situation            far        more

graver       for     those        already          injured        and      crushed.

in general,          terms        the    behaviour           of      the     Liverpool            fans        when      events             of

the    tragedy        initially           became           apparent          wa s     nothing           less     than appalling

and    in m y      n i n e t e e n a n d a half             years       of P o l i c e        Service          the      worst          I

have     personally           e ve r     experienced,                  "!he P o l i c e       were       called         "murdering

bastards"          by t h o u s a n d s       of    fans.         Fans       smelling           of      intoxicants            wa s

rife     in the       West        Stand,           i roiti the       Liverpool             fans      I continued              to hear

shouts       and     chants        of    “we       know who          will       be    blamed         for      t hi s    fucking                lot

d o n ’t we     - the        Liverpool             fans     again.           Liverpool            again".




Further        shouts        of    "We    should           have      h a d the        other       fucking           end,      you          (the

Police)        are    all     fucking          murdering             bastards",               further          shouts         of       "The

F.A.     are    to    b Larne for         this       fucking           lot",          I also         heard       on     numerous

occasions.




1 sa w    the      Police         carry more           bodies          onto      the       pitch area            at     my    en d         of

the    ground and more                  officers           arrived         on    the       scene        at    the      Leppings

Lane     end.        1 sa w       fans    stood about                on the          p i t c h an d      perimeter            track

who    appeared         to    be    in a t o ta l           d az e     and      oblivious            of w h a t        to    do,           I

saw    the     injured        being       treated           by P o J i c e       Officers,              the St.         Johns

Ambulance          and Liverpool               fans        alike.




I saw     the      injured         being       given mouth              to m o u t h         resuscitation and                     heart

massage,        whilst        further          Police        Officers            a r r i v e d at        the     scene,            I

understand           that     a    radio       message           was     passed         on the          Police         radio       that

all    officers         were       to    go    onto        the    perimeter             track,          but    at      no    time          did

1 ever       hear     that        message.            By    this       time      the       officers           assembled            namely
                                                                                                                                        r AGE
                                                                                                                                        R '124

those       that       ware       not       directly          involved            in a s s i s t i n g      the        injured          -

following          a       charge        by a       l a rge    number         of     the L i v e r p o o l         f an s     towards

the    Spion Hop and Nottingham                               Forest         fans       that       appeared            not    to    reach

fighting          proportions                   formed a            line      across          the     halfway            line      to

prevent       any          possibility              of a      clash     between              opposing           fans.




1 then       sa w a n a m b u l a n c e             arrive       at    the        Leppings          Lane        end     of    the

perimeter          track.              More     injured were                 carried          out     and       laid and           treated

on    the    playing             surface        of    the      p i t c h w h i ) st all             the     while           the    Police

were      under        a    constant           barrage         of a b u s e        and       insult        from        the L i v e r p o o l

f a ns.      The       Liverpool             fans     t h e n .commenced                to    rip d o w n         the

advertisement                   hoardings           from      off     the     end       of    the W e s t         Stand and

dropped, t h e m            down       to    the     fans      in the         terraces             be l o w .      Th e      hoardings

were      then     passed             forwards        and      onto     the        perimeter            track          to    use    as

makeshift          stretchers.




By    this    time          fully        grown men were                crying           openly         in the W e s t             Stand       due

to    the    tragedy.                 Many     of    those       in the W e s t              Stand were            wanting          to

leave       the    stand          by t h i s        time      and     leave        the       ground.            Th e    hatred

against       the          Police        seemed       to      grow and            g r o w - the L i v e r p o o l             f an s        were

intent       on m a k i n g           the    Police        the      scapegoats               for     the    tragedy.               As       I wa s

in the       close          proximity           of P o l i c e        Constables              H498 Scholey                  and    1494

Naylor,       X instructed                   those      two      officers            that      we     were        all       three       to

remain       together             as     1 genuinely             feared           for    our       s a f e ty .        We    were

p o s i t i o n e d at          the    right        hand      corner         of    the       West     Stand        when       looking

out    of    the       back       of     the    Stand         towards         the       pitch and           because           of    the

aggression             of       the    Liverpool           fans       both        in the       West        Stand and Leppings

Lane      terrace           be l o w ,      I decided          to     personally              take      over       the

responsibility                   of    the     emergency            e x it    gate       leading           from        the    West          Stand

to    the    rear          of    the     Leppings          Lane       Verraces.               The     young        steward who                wa s
                                                                                                                                            PAGE           1-1
                                                                                                                                            R124

responsible                 for m a n n i n g      this        gate        was        useless        -- he was             more       intent         on

watching             th e    events        on the           pitch       than manning                 his     post,          ] must, have

told       h i m at         Least, six          times        to    stay       by th e            gate,     but        he    continued               to

ignore          my    requests            and    kept        returning                to    the    front         of    the       stand         to

see    what          was     happening           on the           pitch.




1 wa s      of       the     opinion           that     if     1 were         to a l l o w         this      emergency                gate      to

be    opened          there        would        be a        Flood       of    departing              -Fans t h a t          would        only

clog       up       the     ease     of    flow        of    the      emergency               services.               My    thoughts            were

then       confirmed              by a P o l i c e          rad i o     message             that     was    broadcast                 o v er    the

ground          public address                  system,           requesting                  that    fans        remained where

they       were       so as        not     to    impede           the      speed           and    efficiency               of    the

emergency             services.




Whilst, m a n n i n g             this     gate        1 wa s      under          a    constant           barrage           of       threats,

pleas       and       requests            to    open        it b o t h       from Liverpool                 fans           in the W e s t

Stand and             those        in the L e p p i n g s             Lane        terraces.               Th e    fans          came     up w i t h

a hundred and                  one    excuses           why       t hi s     emergency             gate     should              be    opened         to

t he m ,        I    remained         in       charge        of    this       gate          throughout.




At    some          point, in t i m e           th e    Steward            who        had     been    given           the       task     of

manning             the     emergency           gate        completely                disappeared.                1 would             recognise

this       Steward           if    I were        to see           him a g ai n —              I would       describe                 hi m as

being       in his                                                            dark          brown     hair.

                                                             He w a s        of       overall        scruffy appearance.                             It,

wa. o b v i o u s         to me      that       this        Steward          ha d      "lost       his     bottle'’.




As    events          on the         pitch       became           more       organised and                 the        bodies          and

injured were                 cleared,           the     cro w d       in the           ground        started           to       dwindle         and

X eventually                 opened        this        emergency             gate          to a l l o w    fans        out       of    the W e s t
                                                                                                                                            PAGE           1£»
                                                                                                                                            R-1H4

Stand.              Ma n y    by t h i s       time          had    already             left       the       stand       via    the    rear

entrances.                   About       this       time       one       of    the       Chief          Stewards          approached             me

in    the       West         Stand.           He    had       taken       off       his       yellow         Stewards           jacket       and

discreetly                showed         it    to       me    folded          up    in       his    inside          jacket       pocket.              He

told       me t h a t         all       his    Stewards             in    the      West        Stand          had    taken       off       their

Stewards             jackets            and    abandoned             their          duties          -    this       was    because          of    the

threats             and      abase       they       had       been       given          by    the       Liverpool          fans       in    the

West       Stand.             I    have       seen       this       Chief          Steward          on       previous          matches       and.

would          recognise            him a g a i n .



My S e r i a l         had        obviously             got    split          fallowing             the       tragedy.           After       the

West       Stand          was      cleared,             those       of    my s e r i a l           that      were        left    with       me

made       a    sweep         of    the       West       stand       for       any       discarded             property          and       after

finding             none      we w e n t       out       of    the       rear       of       the    Leppings             Lane    terraces.

We    (the          Police)         were       then          all    instructed                to    return          to    the    North       Stand

for    a       de-brief            which       we d i d        where          I was          able       to   account           for    the    well

being          of    all      af    my S e r i a l .



We t h e n          walked         to    Claywheels                Lane       where          we w e r e       stood       down a n d

returned             by      transport             to    Hackenthorpe                   Police          Station.           I    went       off

duty       that        date        at    8.00       p.m.



I    would          like      to    voice          my own f e e l i n g s : -



1.                     'i'his      tragedy          was       caused          by    the       unruly          and    idiotic          behaviour

of    the       Liverpool               fans       themselves.



                       Drink         (intoxicants)                  played          a    large          part    in       their       disgraceful

foehav i o u r »
                                                                                                                           PAGE
                                                                                                                           R 124

3»             As    the    tragedy           unfolded            the       actions          of    the      Liverpool     fans,

particularly             those     in     pent * 3 a n d          4    of       the    Leppings          Lane

terraces       did       more    to      hamper        and    obstruct                the    Police         when

they    should       have       been      directed           at       assisting.



4.             I    was    disgusted            at      comments            made       late       on S a t u r d a y   night

television          <1i>.4.8V)           by   the      L-iverpool               Chairman          when he

stated       that    hooliganism              by     the     Liverpool                fans       was   not    so

and    played       no    part     iri    the       tragedy.               He    ought       to    have      been

with    me    in    the    West       Stand         -- h e   would          have       had a       very

different          viewpoint          then      -    unless           of    course          he    is   an

hypocrite.




SUB SECTOR 6
I NSPECTOR BULLAS



SER IAL. 1 3 — WEST             S i AND



PS 2 0 0 1    BURMER       'E'

PC 2±><V2 SH' li iWELL

PC 3 0 8 8    COUPLAND

PC    1 4 9 4 NAYLOR



PC k 1 6 7    I' ROST

PC 3 1 7 0    FAXKCLOUtiH.

PC    1 6 1 8 8HFARW00D

PC      1 0 MERCER

PC P.7 1 7    SAVOURY

PC     9 2 8 PARKI NG
                                       pa&i~:
                                       R 1p a

                PC   1 4 2 3 NEWSOLD




i-:n d   of   report
In c id e n t         I ID       09129?          0P931                        DOCUMENT          RECORD       PRINT

                                                                                                     OFFICERS          REPORT NUMBER                       R 1 H!3

                                                                                                                                                       Stat, ion

 Surname                            MCDONNELL

 K o r e n a m e ft                 GERARD J OS E P H

 Ag e                                                                                Da t, e    of    bi r t h

 Address


 Occupation                         POL PC 1 4 1 7

 Te i e p h o n e

 Number         of     Pages

 Dated                              £9fJ489                                                                                                                 Signed


                 About         7 „ ‘:>0 arn o n S a t u r d a y ,             13th    April          1989,       I      c a me o n       duty       at ,

                 Edlington               Office        due     to       commence          duty       at    8.00       a m.

                 Together             with       other        Edlington             officers          I    travelled           to       Doncaster             OHQ

                 for         parade       and     briefing              at    8.45    a m.

                 W hilst        there        I was       allotted              to    drive       a Transit             van         for    my s e r i a l         to

                 Sheffield,               Sgt.     V h 'd J    Ashton          being       in    charge.              We a r r i v e d         at    the

                 ground         and       attended            at    the       briefing          and       together           with       my d e t a i l        were

                 in     position            at    the    junction              of    Penistone             Road a n d         Merries           Road        by

                 11.10         a m.       1 remained               at    that       location          until          shortly        after           3 o ’ clock.

                 PC £ 9 6 7         I'ropt       and    3 were           stood       on    the       roundabout,              other        officers              on

                 the         detail       being        PC's        900       Dawson,      PC # 8 0 4 M c F a r l a n e ,            PC 1 7 4 W e l c h ,

                 PC P. 905 G r e a t o r e x „

                 Pedestrian               traffic        built           up    gradually             but    the       m ajority           of    supporters

                 passing            us    were     Nottingham                 Forest       suporters             but     I    saw a        number           of

                 Liverpool               supporter?'           shortly          after          the    commencement                 of     licensing

                 hours         drunk        and    a    g o o d many           of    them       carrying             cans     of    beer.            However

                 this         was     not    just       Liverpool              supporters             but    Notts           Forest        supporters                 as

                 well.

                 Traffic            on    the     road        became          busy     especially            with        coaches           but       began

                 quietening               down a f t e r           £.30       pm.
                                                                                                                                               page
                                                                                                                                               rt -133

Approaching                'A o ’ c l o c k         it    was       clearly              evident        that       the      m ajority          of

Notts       Forest           supporters                  had    arrived                at     the    ground        but      the     Liverpool

supporters             were          still          streaming                down        towards        the      ground          from     the

opposite          side          of    the       roundabout.                    However,              we w e r e       constantly              being

asked       by L i v e r p o o l           supporters                   in    cars          where     they        could       park       their

cars     right         up       till       the       last       minute             and        the    fans       were     directed             up    past

Niagara          on    the       main          road.

As    the       time       neared          kick          off,       I was          stood        near       the     Sergeant          and       heard

on    the       radio       about          problems             being          experienced                 at    the     Leppings             Lane

end    and       repeated              requests               from       somebody,              I    believe          Supt.       Marshall           to

open    the       gates          or       people          were          going          to     get    killed-

X then          heard       a    request             that       a ) 1 available                     officers          attend        at    the

Leppings          Lane          end       which          I did          together              with    all       my s e r i a l .

On a r r i v a l       the       forecourt                into          the    ground           was     cleared          of      fans     and

there       were       a    number             of    mounted             officers              present          and    numbers           of    police

officers          m illing            about.

A drunken             Liverpool                supporter                was            stood nearby             and about           tw e n ty or

thirty          Liverpool             supporters                were          in       the      near       vicinity           the    m a j o r i t y of

them    drinking.

We w e r e       then        instructed                  to    form a          cordon           and     prevent          any      more

Liverpool             supporters                into          the       ground           until       further          notice.

The    drunken             supporter                mentioned                earlier           began       arguing          with     one       of    the

mounted          officers             insisting                on       his            r ig h t to    enter        the      ground        and

unfortunately                   he    was       knocked             over               and     1believe          the     horse       s t o o d on him

After       a    few m i n u t e s             stood          outside,             I     saw S u p t .      Marshall             hurry        towards

us    and       told       us    to       go    into          the       ground           as    our    help       was     needed.              At    that

point       X thought                that       there          had       been          crowd        trouble        and      on    entering           the

terraces          saw t h a t             there          were       a    large           number       of    people          on     the    pitch          I

thought          there          had       been       a    pitch          invasion.

However,          1 seem             to    remember             that          the        pen    1 entered             was     empty and             that
                                                                                                                                       PAGE
                                                                                                                                       R155

one    of      the    barriers          inside             the       compound          was       twisted         and     collapsed              on

the    ground.

I    believe         1 saw a       number             of       shoes    on    the       terracing             but       cannot        be    sure

whether         it    was       then    or    minuts             later       when       I       was    on    the    perimeter              track.

1 walked            onto    the    perimeter                   track    through             the       gate    which       was        open and

then     s a w a ma n           being    carried                 towards          me a n d        it    was      obvious         that       he

was    dead         and    1 then       saw a          further          two       wh o w e r e         in    the    same       way w h i c h

came     as     a    great       shock.           I    hurried          towards             the       pen where          the     people

were     coming           out    and    assisted                with    carrying                two    bodies       out,       they        had

been     passed           out    and    they          were       both       laid       on       the    grass       to    the     left       of

the    goalposts            (facing          down          the       ground)       I    cannot           remember         what       any        of

these       people         looked       like          or       what    they       were          wearing.

However,            whilst       there       it       was       obvious       that          there       was      insufficient               room

to    lay      the    people       down a n d              I    tried       together             with       other       officers

including            an    Inspector          to       clear          more    ground             to    the    left       of    the     goals.

However         there       were       large          numbers          of    Liverpool                supporters          wandering

about,         again       many    of    them          drunk          and    continually                 getting         in    the     way,

some     of     them       saying       they          were       looking          for       a    friend       or    relative           or

actualntance.

The    scene         was    one    of    total             confusion          and       there          was    no    organisation

but    due      to    the       fact    that          it       had    happened          so       unexpectedly             this        is    not

surprising.

Uy ' t h i s    tirne      numbers       of       the          Liverpool          supporters                including

particularly               youths       of    1 7 ~£' 5 a g e          group,          many       of    ' them t h e      worse        For

drink       began         shouting       ahusp             at    the    Notts          l-'orest        supporters             wh o    they

reckoned            were    laughing          at       them.           A number             of    them       began       running           up

the    field         towards       the       Notts             Forest       end,       together             with    other        officers

C followed            and       turned       them          back.

Onre     this        had    been       done       their          rage       was    turned             on u s ,     we    formed        a    line

across         the    field       and    I was             stood       on    the       left,      hand       side       together           with
                                                                                                                                         PAGE
                                                                                                                                         R155

  PC B r ' o o k s h a w       ( A 1) , PC 3 1 3 1           Lewis        (FI?)       and whilst,              there    was       subject           to

  quite      an amount               of    abuse        "You        black       bastards",            "I       hope    y o u ’ re      fucking

  happy      now y o u          bastards,"              and       others™

  A Jot      of      it    was       also       aimed        towards          the     F.A.

  I    remained           at    this       point        until          about,      4,35       pm w h e n       I    returned        to       my

  serial!       on M e r r i e s          Hoad.

  Wh.ilst       I    had       been       in    the     ground          1 never          saw a n y        stewards,          at     the

  Leppings           Lane       end       especially              on    entering          the       ground,           Throughout              the

  period        I was          in    the       ground        I    had    no     idea      what       was       going    off       as     I    had

  become        separated             from       my s e r i a l .

  1 expected              that       shortly          after         entering          the      ground          full    use    would           be

  made     of       the    public          address           system,          in    an    effort          to       direct    rescue

  attempts           and       probab'iy         more        im portantly             inform         the       spectators           as       for

  nearly        an    hour          nobody       k n e w wha t , w a s          happening.                The       system    was        only

  used     once       and       that       was     to    inform          the       crowd       of    the       replay,       (apart           from

  a    short        message          from      Kenny D a l g l i s h . )

  It    would        have       been       particularly                 helpful          to    know w h e r e         medical

  assistance              was       available           as       we e n d e d      up w i t h       two    points       at    opposite

  ends     of       the    pitch.

REPORT
Incident            I1fJ      091297           OP9 3 1                     DOCUMENT RECORD P R I N T

                                                                                                   OFFICERS       REPORT NUMBER                R247

                                                                                                                                            S t a t i on

Surname                           P ATT ISO N

  o renames                       I AN        Ai. AST AI R

Ag e                                                                              Date        of    birth

A d d r e pp


Occupation                        POL S' Cl/ . HO

Tele phone

Number         of    Pages

D a t ed                          0305&9                                                                                                         Signed


                On S a t u r d a y        15 A p r i l ,         1989      (150469)           I    paraded       for    duty    at    Doncaster

                DUO a t       0830        hours.            I was       a member             of    serial       no.    28,    which    was

                supervised               by PS 2 4 0 8 W i l s o n           from       A1»

                Our        duty    as     a    seria)         was     to    work       in     Leppings          Lane,    Sheffield          manning

                the        barriers           which      were        placed       across           side    roads       along    Leppings          Lane

                to    prevent,           persons         attending           the       Notts.           Forest    v.    Liverpool          football

                match        from        entering           the      side    streets              around    the       stadium    at

                Hillsborough                  and   so      annoying         the       residents           or    causing       damage.

                1 had        been        detailed           to    work      with       PC H 6 4 4 R o b e r t s ,       from    A1,    at      the

                location           Leppings            Lane       junction         larndale              Road.

                Inspector           Selwood            of     ’ £*    Division          had        overall       c ommand o f        our    sector.

                After        the     briefing            at      Hillsborough                Stadium       we m a d e    our    way    to      our

                point,       and    at        about      1145        hours       placed           the    barriers       across       the    mouth      of

                the        road.

                At    this        time        there      were        persons       wh o w e r e          obviously       attending          the

                match        in    Leppings            Lane       but      they    were           well    behaved       and    not    large       in

                numbers„

                Neither           myself         nor     PC R o b e r t s        had     a    radio       and    to    the    best    of    my

                knowledge            only        PS W i l s o n       had    a    radio           within    our       serial.

                E}y a b o u t      1230        hours        large       numbers          of       persons       were    walking       d o wn
                                                                                                                                            PAGE
                                                                                                                                            R«47

Leppings            Lane       towards          the       stadium.           At     this         time       it    was       apparent          that

large        amounts           of    alcohol          were       being           consumed.             1 saw many                persons

carrying            bags,          packs       and    bottles          of    alcohol.                 It    was    a    sight          that

caused         me     to      feel       uneasy.           1 would          not     like         to    estim ate            the       number       of

people         wh o w e r e         drinking          f r o m P. 1 t r       bottles             as    well       as    carrying             other

full      ones        with         them.        1 would          say       that     from         where       I was          standing          to

the     stadium              gate    would          have    been       a walk          of    only          3 to    4 minutes,                which

in     my v i e w        meant       that       uni e s s       they       were     going         to       surrender             the    drink

at     the     stadium             gates,       people          were       going       to    consume             vast       amounts          of

a)roho)          in      a    very       short       space       of    time       and       at    this       time       I    feared          for

what     ma y       ensue,          although          the       scale       of    what       was       to    follow          did       not

cross        my mi n d . .

Some      of    the          crowd       began       to    drift       back        from      the       stadium          and        1 recall

being        asked           for    directions             to    pubs       and     clubs         nearby,          many          of    those

wh o a s k e d        for      directions             already          smelled          strongly             of    alcohol             and    some

were     warned              that    should          they       drink       any    more          they       would most                likely       be

refused         admission                to    the    game.

On e    group         in      particular             stands       out       in    my m i n d           having          asked          for

directions               to    the       "Club       that       put         on    scran          and beer         for       us    la s ttime".

Leppings            Lane       by    this       time       was    a mass          of    persons,             no    doubt          most       had

tickets         but          many    had       not    and       kept       asking       me       if    1    knew w h e r e            they

could        get      one      and       sales       of    tickets          were       obviously             taking          place          with

large        crowds           quickly          gathering          around          anyone          who       had    tickets             for    sale.

On t h e       corner          o f _______________________________________________________________________

                         and       the    lady       from       thehouse          c a me     out       to    us    to       tell       us     that

in     the     past          she    had       had    problems               with       persons u rin atin g

                    at       the    back       of    her    house.           Both       her       and       her    husband             then

kept     making              repeated          complaints             to    us    about          this       occurring.                 Qoth

myself         and       PC R o b e r t s       turned          from       our     point         to    watch       for       any       such

occurrences                  but    did       not    see    this       happening.
                                                                                                                                             PAGF.
                                                                                                                                             RH4 7

By 2 p m         (1400)          Leppings             Lane        was    full       and    the       wall          of    the    house        I    have

just        referred             to    was       full        of    people          drinking          from          cans/bottles              like

alcohol              was    going          out    of     fashion,             as    was    the



What        did       surprise             me w a s      the       lack       of    uniformed                officers          wh o w e r e

supervising                 the       fans       as    they        made       their       way    to          the       ground.         In    the

pa?-t       1 have          seen       fans       m arshalled                in    groups       in       a    far       more    orderly

manner.               However          I must          stress           that       most    people             were       at    this     time       in

good        humour,          but       it    was       just        the       vast    unsupervised                      numbers        that

caused           me    concern.

One     point          that       both       myself           and       PC R o b e r t s    passed                comment       on was           not

having           a    radio       between             us,     but       that       Special       Constables                   were     wandering

about        aim lessly               in    two's        or       three's          each    carrying                a    radio.         1 do       feel

most        strongly             about       this,           1 have          served       for    19 y e a r s            plus     in    the

force        a n d woul d,            hope       never        again          to    see    such       a       reckless          act     as    that

of     the       radios          performed             again.            1 do       not    belittle                the    Specials,              but

surely           trained          officers             of     many y e a r s         could       have             made    better        use       of

our     lim ited            radio          resources,

fclorne t i m e        just       after          Hpm ( 1 4 0 0 )         I was       detailed                by a C h i e f       Inspector,

wh o    I    did       not       know t o         go    and        stand                                                              behind       the

l a d y 8s       garden          to    stop       persons           urinating                                           that    1 have

already              mentioned,

1 did        feel          that       this       was     unnecessary                because          with          the    sheer        volume          of

persons,              many,       many       of       whom w e r e           well    intoxicated                   a PC o n       his       o wn w a s

vulnerable                 and    again          even       more        so    without       a    radio             and    the     crowds          were

so     massed          that       had       an    officer           got       into       trouble             no    one    would        have       been

able        to       see    the       fact       and        react       accordingly.                 Wh a t        further        made       this

exercise              seem       pointless             was        that       the    lady    wh o w a s             doing       all.    the

complaining                 must       have       had        to    have       been       watching             from       her     roof       top,

because              had    anyone          been       urinating                                         they          would    have        had
                                                                                                                                              PAGE        4
                                                                                                                                              RPA7

their       back         to    her     house      and          were        shielded                 from    her       house       windows          by



During         the       time     to      now t h e        only        contact                 we    h a d was        supervisory

officers          paying          what      visits             they        could           and       having       a    quick          chat.

At    what      1 would           estimate            to       be    perhaps               H.3 0         (1430)       to    P.85       <1 435)

there       was      a    lull       in    the    crowds             and        i      left          the                         and    reformed

PC R o b e r t s         in    FarndaJe          Road.'

At    about       H.45pm          (1445)         Leppings                  Lane became                    sheerhell ashoards                       of

drunken         mindless             ’fans*       arrived                  from nowhere                    headingfor the Leppings

Lane      end     of       the    ground.             There           is        no    doubt          i n my m i n d         that       of    the

perhaps                    thousand          people            wh o a p p e a r e d              from nowhere               90    per       cent

were      drunk          and     well      so.        Again          it     was        impossible                to    warn       anyone

further         into          Leppings          Lane       because              of     " No         radio       communications".

The      crowds          wh o w e r e      now f i l l i n g          the            area       were       truely          unruiey          and

behaving          in      a    disgraceful             manner,              when           i    tried       to    warn       several

persons         as       to    their       state       the          standard               reply          was    "Fuck       off"       and       had

an    arrest         tried        to      be ma d e        I    have        no        doubt          a    serious          public       order

situation            would        have      arisen.

During         this       period          1 do    honestly                 feel        that          the    officers             in    Leppings

Lane     were        at       great       risk    from          the        mo b who              were f i l l i n g         the       road.

S o me    of    the        elderly         people          from        Farndale                  Road we re           standing          behind

the      barriers             watching          the    mob a n d            their              comments          were       of    disgust          that

so    called         football             fans    could             behave            in       such       a manner.              The    general

behaviour            of       these       people       made          me f e e l            ashamed          to    think          that       should

they      follow          their        team a b ro a d              we ma y a l l               in       Fngland       be    judged          by

their       actions            and     behaviour,

At    kick      off       time       the     road      was          still            a mass          of    people          but    we    had       been

instructed               to    take       meals       in       ones        at        this       time       so    PC R o b e r t s       set       off

for      Olaywheels              Lane      to    have          his    meal.

He    had      been       gone       some       5 minutes             when            several             transit          loads       of
                                                                                                                                                  PAGE
                                                                                                                                                  RH47

officers             went    along          Lappings               Lane          towards            the    ground          and        PC R o b e r t s

reappeared.                 1 asked          h i m wh y            he       had       c o me     back      and       he    was        under        the

impression             that       there          was      a    fight             at    the       ground.             We s t a y e d         at    our

point          as    some    inspector                had      told          PC R o b e r t s         so       to    do.

Shortly             after    this       an       elderly            resident                of      the    area          ca me    to       us    and

to'Jd      us       that    she    had       just         heard             on       the    radio         that       someone           had       been

k i. 1 l e d    at    t he gr ound „

The      next        thing       1 saw was             emergency                     service         vehicles             of     all       types

heading             into    Leppings             Lane         towards                the    ground.             With       the        lack       of

communications,                   it    was       a    case         of       f o 1'.! ow t h e        last          order        so    PC R o b e r t s

and     myself         stayed          on    our       point.                The       old       lady      then          reappeared              and

said       that       she    had       just       put ,       her       TV o n a n d             that      several             people           were

dead       in       what    she    thought             had         been          a    pitch         invasion.

It    was       then       that    people             began         to       walk          up L e p p i n g s        Lane        away       from       the

ground          in    mass       numbers          and         some          of       them      at    first          stopped           to    tell       us

what       had       happened.              But       within            a    few m i n u t e s            of    this       the        mo o d     of    the

crowd          had    become       very          aggressive.                         Both      of    us    were          spit     upon and

verbally             abused,       some          wanted            to       fight          with      us    but       commonsense

dictated             that    we    stood          our         ground             and       prevented            them       from        entering

the      side        roads.        Of       those         who       spit             and    abused         us       we    did     not       answer

but     tried         to    assist          the       genuine               fans       wh o w e r e        shocked             and     wanting           to

ring       h o me     to    inform          the       relatives                  that       they      were          safe.

It    must          have    cost       the       residents                  of       Farndale         Road a             considerable

amount          of    money       in    allowing               genuinely                   worried         fans          the     use       of    their

phones.

At    one       stage       we    had       to    let         a man a n d              his       wife      wh o w a s          pregnant            into

Farndale             Road and          into       one         of    the          houses          because            the    mindless              drunks

had      recognised              that       they       were         locals             with         the    shopping              they       were

carrying             and    were       badly          abusing               them.

Although             1 had       reservations                  at       the          earlier         stage          of    the     day       .1 f e l t      a
                                                                                                                                                           PAGE            is
                                                                                                                                                           R c 'A V

            the     crowd       left        the        ground           that          we w e r e     at    any       time       likely          to    be

            asf-aul t e d «

            The     worft       part         of     the       departing                crowd        for    me w a s        w h e n a man             ca me       to

            me a n d      said       he     had        not        been          able     to    find       his       young       son.        I       had    to

            tell     him    that           1 had         no       radio          and     could       not    directly             assist             him    in

            contacting           the        ground,               he    was       at     first       and    understandably                      abusive              but

            then     apologised                and       was       at       crying        point.           Fortunately                there          was     a       dog

            van     over    the          road       and       I    took          him     to    this       for       help       via    the       radio.

            1 cannot        pass           comment            cm t h e           following           points          because          1 did          not     see

            or    take     part          :i.n t h e m .

            1.      The    actions             of      the        stewards,              or    the    actual             incident          and       rescue

            operation           in       the      ground.

            H„      As    for    breakdown                in       communications                    as    at       No.    b    there       was       for        us

            no    communications                    at    all.

            1 felt        and    still            do     very          angry          that     1 was       unable          to    assist             the

            injured        a n d my         colleagues                  in       the     ground       because             until       it    was       too        Late

            we    did     not    know w h a t             had          happened,              all    in    all       I    felt       that       I    had     been

            left     out    as       a    spare          part.              I    have     not       yet    forgotten             that       day       and        I    do

            not     suppose          the       feelings                of       the    event        will    ever          go.

            Eventually           along            with        PC R o b e r t s           when a l l        was       quiet       we w a l k e d           with        PS

            Pearson        from          A£ a n d        other          odd       officers           whom       I    do    not       know       to

            Claywheels           Lane          where          we       eventually              regrouped             and       were    transported

            back     to    DHO d i s m i s s i n g                at    7 . 4! i pm      (1945).

END O f   REPORT'
In c id e n t        110       091H9V       0P931                     DOC UMENT      R EC OR D P R 1 NT

                                                                                          OFFICERS             REPORT      NUMOER            R6eL

                                                                                                                                           S ta t ion

 Surname                        SMI r n

 F o r e name?

 Age                                                                         Date    of    birth

Address


Occupation                      POL    PC 1 9 3 4

T e 1e phone

Number          of    Pages

Dated                           rte(J4fc9                                                                                                       S i gned


                 LI VERPOOL V.            NOTTS FOREST F . A .               CUP

                 SATURDAY,          1 5 APRI L       19&9

                 REPORT BY PC             1 9 3 4 SMI TH        (SERIAL 3 1 )



                 I    report     that       1 am c u r r e n t l y       stationed        at        A. H T h o r n e      Sub D i v i s i o n          on

                 beat       duties     at    Thorne        and       H atfield.

                 At    8.45     am o n S a t u r d a y ,        15th     April      1989,       I    c a me     on d u t y    at      Doncaster

                 Divisional           Headquarters              and    was    transported,                with     other       officers,               to

                 Hillsborough             Football         Stadium          for    briefing          in    the     main      stand         at     9.30       am

                 that       date.

                 I    was    a member        of     PS P e a r s o n s      details,      Serial           31,      our    duty       being        to

                 supervise          crowd      control          at    the    roundabout             at    the     junction         of      Leppings

                 Lane       and P e n isto n e       Road       with     specific         regard          to    the    L.i v e r p o o 1

                 supporters           coming        to    the    ground       from    the       coach          park    and    Wadsley

                 Bridge        railway       station.

                 At    11.00     am t h a t       date,        with    my s e r i a l ,    )    took       up     this      point.

                 Through        the    morning,           supporters          arrived          and       all    appeared        in      jovial

                 mood,       looking        forward        to    the     match.       There          was       no a n i m o s i t y     as      far     as

                 I    could     detect       from        the    supporters          and    everything              appeared           to     be    a

                 normal       F.A.     Cup S e m i - F i n a l .
In    fact,       everything                    appeared            to    be     the    same        as      .Last, y e a r s           sim ilar

fixture,          a match              that       I was         also        on    duty       for       at     a    sim ilar            point.

The    day     continued                   :i.n m u c h     the      same        way,       and     it      appeared              as    though            the

game     was      going           to       be w e l l       attended             by    good       natured              football          supporter

X saw       nothing           to       suggest            any       problems           at    this        time,          except          the    odd

fan    being        stopped                b y a I’o J i c e         O fficer          and     told         to     leave          any    cans        of

beer     behind.              I    could          see       some         fans     sitting           on w a l l s            and    drinking

their       cans,        but       nothing             to      suggest           problems           and       it       was    only       the

occasional              fan.           I    had       not      cause       to     speak       to       anyone           except          to    give

directions              or    assistance                  as    to       where        the    various              entrances             were       at

the    ground.

By 3 . 0 0     pm t h e           crowds          corning           down P e n i s t o n e          Road          to    the       ground       had

subsided          to     a mere             trickle            of    fans,        all       still        in       good       humour          and

causing        no       problems,                certainly               no m o r e     than        100       people          and       they       were

spread       out        as    though             they       had a r r i v e d          late       in     private             cars.

At    this     time,          because             there         were        no    more       crowds,              our       serial       with

PS P e a r s o n ,       began             to    make       our      way        back    to    the        ground.

It, w a s    at     this          time,          approximately                   3.03       pm t h a t        we w e r e          directed

by    radio       to     assist             with       crowd         problems           at    the        Leppings             Lane       entrance

to    the    ground.

By a p p r o x i m a t e l y           3.10       pm we a r r i v e d             at    the       metal           gates       at       the

Leppings          Lane        entrance,                where         I    could        see    a     cordon             of    Police          O fficers

but    very       few        supporters.                    We w e r e          directed          to     assist             here,       but    at

this     time       I    could             see    no      reason          for     the       cordon.

A few m i n u t e s            later,            it    became            clear        that    a     serious             incident             was

taking       place           inside             the    ground.              I    saw    several             fans        being          escorted            by

Police       Officers              from          the      ground,         by     the    turnstiles.

I    could     see       by       their          faces         that       they        were     in      great           distress          and       i.t,

became       obvious              that          they      were       not        being       arrested              but       assisted          by

Police,           At     this          time       I    heard         the        announcement                that        a    serious          problem
 •
                                                                                                           PAGE.           3
                                                                                                                                                                  R62


             had    occurred              inside         the    ground             and       that      several             people          were          injured,

             ambulances              had      been       requested                and     1 was        directed                by a n       Inspector,

             whom I. do          not       know,         to    go    down t h e              service            road       at       the    rear          of       the

             south        stand       to      assist          ambulances                to    and      from          the       ground.

             T. w e n t    down       the         service       road          and       with      the       help       of       some       fans          and       other

             officers,           we m o v e d        one       or    two          parked        vehicles              so       that       the    service

             road     was       clear,

             1 d id       not    have         a    persona)          radio          issued            to    me a n d           so    I went          to       the

             control         box      at      the    side       of       the       south        stand           and    informed             them          that          the

             service         road         was      clear       for       ambulance              and        emergency                service          vehicles.

             I    suggested           that         ambulances                should          c o me    in       from       Leppings             Lane          and

             that     they       should            leave       via       Penistone              Roa d, a n d          thus          keeping          a    smooth

             flow.         S o me a m b u l a n c e s          stopped             at    the     Police              Control          entrance                to    the

             ground        and       loaded         victims          from          this       point,            but    for          the    most          part       the

             ambulances              c a me       from    Leppings                Lane,

             I    remained           at    this      location                to    ensure         the       free       passage             of    emergency

             vehicles           and       assisted            one    or       two       injured            fans       with          first       aid       where          1

             could        and    helped            them       into       waiting             ambulances.

             It    would        be    about         3.30       pm w h e n          I was        eventually                 stood          down       from          this

             duty     and       1 then            returned          to       the    main        stand           for    debriefing                at       6.00          pm.

             1 did        not    see       any      gates       opened,             nor       did      I    see       any       surge       in       crowd

             numbers         prior         to      the    kick       off,          except         for       a    few       late       comers,                 I    saw

             nothing        that          would      suggest             a    sudden          influx            of    supporters                at       3,00       pm,

HM)   Of   REPORT
         NF I R M R T I ON     REPORT       *«    fiS   OF     5   DEC   ’ 97   15:56   P A G E . 01




T I ME                       0 / F ROf v!        MODE        MIN/SEC     P GS     STATUS
15:4                           017 12732007      G3— S        13"05      35        OK
       *   *   TX   C 0 N F I R MA T I 0 N     R E P 0 RT   * *     AS OF     5   DEC   ’ 97   1S : 0 2   P A G E , 01




     DATE      TIME                   TO/FROM                      MODE     MIN/SEC     P GS      STATUS
01   IS/ 5     15:57                         0 17 12 7 3 2 0 0 7   G3 — S    0 4 ” 38   12         OK
                                                            Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire                               50 Windsor Road


              POLICE                                        Heeley
                                                            SHEFFIELD
              JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                            S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                S*

                 ^                           S c ru Jt? ^

For the attention of:

Comments:
                                    UoV'


                                                1st* 2.
                                           « np c-/eX « ^




                                                                     i-




From:

Telephone Numbs
                        CMtU l%tCo ^ 7
 Number of Pages (including this page)                       LV

 In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
 South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
 Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Interna! Extension 3002
In c id e n t         110      05-1 2 -9 7                 0P931               Screen             p rin t        -- t e r m i n a l          014        -    P lu s       code         -+QE

                             **•«•■»•#*•*#■*■« ****■»•■»■ #*■# ##-■«•*#*#-St-a-H~!S #***■*■« * •» •* # * * * # # * * # * ■« #*#■»■*#•#■■»■#
                                               DOCUMEN I" QUEUE E N T R IE S                                        SCREEN 1 1 , 4
    E N Q U I R I E S ON ' GUEST i OIMNA 1R f                       GUEUE TYPE NO “I READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO               DAYS                RESUME
   OOP 1                                10- - 0 5 - - 8 9       GROOME
   GOG 1                    *#          0 4 - - 0 7 --8 9       OALRYMPLE
   QOR1                                  17-- 0 5 - - 8 9       LONG
    G 0R2                   **           1 8 - -o s - - 8 9     STOREY
    QOR 3                                18- 0 5 - - 8 9        F 10REH1RST
    G 0R4                   **           18-•05- -89            HALL
    QOR 5                    •8--K-      18-- 0 3 - - 8 9       HUDSON
    QOR 6                                18--05--89             GODLEY
    QOR 7                    **          18--0 5 - -8 9         TURNER
    G 0R8                                1 8 - - 0 5 - -89      ROTCHELL
    QOR 9                    **          1 8 ---05- ■■ft 9      COX
    QOR 10                               1S--•05-- -8 9 p i r r
    QOR 1 -1                -Sf-H        1 8 - - 0 5 - - 8 9 JACKSON
    QOR 1 2                 •H-tt        18- •05- - 0 9 PURSLEY
    QOR 13                  *-3f         1 8 - - 0 5 - - 8 9 WALKER

  ENTER P            TO P R I N T QUEUE

* ** # *•« ■* ■*■«          -Sf-'S-H* * • * * * ■ # • * ■ » ■ * » * * * # ■ » ' * * # # « # * # * * * * * ■ » • * * ■ » * * ■ # • » # * # ■ « « * * * # ■ & # * * * • # ■ * # * # * # * * * ■ # • *
In c id e n t   110       05-1 2 -9 7           OP9 3 1           Screen   p rin t   -   te rm in a l   014   -- P l u s   code   +QE

                         **■«-*****■«■ *** * * * * **■« # * # * # * **##**•«■      #*##■«■#•«•#•»•#*#*■«■*********#
                                          DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S                            SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   E N Q U I R I E S ON Q U ESTIO N N A IR ES                     QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS             RESUME
  QOR 1 4              •S'-Jt-   1ft-- 0 5 - 8 9     DUDLEY
  QOR 15                         18- - 0 5 - 8 9     WHITAKER
  QOR 1 6               *#        18-- - 0 3 - 8 9   C H IL D S
  QOR 1 7                        18- - 0 5 - 8 9     MCLOUGHLIN
  QOR I S                        18- - 0 5 —8 9      LONG
  QOR 19                         18- - 0 5 - 8 9     WOODWARD
  QOR 2 0                        18-- 0 5 - 8 9      AST IN
  QOR 21                         18 - - 0 5 - 8 9    WOOD
  Q0R22                 ■H'#     CC‘- 0 5 - 8 9      WEST
  QOR 2 3               it#      2 2 -- 0 5 - 8 9    THORNTON
  QOR 2 4               #*•      22-- 0 5 - 8 9      drew i n
  QOR 2 5                        2 2 - - 0 5 ..8 9   CAWKWFI I
  QOR 2 6               «•#      22-- 0 5 - 8 9      COUSI N
  QOR 2 7               it*      22- - 0 3 - 8 9     TEMPLE
  QOR 2 8               *#       22-- 0 3 - 8 9      GI LL OTT

 ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE

# **# # # ## #*# ## ■#*# #*                                                      *# ■# # **# # # *# ****■# ****# # # *# *****■« ■*■« *
In c id e n t   110       03-1 2 -9 7                           0P931                        Screen                  p rin t                   -     te rm in a l                      014               -       P lu s      code   +QE

                      ■   *   *   *   *   #   #   #   *   -a # * • » • » • * ■ ■ »   ■ #   * * * * #   #   #   ■ * * #   #   #   #   • #   #   a   - * #   #   #   #   #   * #   * #   ■ *   *   *   #   #   *   *   *   #


                                      DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN. 1 1 . 4
   E N Q U I R I E S ON QUE STIONIMAIREt.»        QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS                      RESUME
  QOR 2 9                                 2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 WI LLI AMSON
  QOR 3 0              ■H-#               2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 MCGUINNESS
  QOR 31                                  2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 STOKES
  QOR 3 2              **                 2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 NETTL..ESH.CP
  00R33                •«*                2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 FLETCHER
  QOR 3 4                                 2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 WOODCOCK
  QOR 3 3                                 2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 BATTY
  Q0R36                •S’*               2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 J ESSOP
  QOR 3 7              #■»                2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 ABRAHAMS
  Q0R38                                   2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 PEARS
  Q0R39                                   2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 MARSHALL.
  QOR 4 0                                 2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 EDWARDS
  (3OR 41                                 2 2 - Q 3 - - 8 9 WELCH
  Q0R42               •H-#                2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 WES T
  QOR 4 3                                 2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 HOYI..AND

 ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE
    In c id e n t                            110                         05-1 2 -9 7                                     0P931                           Screen                      p rin t              — term in al.                               014             -       P iu s                  code                +QE

                                                                                        #•» * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                   DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S               SCREEN 1 1 . 4
             E N Q U I R I E S ON Q UEST IO N NAIR ES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

     DOCUMENT NO                                                 DAYS                          RESUME
      QOR 4 4                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 MARPLES
      QOR 4 3                                                     **                     22--05---8 9 THOMPSON
      Q0R46                                                       **                     2 3 —0 5 - 8 9 STOREY
      QOR 4 7                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 WEBB
      QOR 4 8                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 3 - 8 9 TUNE
      QOR 4 9                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 MACKAY
      QOR 5 0                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 TEW
      QOR 51                                                      **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 YARDY
      QOR 5 2                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 GRAY
      QOR 5 3                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 ANDREWS
      QOR 5 4                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 lr ROGGATT
      QOR 5 5                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 SKIDMORE
      Q0R56                                                       **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 LAVER1CK
      Q0R57                                                       **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 SIMPSON
      QOR 5 8                                                     **                     2 2 - 0 5 - 8 9 JACQUES

     ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE

*    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   ■   *   •   »   *   *   *   *   *    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *
In c id e n t          1.10         0 5 —1 2 —9 7             0P931             Screen           p rin t      — te rm in a l            014      -- P l u s       code       +QE



                                        DOCUMENT' QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN                                                                                    11.4
    E N Q U I R I E S ON QUES TI ONNAI RES           QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                   DAYS                  RESUM?"
   Q0R59                                      2.2- - 0 5 -  -89   SANDERSON
   QOR 6 0                                   22- - 0 3 - •89      LQUGHGR
   QOR 6 1                        ■h-h       2 2 .' ..0 5 - -89   SUTCL. I F F F.
   QOR 6 2                        **         22- *-05-•89         LOWE
   QOR 6 3                                   PE'- 0 5 - -S9       HOI...LAND
   QOR 6 4                        #*         22-- 0 3 - •89       L I A S ID E S
   G.0R65                                    2 3 - - 0 5 - -8 9   S(3U 1RLS
   Q0R66                                     23-- 0 3 - ■89       HI L L
   QOR 6 7                                   24- - 0 5 - -89      WEST
   QOR 6 8                        *#         24- - 0 5 - ■89      BAI NES
   Q0R69                                     24-- 0 5 - ■8 9      AGAR
   QOR 7 0                                   25*- 0 3 - ■8 9      SLACK
   QOR 71                         *#         2 3 - - 0 5 - •89    DOWLING
   QOR 7 2                        **         26*- 0 5 - ■89       WADSWORTH
   00R73                                     26-- 0 5 - •89       HI RST

  ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE

* # # * ■* * # * # # ■» ■# ■* * # ■* * ■* # # * # ■# # ■# * # * ■■* # ■* # * ■■* ■* * ■■* ■* # # * ■* ■* * * # * # # * * # * * * ■* ■# * ■* ■* # # * * ■* * * * ■* * * * * * * * * # * *
In c id e n t   110     03-12-9/           0P931        Screen    p rin t   -   te rm in a l   014   -   P lu s   code    +QE



                                        DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN                                   11.4
   E N Q U I R I E S ON Q U ESTION NA IR ES         QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS             RESUME
  QOR 7 4                       2.6-- 0 5 - -89 GLESON
  QOR 75                        2 6 - ■ 0 5 - ■8 9 PLUMRI OGE
  QOR 7 6                       2 6 - - 0 5 - -8 9 HARR ATT
  Q0R77                         2 6 - - 0 3 - ■8 9 C L I F T ON
  QOR 7 8             #*        2 6 - 0 5 - -ft 9 HARTSMORNE
  QOR 7 9             **        2 6 - - 0 5 - 8 9 8U I L.ER
  QOR SO                        2 6 - - 0 5 - -89 BROOKSHAW
  QOR 31                        2 6 - - 0 5 - ■8 9 SIMMS
  QOR 8 2                       2 6 “- 0 5 - ■8 9 P U R VI S
  QOR 8 3                       2 6 - • 0 5 - ■89 SMITH
  Q0RS4                •#•*     2 6 - - 0 5 - •89 W3LD
  QOR 8 5                       2 6 - • 0 5 - •89 WEEKS
  00R86                         2 6 - - 0 5 - •89 WADSWORTH
  QOR 8 7             #*        S I - 0 5 - •89 MARTIN
  QOR 8 8                       3 1 - - 0 5 - ■8 9 FOSTER

 ENTER     P TO P R I N T     QUEUE
In c id e n t                               CIO                          05-12-97                                    OP9 3 1                   Screen         p rin t         -    te rm in a l           014        -      P iu s           code            -+QE



                                               DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN                                                                                                                                                             11.4
        E N Q U I R I E S ON Q U ESTIO N N A IR ES         QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

    DOCUMENT NO                                             DAYS                               RESUME
     QOR 8 9                                                 #•»-                        O i - O S - 8 9 NT ELD
     Q0R90                                                   #«•                         31 - - 0 - 5 - 8 9 ROCHE
     QOR 91                                                  *■*                         31 - 0 5 - 8 9 DOLAN
     QOR 9 2                                                 *•»                         3 1 - 0 3 - 8 9 SNOWDON
     QOR 9 3                                                 #*                          31 - 0 5 - 8 9 TAYLOR
     Q0R94                                                   **                          31 - 0 5 - 8 9 GIBSON
     Q0R95                                                   ■S-H                        3 1 - 0 5 - 8 9 CROPLEY
     Q0R96                                                                               3 1 - ■■0 5 - 8 9 FL. ATMAN
     Q0R9?                                                                               31 - 0 5 - 8 9 GRI FF I THB
     QOR 9 8                                                        5f«-                 31 - - 0 5 - 8 9 SHEER IEN
     QOR 9 9                                                                             31 - 0 5 - 8 9 THOMAS
     QOR1 0 0                                                                            31 - 0 5 - 8 9 HAGUE
     QOR1 0 1                                                       H-H-                 31 - - 0 5 - 8 9 CHARTERS
     QOR1 0 2                                                                            01 - 0 6 - 8 9 GR I F F I T HS
     QOR1 0 3                                                       •ft#                 0 1 - 0 6 - 8 9 HARRI S

    ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE

i   t   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   '   *   *   *   #    *   *   *   *   *   #   *   *   *   *   *   * • * # * • •«•■« *   #   #   *   *   *   - H - # * * * * * * * * * # # * * # * * - H - H - H - S H i   « ■ ■ « ■ • « • * # * * ■ » ■ # * • # * • « • # # *
In c id e n t   110       05-1 3 -9 7             OP 9 3 1   Screen   p rin t   -   term in al.   014   -   P iu s   code    +-QE



                                          DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S             SCREEN                                   11.4
   E N Q U I R I E S ON Q U ESTIO N N A IR ES         GUEUF TYPE NOT READY l-OR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS              RESUME
  QOR1 0 4             # #        0 1 -0 6 -8 9       LODGE
  QOR1 0 5             * *        0 1 -0 6 -8 9       HAYWOOD
  ©OR 1 0 6            * *        0 1 -0 6 -8 9       HARWOOD
  QOR1 0 7                        0 1 ... 0 6 - 8 9   A I TCHISON
  QOR1 0 8             •M *       0 1 -0 6 -8 9       GREENWAY
  QOR1 0 9             •» »       0 2 -0 6 -8 9       JACKSON
  QOR1 1 0             ■ft*       03 -0 6 -8 9        LAWSON
  QOR 1 11                        03 -0 6 -8 9        DEVLI N
  QOR1 1 2             # #        0 5 -0 6 -8 9       HIGHVON
  QOR1 1 3             SS--H-     0 5 -0 6 -8 9       WHEATLEY
  QOR 1 1 4                       0 3 -0 6 -8 9       BRADLEY
  QOR 1 1 5                       0 5 -0 6 -8 9       R iMMER
  QOR 1 1 6            * #        0 3 -0 6 -8 9       DENTON
  QOR 1 1 7           * *         0 3 -0 6 -8 9       PONT
  QOR 1 1 6            * *        0 3 -0 6 -8 9       WEBSTER

 ENTER     P TO P R I N T       QUEUE
In c id e n t   110     O S - 12--97      QP931         Screen      p rin t   -■   te rm in a l   014   -   P lu s   code    +Qt£



                                      DOCUMENT" QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN                                       11.4
   F..NGUIR 3 ES ON Q U ESTIO N N A IR ES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL,

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS           RESUME
  Q 0 R 1 19           *#     0 5 - -06- - 8 9 CHURMS
  QOR1 2 0                    0 3 - -06-- 8 9 CHERRY
  QOR1S1              **      0 5 - -06-- 8 9 O G I L V I E
  QOR1 2 2            #*      0 5 - -06- - 8 9 WI LKES
  QOR1 2 3            **      0 5 “•-06-- 8 9 BUCKLEY
  QOR1 2 4            #*      0 5 - -06-- 8 9 CLARKE
  QOR1 2 5            •»*     0 5 - -06-- 8 9 HJ N C HC L I F F E
  QOR1 2 6                    0 5 - 06- - 8 9 SPOONER
  QOR1 2 7             **     0 5 - •06-- 8 9 WI LLI AMSON
  QOR1 2 8                    0 5 - 0 6 -- 8 9 TURNER
  QOR1 2 9                    0 3 - -06- -8 9 BROWN
  QOR1 3 0                    0 5 - •06-- 8 9 LEECH
  QOR1 31                     0 3 - -06-- 8 9 P AT T I S ON
  QOR1 3 2            **      0 5 - -06-- 8 9 HALLETT
  QOR1 3 3            **      0 3 - -06-- 8 9 DEARDEN

 ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE
In cid en t,       110        05-1E -97            OP9 3 1        Screen        p rin t    -   te rm in a l     014    -   P lu s    code     +QE



                                    DOCUMENT Queue E N T R I E S            SCREEN                                                          11.4
   E N Q U I R I E S ON QUESTIONNAIRE' S        QUEUE TYPE NOT READY TOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO             DAYS               RESUME
   QOR1 3 4                ■H#       0 3 —06”-8 9 ROSEVEAR
   QOR1 3 3                 •M#      03-- 0 6 - •89 SOWERBY
   QOR 136                           0 5 - 0 6 - 8 9 BERN ATI, IC
   QOR1 3 7                          03-- 0 6 - ■89. BAIRSTOW
   QOR1 3 8                 ■a*      0 3 - 0 6 - •89 P R I C E
   QOR1 3 9                          0 3 '- 0 6 - •89 WARD
   QOR1 4 0                 ■a*      0 3 ' - 0 6 - •89 CHAPMAN
   QOR141                            0 3 -0 6 - •89 HA! .LE f T
   GOR1 4 2                          0 3 ' - 0 6 - -89 GARNL-.R
   QOR1 4 3                 -Si-#    03- - 0 6 - ■89 SEWELL
   QOR1 4 4                          0 5 ' - 0 6 - ■8 9 MARSHALL
   QOR1 4 3                          05-- 0 6 - 89 DRABBLE
   QOR1 4 6                 #-s-     03-- 0 6 - ■8 9 CODLING
   QOR1 4 7                 **       03-- 0 6 - 8 9 MYERS
   QOR1 48                  **       03- - 0 6 - •89 BROWN

 ENTER P TO PRINT" QUEUE

t t * # * * * * # * * * * # * # # * * * * * # * * * * * * * * * # * * * * * * * - * * * * * * * * * * * * * # '* * * # '* * # **********#**#•*•**•»••»*
    In c id e n t                            I'10                    05-~1»?-97                              0P931                            Screen                          p rin t              ~           te rm in a l                         014         -       P lu s              code                     +QE

    **                   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ■* * ■* a - # * * * * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                       DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 1 .4
             EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

     DOCUMENT NO                                             DAYS                        RESUME
      QOR1 4 9                                                **                  0 5 - -06---89 STEPHENS
      QOR1 5 0                                                **                  0 5 - 06-- 8 9 CRUTTENDEN
      QOR1 5 1                                                **                  0 5 - 06- -8 9 LONG
      QOR1 5 2                                                **                  0 3 - •06-- 8 9 COLLEY
      QOR1 3 3                                                *•*                 0 3 - ■06-- 8 9 MORLEDGE
      QOR1 3 4                                                **                  0 3 - •06- -89 SIMONS
      QOR1 3 5                                                **                  0 3 - -06- -8 9 OUGHTON
      QOR1 5 6                                                **                  0 5 - 06-- 8 9 E L L I S
      QOR1 3 7                                                **                  0 3 - 06-- 8 9 MOTTRAM
      QOR1 3 8                                                **                  0 3 - 06-- 8 9 WILLIAMSON
      QOR1 3 9                                                **                  0 3 - •06'- 8 9 PERKINS
      QOR1 6 0                                                H*                  0 5 “■06- - 8 9 HEWITT
      QOR1 6 1                                                **■                 0 3 - •06-- 8 9 H i LES
      QOR1 6 2                                                **                  0 3 - •06“- 8 9 MOUNTFORD
      QOR1 6 3                                                **                  0 6 - -06-- 8 9 DAI..EY

     ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

*    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   * • *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   * * •   *   *   *   *    *   *   *   *   *
In c id e n t    1.10         OS—1 2 —9 7              0P931                Screen             p rin t         -      term in al.            014        — Plus            code         +QE

                «-»•* ** *# ** «   h■« * • » • # * * • » • * * -a a ' * * * # * # - * * * - * * - * - * * * # * #   ■* * * •■« ■» •# •» ■» ■■» •■» ■■» * * # * # # •» •* * * •» * # * * * ■# ■# ■* *
                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    INQUIRIES ON QUEST 10NNA1RF.S         QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO            DAYS              RESUME
  QOR1 6 4                          0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 HIRST
  QOR1 6 5                          0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 GEARY
  QOR1 6 6                •HH       0 6 - 0 6 - 6 9 MUGGI .LIS TONE
  QOR1 6 7                S-S!-     0 6 —0 6 - 8 9 RtEVfcS
  QOR1 6 8                **■       0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILL. IAMSON
  QOR1 6 9               •»*        0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 COOK
  QOR1 7 0                          0 6 - 0 6 - 6 9 YARROW
  QOR1 7 1               * •*       0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 8RICKLEY
  QOR1 7 2                          0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 INNES
  QOR1 7 3               •»*        0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 SAPSFORD
  QOR1 7 4                          0 6 - 0 6 - 6 9 I ! I SLOP
  QOR1 7 3                          0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 HYDES
  QOR1 7 6                « •*      0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 III {OWN
  QOR1 77                           0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 NOTTINGHAM
  QOR17S                            0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 REES

 ENTER     P    TO P R I N T      QUEUE
In c id e n t   1.10      O S-12-97         OF9 3 1     Screen   p rin t   -   term in al   014   P iu s   code   +QE



                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL.

 DOCUMENT NO           DAYS             RESUME
  QOR1 7 9              •H-'H     0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 STAN IF'ORTH
  QOR1SO                          0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOLDER NlTSS
  QOR "IH 1                       0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 IJELL.
  QOR1 8 2                        0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 BAGNAL.L
  QOR1 8 3                        0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILSON
  QOR1 8 4              •H-H-     0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 LUND
  QOR18 S                         0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 HUGFiLS
  QOR1 8 6              *■»       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HORN
  QOR1 8 7              •HH       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HIRST
  QOR1 8 8              *#        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BARNES
  QOR1 8 9              *■»       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HILLYER
  QOR1 9 0                        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARTIN
  QOR191                ■H#       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROWBOTHAM
  QOR1 9 2              **        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROBERTS
  QOR1 9 3              **        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MORGAN

 ENT ER    P TO P R I N T       QUEUE
In c id e n t         110           05-12-97                OP9 3 1         Screen          p rin t      -    te rm in a l       014      -   P iu s      code      +QE



                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                    SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUt-Uf- TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                 DAYS               RESUME
   QOR1 9 4                                0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MAK1 N
   QOR1 9 5                      H -#      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 TATLOW
   QOR1 9 6                      -HH-      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 B TAGG
   QOR1 9 7                                0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 CARROLL,
   QOR1 9 8                      * #       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 W1LSON
   QOR1 9 9                                0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 TRKiG
   Q0R200                        * *       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HONE
   QOR2 0 1                                0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HUTCHINSON
   QORHO2                                  0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BAITY
   Q0R203                       -H-Si-     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 RICHARDS
   QOR2 0 4                      -H--H-    0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BAKER
   Q0R205                       ##         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 LISTER
   Q0R206                        * •£      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WAIN
   QOR2 0 7                      H--H-     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 QAIYUM
   QOR20&                        •H-H-     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 DAY

  ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* # • * * # # # * # # * # •» ■* * # * # # # * # * # * # * * * * * * * # * # * * * * * # # * # # # ■# ■* * # # * # * * # * * * * # * * * * * •» •* # •* ■•* •* * * # # * # ■•* ■
In c id e n t   110     O S-12-97          0P931      Screen   p rin t   -   te rm in a l   014   -   P lu s   code   +Q£



                                      DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                   SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   L N G U i i n E S OiM QUES TIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY i-OR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS              RESUME
  Q0R209               *#         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 SHIEL
  Q0R210                          0 7 —0 6 —8 9 BALL
  QOR2 1 1             •H-H       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WYER
  QOR2 1 2                        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 LANGDALE
  Q0R213               •H #       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BELL
  Q0R214               * *        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 PARFITT
  GQR21                •H-tt      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 JENK1NSON
  Q0R216               a-*        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 SCOTT
  Q0R217               •H-H-      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WHEAT
  QOR2 1 8             -H--H-     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 RODGERS
  QOR2 1 9             -H--S-     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 SOMERSET
  QOR2 2 0             H--H-      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MITCHELL.
  Q 0U 22 1            •H *       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARSHALL
  QOR2 2 2             •H-H-      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILLIAMS
  QOR2 2 3                        0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WALLACE

 ENTER     P TO P R I N T       QUEUE
In c id e n t       110         05-12-97              0P931           Screen        p rin t     -    te rm in a l     014      -   P iu s    code      +QE

# # * " » ^ ^ # # * * # * # # * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * -a--a-*##*** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                        DOCUMEN T QUEUE ENTRIES                                                       SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    ENQUIRIES ON Q UES110N NAIRFS                                               QUEUE TYPE NOV READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO                DAYS              RESUME
  Q0R224                     *»         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 LAW
  QOR2 2 3                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HUNT
  Q0R226                     **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WEBSTER
  Q0R227                     **         0 7 —0 6 —8 9 ALLEN
  Q0R228                     **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 EMMERSON
  QOR2 2 9                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WHITE
  Q0R230                     **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BURGESS
  QOR2 3 1                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BUNTING
  QOR£ 3 2                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 L AT H
  QOR2 3 3                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MILNER
  G0R234                     **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARPLEB
  QOR2 3 3                   #*         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 RADLEY
  QOR2 3 6                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 RICHARDSON
  QOR2 3 7                   **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 CAWTMOHNE
  Q0R238                     **         0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 EDWARDS

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * S '* * * # * # # * # * * * * * # * * * * # * * * # * # # * # # * * # # # * # # * # # * * * * * # # * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
I nci de nt                             I '10      0 3 -1 2 - 9 7   OP9 3 1             Screen     p rin t            — term in al                  014        — P lus             code         +QE

# # # ■}
                                    DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
        ENQUIRIES ON QUES '1 10NNA1RE B         QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

    DOCUMENT NO                                 DAYS            RESUME
     QOR2 3 9                                    * *      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 LIGHTFOOT
     Q0R240                                      # *      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HALL
     QOR£ 4 1                                    •H *     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOLDER NP.SB
     Q0R242                                      •Si*     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MYERS
     Q0R243                                      * *      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 RADi.EY
     QOR2 4 4                                    **       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 WEBSTER
     Q0R24S                                      **■      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 SHELTON
     Q0R246                                     •H *      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 ZALAD
     Q0R247                                      *•*      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARTIN
     QOR2 4 8                                    **       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 SWEET-
     Q0R249                                               0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BULL IV ANT
     Q0R2S0                                     * *       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 STEVENS
     QOR2 5 1                                    * *      0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOWE
     QOR2 5 2                                   * *       0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 BINGHAM
     Q0R2S3                                      •H-H     0 7 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROCH

    ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

#   #   #   #   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *                                 * *   -        s h s -h   -h - ss i i - a * * ■ « * * « • # * • » • # * * * ■ # # * # ■ # * * # * * * # # # * # * * • « ■ • » •
In c id en t   110       05-1 2 -9 /     OP9 3 1    Screen   o rin t   — term in al   014   — P lu s   code    +QE



                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN                                   1 1 .4
   ENQUIRIES ON QUES TIONNAIRKS ■        QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO         DAYS             RESUME
  Q0K254                        0 ? ..0 6 .. 8 9 HOUSE
  QOR2 5 3            **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WARRILOW
  Q0R256              ■n»       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BATEMAN
  QOR2 5 7            M-*       0 8 —1.16—8 9 PARKIN
  QOR2 5 8            #■»■      0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 MITCHELL
  QOR2 5 9            #*        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 CRAN
  QOR2 6 0            *■#       0 8 —0 6 —8 9 DUCKHR
  QOR2 6 1            *#        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 NH S8IT
  QOR2 6 2                      0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 LY'THALL
  Q0R263             * *        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 HODGKINSON
  G0R264              •a#       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 JONES
  QOR2 6 5           •H-H-      0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOMER
  Q.0R266             •H■ *     0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 J ONE'S
  QOR2 6 7           •H--H-     0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 RYMER
  QOR2 6 8            •H-H      0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BROWN

 ENT ER   P TO P R I N T      QUEUE
In c id e n t        I "10       05-12-97               QP931           Screen         p rin t     ~    te rm in a l      014      ~   P lus      code      -^-QE

•H-H «       * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN                                                                               1 1 ,4
    ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                DAYS              RESUME
   Q0R269                     *•*        0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILSON
   Q0R270                     **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BROWN
   Q 0R 27 "I                 **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 LAX
   QOR2 7 2                   **         0 8 —0 6 —8 9 ROWETT
   QOR2 7 3                   *•*        0 8 —0 6 —8 9 THOMAS
   QOR2 7 4                   **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WHEELER
   QOR2 7 5                   **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 1..EWIS
   Q0R276                     **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BARRS
   QOR2 7 7                   **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 NUNN
   QOR2 7 8                   *•*        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BROWN
   QOR2 7 9                   **         D 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 LEAKE
   QOR2 8 0                   **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILKIE
   QOR2 8 1                   **•        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROWE
   QOR2 8 2                   **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 SCARGILL
   Q0R283                     **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 CRANL5W3CK

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * - * * * * « * #   * #   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t       110         05-12-97              0P931           Screen        p rin t         te rm in a l      014     -   P lu s    code      +Q£

* * * * ^ ^ * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *       * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                     SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    ENQUIRIES ON QUES TIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NO T READY f- OR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO                DAYS             RESUME
  G0R284                     *•*       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 STEPHENSON
  Q0RHS3                     **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 FARRELL
  QOR2 8 6                   **        □ 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 GRIMSFIAW
  Q0R287                     **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROBSON
  QOR2 8 8                   **•       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARSHALL
  QOR2 8 9                   **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WEBB
  QOR2 9 0                   **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BAXTER
  QOR2 9 1                   **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WATK INSON
  G0R292                     *■*       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 THOMAS
  Q0R293                     **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 HINDS
  QOR2 9 4                   **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 SCOTHERN
  QOR2 9 5                   **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 GUANBOROUGH
  GORE9 6                    *»        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 STACEY
  Q0R297                     *•*       0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 DERBYSHIRE
  Q0R298                     **        0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 COOPER

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t   110            03-12-97                            OP9 3 1                    Screen                 p rin t            -      term in al   014   -   P ius   code   +0E

                      * * • # • * * • « " ! ( ■ * ■ ■ » • * • ! ( • # • « ■ * * * * • ■ « ■ * ■ * * * * • » * * * * # ■ « • * * * * # ■ « • ■ » -a

                            DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                   SCREEN 1 1 , 4
   ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY I'OR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO            DAYS                      RESUME
  Q0R2V9                 *•*                0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BELL
  Q0R300                 **                 0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WATSON
  G0R3U1                 •a#                0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 SM1TH
  Q0R302                                    0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 COPLEY
   © O R 303                ##              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 RUMRL.E
   Q0R304                   **              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 CAR rWRIGHT
   QOR3 0 3                 **•             0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 RUDD
   Q0R306                   **              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WOOD
  Q0R307                    *•»             0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 BARKER
  Q0R3QS                    ■M-*            0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 GOVER
  Q0R309                                    0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 NAYLOR
  Q0R310                   **■              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 GRAHAM
  G0R311                   *#               0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 EDGE
  Q0R312                    **              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 F ARNSWOR f'H
   Q0R313                   **              0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WARD

 ENT ER    P TO P R I N T            QUEUE
In c id e n t       110         05-12-97              0P931            Screen        p rin t     -   te rm in a l      014     -   P lu s     code     +Qt

 ■«
•H          ***•» ■ *****•» ••» ■**•» * * * * * * * * * * ■ * #   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

                                DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                   SCREEN 1 1 . 4
      EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY I OR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO               DAYS              RESUME
   G0R314                    #*         0 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 PLUMMER
   Q0R313                    **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 JARMAN
   Q0R316                    **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 WAL5HAW
   Q0R317                    **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 FEARNEHOUGH
   G0R318                    **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 PRICE
   Q0R319                    **         0 8 - 0 6 - 8 9 AX UP
   Q 0R320                   **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 SOUTHALL
   Q 0R321                   **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 KIRK
   Q0R322                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 BASHFORTH
   G0R323                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 SUDWORTH
   G0R324                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 cot H N S
   Q0R323                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 LEY
   Q0R326                    **         0 9 —0 6 —8 9 SLA'l ER
   G0R327                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 BOYLE
   G0R3?8                    **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 CATCHPOLE

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t          I "I O       0 5 - I E --97          0P931             Screen           p rin t       -   te rm in a l       014      -   P lu s       code        +QE

* * * * f^ t# * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ft* * * * # * # * # * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                            D O C U M E N T Q U E U E ENTRIES                     SCREEN                                                11 „ 4
    ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES                                                   Q U E U E TYPE NOT READY KOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                   DAYS              RESUME
   G0R3E9                        **         0 9 —0 6 —8 9 GOODYEAR
   Q0R330                        **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 MYNETT
   G 0R 331                      *•*        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 THURMAN
   Q0R33H                         **        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 HILL
   G0K333                        **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOLMES
   Q0R334                        **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 AINSWORTH
   GOR3 3 5                      **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 MACCORMAC
   G0R336                        ##         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 MIDDLETON
   Q0R337                        *#         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 IBfiO'TSON
   G0R338                        **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 8ENBTEAD
    Q0R33V                       ##         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 JENKINS
    Q0R340                       *•*        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 FOX
    G 0R 341                     **         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 HUDSON
    Q0R34H                       ##         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 BRAMHAM
    GOR3 4 3                     ■H*        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 THOMPSON

  ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * # # * # * • # * * * * * * # * * # # # * * * ■ * * * ■ # ■ * * # # * * # # * • * * # *• * * * * *   * * * * * * * * * * * * * *   * * * * * * *   * * ■ # # * * * ■ * ■ * * *
In c id e n t         I. "10       0 5 -1 2 -9 '/           OP9 3 1           Screen          p rin t      -- t e r m i n a l       014      -   P iu s      code       +QE



                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES .                  SCREEN                                                                                        1 1 .4
    EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE "I YPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL.

  DOCUMENT NO                  DAYS                RESUME
   Q0R344                                   0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 WALKER
   Q0R345                        #•*        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 DONOHOE
   Q0R346                        #*         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 HICK IE
   Q0R347                                   0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 BALDWIN
   G0R348                                   0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 MORAN
   Q0R349                        tttt       0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 DAVIS
   Q0R35CJ                       #*•        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 GOUGH
   Q 0R 35 1                     #*         0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 PEL.LEGR INE
   G0R3S2                        #•*        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 WEST
   Q0R333                        •*#        0 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 HULLEY
   Q0R354                                   09- 0 6 - 8 9 HARDY
   Q0R355-                                  ■ 1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 PIERPO IN T
   Q0R356                        •HH        1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 GREGSON
   G0R357                                   1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 BOUGH
   Q0R33S                                   1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 SMYK

 ENTER P TO P R I N T QUEUE

f t * * * - * # * * * * # * * * * # - * * * * # *•# * • * * * ■» • ■# * * • * * # * « « « ■» t t * * * * - * * * * * * * * * ■#•■***•*■»•#•*■■#•*■»•**■» *•* ■*•*#•■#•**■#••»•*#•*•
In c id e n t      E1CI        05-12-97              0P931           Screen         p rin t    -    te rm in a l      014     -   P lu s    code       M3E

               ** ■# * * * * # * * ■« ■* « ■# * *#*#*■*■*•#•**** # * # * * ■ * * ■ * ■ # # * * * * * # ■ * * # * * ■ « ■ ■ * * * # # * # « * * # * • * # * # * *
                                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                                                               SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES                                QUEUE TYPE NOT READY I-'OR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO               DAYS               RESUME
  Q0R3?>9                              •1 2 -0 6 -8 9 HILL
  Q0R360                               • 1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 ENGLAND
  QOil 3 6 1                 #*        • 1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 OSBORNE
  QQR362                     *#        1 2 - 0 6 - 3 9 LATHAM
  Q0R363                     **        • 1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 WAS8ELL
  Q0R364                               1 2 - - 0 6 —8 9 C L O K E
   G0R363                    **        1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 HARR I S
   Q0R366                              1 2 - 0 6 - 8 9 W H I T T INGHAM
   Q0R367                    *■#       12-06--89 ORANSKIELD
   Q0R368                              • 1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 ROEBUCK
   Q0R369                              • 1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 CARTWRIGHT
   G0R37D                              1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 WALTON
   Q0R371                    ##        1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 HODGSON
   Q0R372                              1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 FENNEY
   00R373                              1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 KRAJEWSK1

 ENTER P         rO PRINT QUEUE

ft****# **# *-*# .*******# * # # • » ■■# * # # # # * # # * # # # # * # ■« ■• « ■* # * # * * # # * # * # • » ■# * # • » ■* # * * * # *
In c id e n t        110         03-12-97               0P931            Screen         p rin t      -   te rm in a l       014     -    P ius      code      +0E

* * * J 0 f * * # * f t * # * # # * # * * * # * * * * * # * # * # # * # * # * *•#* * * * * # ■ * * # * # * * * # * * * # # * # # # # # * * • # * ■ # * • * # * * # * # #
                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                   SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY I OR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                DAYS                RESUME
   Q0R374                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 —8 9 PASHLEY
   Q0R375                     «•#         1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 COOPER
   Q0R376                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 REED
   Q0R377                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 HEM8ROUGH
   Q0R378                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 SHIPLEY
   Q0R379                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 SANDERSON
   qor3 an                    ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 PARKIN
   G0H381                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 PILLEY
   Q0R382                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 G1 LBERTHORPE
   Q0R383                     ##          1 3 - 1 .1 6 - 8 9 MARSH
   Q0R384                     ##          1 3 —0 6 —8 9 DOYLE
   Q0R385                     ##          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 ENWRIGHT
   Q0R386                     *#          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 PERRY
   Q0R387                     ##          • 1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 GORDON
   Q0K388                     #*          1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 MARVIN

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

# * # * * * * # # * # * * # * * * # # # # * * # # * # * * * # # # * # * # * * # # * * * * # # # * # * * * * ft* * ft* * * * ft* * # # ft* * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t    110       OS—1 2 —9 7        OP9 3 1          Screen          p rin t      -   te rm in a l        014      -   P lu s      code       +QE

                                                * * * * ■* * •* * * * * * • » •• » •■» * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO           DAYS             RESUME
  Q0R389                •a*       1 3 —0 6 —8 9 LOGAN
  Q0R390                **        1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 FRITH
  Q 0R 391               -H-H-    1 3 —0 6 —8 9 MARSHALL
  Q0R39S                 **       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 LAWRENCE
  G0R393                 •H *     1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 G1LM0UR
  Q0R394                 •SC*     1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 WATSON
  Q0R393                 **       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 LEY
  Q0R396                 **       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 STRONACH
  Q0R397                 **       • 1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 BOV ILL
  Q0R398                 •»*      1 3 “0 6 —8 9 SUTER
  Q0R399                 **       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 F-.KWUBHU
  Q0R400                 *#       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 8REEZE
  Q0R401                 **       • 1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 SHFRHURN
  Q0R402                 **       1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 PARKINSON
  Q0R403                 *•*      1 3 - 0 6 - 8 9 J 0 1 1MSI ONE

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * # * * # * * * # # * * * * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * # * * # * # * * * # ##•*###■*****#•*#■********■■«■**#■***■«•■«■**■#■***#
In c id e n t       110           05-12-97                  0P731              Screen           p rin t       -    term in al           014      -    P ius       code        +QE

                * •# * * ■« ■* * * •# ■# ■» ■* * * « •* * * •» * * * ■» ■ « ■ « " » ■ * * » # * ■ * # * * ■ » • # * * ■ » * ■ » # •» # « « •# « * * * • » '* # * # ■» ■* * * # • « ■* # *
                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   EN QUIRIES DIM QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO                 DAYS                  RES5UME
  G0R4G4                                    •13-• 0 6 - - 8 9 WORT LEY
  OCR4 0 5                                  1 3 - - 0 6 - -89 TAMS
  Q0R406                                    1 3-- 0 6 - - 8 9 GLINlt'CKI
  QOR4 0 7                                  1 3 - - 0 6 - -8 9 RILEY
  Q0R408                        tt*         1 3 - - 0 6 - - 8 9 MORAN
  Q0R409                                    1 3 - - 0 6 - •89 KELLY
  Q0R410                                    1 3 -- 0 6 - 8 9 SMITH
  Q 0R 41 1                     **          1 2 - - 0 6 - -8 9 HOGG
  Q0R412                        •H#         •14-- 0 6 - - 8 9 NORTON
  Q0R413                                    1 4 - - 0 6 - •89 CARTER
  Q 0R414                       •H•«        1 4 -- 06- •89 T AYLOR
  Q0R415                                    1 4 - - 0 6 - •89 M I T T O N
  Q0R416                        **          1 4 - - 0 6 - - 89 HIRST
  Q0R417                        *#          1 4 - - 0 6 - -89 MCCOY
  Q0R418                        •H-H        1 4 - - 0 6 - 8 9 SMITH

 ENT ER    P TO P R I N T              QUEUE
In c id e n t   110     0 5 - 1 ? ? —9 7   0P931     Screen   p rin t         ■■■■■ t e r m i n a l        014        -    P lu s   code   +QE!

«**•                                                          # * * * « ■ * * ■ » ■ ■» ■* * * * * ■■« ■■» ■■» •* * •* * * •* * *
                                   DOCUMENT QUEUE. ENTRIES                 SCREEN 1 1 . 4
   EN QUIRIES ON QUE ST I ON NA IR E S         QUEUE TYPE NOT READY TOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO          DAYS              RESUME
  Q0R419                         1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 HOYI.AN))
  Q0R4H0               8-S-      1 4 - 0 6 —8 9 SPURR
  Q0R4H1               •H tt     1 4 - 0 6 " - 8 9 OLIVER
  Q0R4HH                         1 4 - 0 6 - 3 9 STEVENS
  Q0R423               • H #     1A- - 0 6 - 8 9 ANSELL
  Q 0R4E4                        1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 MAR TIN
  Q0R4£3                         1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 SMITH
  Q0R4R6                         1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 WASTN1DGE
  Q0R4&7               • H *     1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 PARKER
  Q0R428                         1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 HAWKER
  Q0R4S9               #*        1 4 —0 6 —8 9 HOWFI I
  QOR4 3 0            # « •      1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 BEAUMONT
  00R431                         1 4 —0 6 —8 9 WA'1 LRHOUSE
  Q0R43/?             ■ft*       1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 BRAY
  0 .0 R 4 3 3        ##         1 4 - 0 6 - 8 9 WRAGG

 ENTER     P TO P R I N T      QUEUE
In c id e n t      110           O S -12-97                   OP9 3 1           Screen           p rin t         -   te rm in al   014   -   P lu s   code   +QE

•H        tt-H -tt-H -H -**# # # # # # « • « ■* « ■# * * ■» ■* * # * • « ■« # * # # * * * ■ # # # ■ * «   H 'H
                                                            DOCUMENT              QUEUE ENTRIES                    SCREEN 1 1 . 4
     EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES                                                    QUEUE TYPE NOT READY F O R APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO                 DAYS                  RESUME
  Q0R434                       •h *         1 5 - 0 6 - 8 9 COOPER
  QOR4 3 5                     •it*         • 1 5 - 0 6 - 8 9 MORRELL
  Q0R436                       •Si*         1 5 - 0 6 - 8 9 GILLOTT
  QOR4 3 7                     * *          1 5 - 0 6 - 8 9 WILLIAMS
  Q0R438                                    1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 HA1GH
  Q0R439                                    • 1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 MCMANUS
  Q0R440                                    1 6 - 0 6 - -89 ROWLEY
  Q 0R 44 1                    * *          1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 BELL
  Q 0R 44E                     * *          • 1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 GRAHAM
  QOR4 4 3                                  1 6 - 0 6 —8 9 80WN
  Q0R444                                    1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 SHAW
  QOR4 4 5                     # *          1 6 - 0 6 - 8 9 M IRfIN
  QOR4 4 6                     •8 *         19- 0 6 - 8 9 BARRON
  QOR4 4 7                                  1 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 CRAWLEY
  Q0R448                       •»•«         1 9 - 0 6 - 8 9 TAYLOR

 ENTER      P TO P R I N T            QUEUE
In c id e n t         110          05-12-97                0P731            Screen          p rin t      -    term in al         014      -   P iu s      code      +QE

****^ ^ H -**H *H *H * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                           DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                                                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    E N Q U I R I E S O N QUEST l'ONNAIRES                             QUEUE TYPE NOT                                 READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                 DAYS               RESUME
   Q0R494                      •#•*         10 - 0 7 - 8 9 MANGLES
   QOR4 9 5                    **           11-- 0 7 - 8 9 MURRAY
   Q0R496                      **           11 - 0 7 - 8 9 ACKERS
   QOR4 9 7                    **           11 - 0 7 - 8 9 JOHNSON
   QOR4 9 8                    **           11 ..0 7 ...8 9 F- INNERTY
   QOR4 9 9                    **           11 - 0 7 - 8 9 DURHAM
   QOR5 0 0                    **           11 - 0 7 - 8 9 HODGKINSON
   QOR5 0 1                    **           11-- 0 7 - 8 9 HUTCHINSON
   QOR5 0 2                    **           11 - 0 7 - 8 9 WRIGHT
   QOR5 0 3                    *•*          11-- 0 7 - 8 9 LOWRY
   QOR5 0 4                    **           11 • 0 7 - - 8 9 D '.l XON
   QOR5 0 5                    **           12 - 0 7 - 8 9 PEARSON
   QOR5 0 6                    **           12 - 0 7 - 8 9
   Q0R507                      •ii*         12-- 0 7 - 8 9 HANSON
   Q0R508                        **         IP - 0 7 - 8 9 SMITH

  ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * - * * * * * * * - 5 H * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * H- K* * S * * * * ■ * • » ■ * * * * ■ H* * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t        I ID        O S-12-97              OF93 1          Screen         p rin t      -   term in al        014      -   P lu s     code      +QE

* * » - i ^ f c * * * * * - * * * « * * * * * * * * * * * * *•»•** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ■ * * *
                                       DOCUMENT QUEUE E N T R I E S            SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    E N Q U H U LS ON QUE ST I ON NA IR E S        QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT MO               DAYS               RESUME
                             **




                                               a

                                               D*
                                          3s

                                               -0
   QOR4 4 9                                                 HARE




                                                i
   QOR4 5 0                  **          1 9 —0 6 —8 9      ZOMMERFI ELD
   QOR4 5 1                  **          19-06-89           WILLIAMSON
   Q0R452                    **•         1 9 —0 6 —8 9      BARKER
   QOR4 5 3                  **          20-06-89           HAYS
   QOR4 5 4                  *•*         >20-06-89          MCDONNELL
   QOR4 5 5                  **          20-06-89           UTTLEY
   QOR4 5 6                  **          2 0-06-89          EARNSHAW
   QOR4 5 7                  **          20-06-89           SO HOF 3.ELI)
   QOR4 5 8                  **          21-•06-89          NICHOLSON
   Q0R459                    *•*         22-U 6-89          COL.LER
   QOR4 6 0                  **          2 2 —0 6 —8 9      ROCKET 1“
   QOR4 6 1                  **                0 6 —8V      L.AWRtNCE
   QOR4 6 2                  **          22-06-89           NASH
   QOR4 6 3                  *•*         2 3 - 0 6 —8 9     HE-M1NGWAY

 ENTER P T O PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t       1113        O S-12-97              OP9 3 1        Screen        p rin t     -   term in al        014     ••••• P l u s   code    +QE

* * *       * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                               DOCUMENT Q U E U E ENTRIES                   SCREEN 11.4
    EN QU IRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES             QUEUE' TYPE NOT READY I-OR APPROVAL

  DOCUMEN i“ N O            DAYS               RE!3UM6
    Q0R464                   **         £6--06- - 8 9 rox
   QOR4 6 5                  **         26--06--89 W A L K E R
   QOR4 6 6                  **         £6--06-- 8 9 WALLACE
   QOR4 6 7                  **         26--06- -89 HOUSE
   QOR4 6 8                  **         27--06-- 8 9 STEEL. IE-
   Q0R469                    **         28--06- -89 STURGESS
    QOR4 7 0                 **         2 8 - -06'- 8 9 ROBERTS
   Q0R471                    **         28--06- -89 ADAMS
   QOR4 7 2                  **         2 8 - -06- -89 PUL I'-'REY
   QOR4 7 3                  **        2 9 - - 0 6 ■- 8 9   MULLINS
   QOR4 7 4                  **        2 9 - -06-- 8 9      THOMPSON
   Q0R473                    **        30--06-- 8 9         ROGAN
   QOR4 7 6                  **•       3 0 - -06-- 8 9      BEECH
   Q O R 477                 **        30- -06- -89         HODGETTS
    Q.0R478                  **        3 0 - -06--89        LONG

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t       I "10       0 5 —1 2 9 7           OP9 3 1        Screen         p rin t    -    te rm in al       014- -      P lu s    code      +QE

***K T W * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ■ * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                    SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    EN QUIRIES ON QUES TIONNAl'RE S         GUFUE TYPE NO V READY F OR APPROVAL..

  DOCUMENT NO               DAYS                RESUME
   QOR4 7 9                   *#        0 3 - 0 7 - 6 9 SHEPHARD
   QOR4 8 0                   **        0 3 - 0 7 - 8 9 BURNS
   QOR4 8 1                   **        0 4 - 0 7 - 8 9 MOGHUL
   QOR4 8 2                   **        0 4 - 0 7 - 8 9 YA } ES
   Q0K483                     **        0 4 - 0 7 - 8 9 DAl.RYMPLE
   QOR4 8 4                   *#        0 4 - 0 7 - 8 9 CLARKE
   QOR4 8 5                   **        0 5 - 0 7 - 6 9 Ml I I ON
   QOR4 8 6                   **        0 5 - 0 7 - 8 9 DAVIS
   QOR4 8 7                   **        0 6 - - 0 7 - 8 9 MUIR
   Q0R488                     *#        0 6 - 0 7 - 8 9 ALLEN
   G0R489                     *#        0 6 - 0 7 - 8 9 TYLER
   QOR4 9 0                   #ft       0 7 - 0 7 - 8 9 KELLY
   QOR4 9 1                   ftft      0 7 - 0 7 - 8 9 TRCfcK
   QOR4 9 2                   ftft      1 0 - 0 7 - 8 9 COSGROVE
   QOR4 9 3                   **        1 0 - 0 7 - 8 9 THOMPSON

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ft-* * * * * * # * * * * # # * * * * * * # * * * # * * * * * * # * * * * # * * * * * * # * * * * * * * * * * * * *
In c id e n t       110            05-1'£“ 97            0P931             Screen          p rin t      -    te rm in a l        014      -   P iu s      code       +QE

*               ***•##•#•#•*•*••****-*#•# # # * * * # # • * • * * * # * # * * # * * * • * * * • * • * * * # * * # * # * * # * * * • * * * # ■ * * • • * # * # • » • * # • » * * *
                                                    DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                      SCREEN 1 1 . 4
     ENQUIRIES           ON Q U E S T I O N N A I R E S         QUEUE TYPE N O T READY i-'OR APPROVAL

    DOCUMENT NO              DAYS                  RESUME
     QOR5 0 9                 •s s-        12"- 0 7 - 8 9 PEARSON
     Q0R510                    •H-H-      1 2 - • 0 7 - 8 9 CHAPMAN
     Q0R511                    ■H-Sf-      1 3 - - 0 7 - ■ 8 9 SHF.RBURN
     Q0R512                    •H-H-      ■1 7- 0 7 - 8 9 DYSON
     Q0R313                    ■MM         1 8 - - 0 7 - 8 9 YOUNG
     QOR 5 1 4                 H--H-      1 9 - 0 7 - 3 9 BO TF I ELD
     00RS15                    •H-M-       1 9 - - 0 7 - 8 9 LONGFORD
     Q0R516                    ■H-H-      2 0 - 0 7 - 8 9 FOX
     G0R317                    •H-H-      '£'■>•■■ 0 7 - •89 CANAD)NE
     Q0R518                    M-H-       0 4 - 0 8 - 8 9 CUTLER
     G 0R519                   •H-H-      0 9 - oa- 8 9 Hi CIO. IMG
     QOR5 2 0                  •H-H-      1 1 - 0 3 - 8 9 GLOVER
     QOR5 2 1                  -H-H-       •1I- ■ 0 8 - 8 9 SYKES
     QOR5 2 2                  -H-H-      2 1 - 0 8 - 8 9 BOCK XNG
     QOR5 2 3                  M-M        2 1 - •08- 8 9 CRAPPER

    ENT ER   P TO P R I N T             QUEUE
In c id e n t          110           03--12-97                  OP9 3 1         Screen           p rin t      -      te rm in a l                 014          -     P lu s           code           +QE

-H-H             * * * * • » • « • # -H-MMM H-H■ # * • * * * # * * * • »                                      H-MH-H-H-if-S •»• * # • » ■ # # # # ■ » • * # ■ » • # ■ » • ■ » • * * # « • • » ■ # ■ » • ■ » • ■ » *
                                   DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                                                                                                   SCREEN 1 1 . 4
       EN QUIRIES ON GUEST IONNA1 RES             GUEUETYPE NOTREADY                                                                                 FOR APPROVAL.

  DOCUMENT NO                   DAYS                   RESUME
   G0R524                          •H-H         1 2 —0 9 —8 9 T1NGLT.
   QOR3 2 5                                    1 2 - 0 9 - 8 9 REDGARD
   Q0RS26                          •H-H-       1 2 - - 0 9 - 8 9 JONES
   QOR5 2 7                        •H-H-       1 ^.~0 9 - 8 9 WILK INSON
   Q0R528                          •H H-        1 9 - 0 9 - 8 9 CLEMENT
   QOR5 2 9                        H-H-        ■ 1 9 - 0 9 - 8 9 FLOWER
   QOR5 3 0                        •H-H-       2 0 - 0 9 - 8 9 BRADLEY
   QOR5 3 1                        H-H-        2 0 - 0 9 - 8 9 RODDIS
   Q0R532                          H-H-        2 0 - 0 9 - 8 9 ASHMORE
   QOR5 3 3                        -M-H-       2 5 - 0 9 - 8 9 SOUTHALL
   Q0R534                          -H-H-       2 3 - 0 9 - 8 9 FLACK
   QOR5 3 5                        •H-H-       ■ 1 1 - 1 0 - 8 ? THOMPSON
   QOR5 3 6                        •H-H-       1 1 - 1 0 8 9 DONNELLY
   QOR5 3 7                        •H-H-       1 1 - 1 0 - 8 9 GERMAN
   QOR5 3 8                        -H-H-       1 2 . - 1 0 - 8 9 CLARK

  ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

-H-H-H-H-H H -H -H H -H-H H H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-H-M-H-H-M-M-H•H-H--H-M-H-H--H-H-!f"H-H--M-H-H -H H-H-H--H-H H--H-H-H-H-H -H-H-H-H H-H ■ f r * # * # # * * * - * # ■# •# •» •# # ■# •
In c id e n t       110         05-1 £ -9 7            OP9 3 1         Screen         p rin t     -   te rm in a l      014      -   Pi.us     code      +Q£

* * * jl^ sft* ■* * # * # # # * # # # # f t # # * * * # * * * * * # # * # * # # * * * # # # # # # # # # f t * * # # # * # # * * * * # * * * * * * * * * * * * # # #
                              DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    EN QUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO               DAYS               RESUME
   QOR5 3 9                   *#        1 3 - 1 0 - 8 9 VERNON
   QOR5 4 0                   *#        1 3 - 1 0 - 8 9 FOERS
   QOR5 4 1                   #*        ■13- 1 0 - 8 9 ADAMS
   QOR 54/2                   *#        1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 GILL
   Q0R543                     ##        ■ 1 6 - 1 0 - - 8 9 fc’ROOMHEAD
   QOR5 4 4                   a-#       1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 DOWDAL.L
   Q0R345                     ft*       1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 SOWERBY
   QOR5 4 6                   *•*•      • 1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 MADDOCKS
   QOR5 4 7                   #*        1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 SOCKETT
   Q0R548                     ft#       1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 HARPER
   G0R549                     ##        1 6 - 1 0 - 8 9 JOHNSON
   Q0R550                     *#        1 6 - - 1 0 - 8 9 MORDEW
   QOR5 5 1                   ##        1 7 - 1 0 - 8 9 PI..OWS
   QOR 55/2                   H•*       1 8 - 1 0 - 8 9 DUDLEY
   Q0R553                     *ft       • 1 8 - 1 0 - 8 9 BARLOW

 ENTER P          TO PRI NT QUEUE

* * * * * # # * # # * # * * * * # # * * # # * # * # * # # * * # * * # * * * # # * * * * # * # # # # * # * # * * * * # # * # * * # ■ « # * ***# # # # # # # # #
In c id e n t         110          03-1H -97               0P931            Screen          p rin t       - te rm in a l         014     -    P lu s     code       +QE

                                   ■«■ »■«• ■«•*#■»■*#*•«• # * « * * ■ * # #•»•**■»•■»***■*■«■ ■ « # # » # # « *»##** # * * * # # * * # •# ■» * # # ■# ■# * * ■» ••# ■* #
                               DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                     SCREEN 1 1 . 4
    ENQUIRIES ON GUEST 10NIMAIKES          QUEUE T YPE NO T READY I-OR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                 DAYS                 RESUME
   00R334                      ■h-n        H3-- 1 O -89 WILSON
   Q0RS33                      #»          2 3 - - 1 0 - 8 9 WHEELHOUSE
   CX>R556                                 0 8 - - 1 1 - 8 9 SMITH
   QGR537                        H-a-      0 9 - -11-8 9 COOPER
   Q0R358                       ■S'S       C9--•11..8 9 FEATHERSTONE
   Q0R539                       ■S'#       1 3 - - 1 1 - 8 9 WHITTAKER
   Q0R36Q                        •KH        14-- 1 1 - 8 9 BINGLEY
   QOR5 6 1                     •H#        14--11-8 9 BATES
   Q0R36H                       ##          16-- 1 1 - 8 9 EARLS
   Q0R563                       •ft*       16-- 1 1 - 8 9 FOSTER
   QOR5 6 4                     #«•        20- - ■ 1 1 - 8 9 HOUI T
   QOR3 6 3                                20--11-8 9 COLTON
   QOR3 6 6                     **         "d"7-- 1 1 - 8 9 WALKER
   QOR3 6 7                     *#         2 .7 - - 1 1 - 8 9 SMI TH
   G.GR368                      **         27- ■ 1 1 - 8 9 MITCHELL

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

# ■« ■# # # » * * * * * * ■# # * * * * * # # * * •■« ■* * * # # * ■» # M # « * * * ■* * » * * ■» ■* # * * * * * # * * * # * * # # # # * # ■« • * # * * * * * * * * * * • » • *
In c id e n t        110          05-12-97                OP9 3 1          Screen          p rin t      -   te n n in a i       014      -   P lu s      code      +QE

                         ■* * * * * * * « • # # « • # * * # * # # # # * * * # * * ■ * # # # # * * ■■• « • # # # * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * » # * # * * # * * * » ■# # *
                                                          DOCUMENT Queue £ N TRIES                       SCREEN                                                  11.4
    E NQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES                                      QUEUE TYPE N O T READY F O R A P P R O V A L '

  DOCUMENT NO                DAYS                RESUME
   QOR5 6 9                     **        2 7 - -11--89BURKINBHAW
   QOR5 7 0                               2 7 - ■•11-- 8 9
                                                       WXLI-.CAMS
   QOR5 7 1                     •a-#                   KOZIEJA
                                          2 7 - •11-- 8 9
   QOR5 7 2                               0 5 - •12-- 89
                                                       SYKES
   Q0R573                      *#         U5--•••12--89MITCHELL
   QOR5 7 4                    *#         05™■ 1 2 - - 89
                                                       EVANS
   Q0R575                                 13- -12--89  STOKOE
   Q0R576                      •a-#       1 3 - ■ 1 2 - - 89
                                                       WHITEHOUBE
   G0R577                      ##•        2 1 - ■••12“- 8 9
                                                       T0PL3SS
   Q0R578                      **         2 1 - •12--89WORRAl.L
   QOR5 7 9                    **         2 1 -- 1 2 - - 8 9
                                                       WYKE
   QOR5 8 0                    *#         02- •01--90 ARMITAGE
    0 0 R581                   **         02--01-■ 9 0 H O P E W E L L
    Q0R582                     **         02-•01-- 90 LI VERBIDGE
    Q0R583                     #*         02--U1-- 9 0 WIL D

  ENTER P TO PR IN I" QUEUE

■»•#**##«•***■##**#*•»••»•#* # * ■ * # * # # * • * # # # # # » * # # * • » ■ * * * * * * * * * # * » * * * # ■ # * * # * * * # * * • ■ « • # * # • » • * # * * # * # * #
Incident              110             0S-~12-9 7                            0P931                   Screen print - terminal 014 - Pius code +Q!£

                          -S #   #   ■ »   ■ »   X   * ■»   -a--U -# •« ■    # • » ■« ■ •«■ -a- * -Si t t # v!   * # * » * * # * # * « • * « • # * # * • # * #S< * * * * * * * * * *

                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 .4
    ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY POR APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT NO                    DAYS                 RESUME
   Q0R584                         **             02'- 0 1 - 9 0 TOWIMROW
   Q0R585                         **             02--01-90 PERRY
   00I1586                        *#             02'- 0 1 - 9 0 BARBHR
   QOR587                         •a-#           02--01-90 WINSOR
   QOR588                         *»             02--01-90 VARLEY
   QOR589                         •a-#           04-- 0 1 - 9 0 HOPKINS
   G0R590                         #*             04---01-90 SAUNDERS
   QOR591                         **             04--01-90 GIBSON
   G0R592                         **             08--01-90 PEEL
   Q0R593                         ■»#            08--01-90 PATCHETT
   QOR594                         •a#            08--0-1-90 BLACK
   QOR595                         *#             OS--01-90 REEVES
   G0R596                         ##             09--01-90 DAMMS
   QOR597                         *#             09-- 0 1 - 9 0 PRICE
   QOR598                         #*             09--01.90 ATHORN

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * ■ # * # * * * # * # * • • « • * S - * # * # * * '# # * * # * * * * ■# • » • # * * * * » * * # # # * Ha * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Incident          110       05-12-97             0P931          Screen orint - terminal 014 - Plus                                    code +QE

              •a -*# **# # *•*•*#                       * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * #* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
                            DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 11.4
   ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO             DAYS             RESUME.
  QOR'599                 **        09--01-90 CROSS
  QOR600                  **        09- 01-90 JESSOP
  G0K601                  **        09- 01-90 FLETCHER
  QOR602                  **        12- 0-1-90 GOODISON
  QOR603                  **         12--01-90 NEWMAN

                                         6

                                                «
                                                w
                                         T“
  Q0R604                            15-           HAYES



                                                —t
                           S i*




                                          i
  Q0R605                   **       1!;>--0-1-90 BUCKINGHAM
  QOR606                   **       15- 01-90 STUCHFIELD
  QOR607                   **       13--0-1-90 KAYE
  QOR608                   **       15- 01-90 GILLIES
  W0R609                   **       17--01-90 OWFN
  Q0R610                   **       17- 01-90 STOKES
  QOR611                   **       17--0-1-90 HAGUE
  Q0R61H                   **       17- 01-90 SOUTHWELL
  Q0R613                   **       2 2 - -01-90 CROSSLAND



 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *****# **# # # **# *******# •!( * * * * * * * *
Incident   110       05-12-97                 OP931       Screen print •••- terminal 014 - Plus code +QE


                          DOCUMENf QUEUE ENTRIES                   SCREEN 11.4
 ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE 'TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

DOCUMENT NO      DAYS         RESUME
 Q0R614           •H-H-    22-01-90 HUDSON
 QOR615           -Si-H-   22-01—90 CLARKE
 Q0R616           -H-H-    22-01-90 I.EVICK
 QOR6 1 7         •H-H-    22-01-90 OAKLEY
 QOR6 IS          ■H-H-    22--01-90 F RY
 Q0R619           •H-H-    22-01-90 STEVENS
 Q0R62.0          •H-H-    24-01-90 MAUGHAM
 Q0R621           •H-H-    24-01-90 STRAFFORD
 QOR622           •H-H-    24-01-90 MOWER
 Q0R623           •H-H-    24-01-90 ALLEN
 Q0R6H4           •H-H-    25—01-90 ALLEWAY
 QOR625          •H-H-     25-01-90 TURNER
 QOR 626          -H-H-    25-0 "I--90 ASHMORE
 QOR627          •H-H-     25-01-90 WYNNE
 G0R628           •H-H-    25-01--90 AGAR

ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

                           * * • » ■* • * # * # • * * #      * # # -H-"S’ -H-* -H-# -!fr* • -H- -H--H *   H -H -H -H-B-S-H -H • * # # • # ■ » # * ■ »
Incident   .C10         O S - 12-97                              OP931                    Screen print ~ terminal 014 - Pius                                                                               code +QE


                             DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 11.4
 ENQUIRIES ON OUES'I 10NNA1RFTS          QUEUE TYPE NOT READY FOR APPROVAL

DOCUMENT NO       DAYS                     RESUME
 Q0R629              -H-H              25-■01 --90 CARROLL
 QOR630             •H-H-              26-•01 -90 DYE
 QOR631              •H-H-             26--01 “90 MALE
 QOR632              H-H-              26-•01-90 REVITT
 QOR633              -H-H-             26- 01-90 BENNE'T " !
 QOR634             •H-H-              31--01-90 ELLIOTT
 QOR635              H-H-              31--01-90 MARTIN
 QOR636             •H-H-              31-•01-90 HITCH80RNE
 Q0R637              •H-H-             01--02-90 THACKER
 QOR638             •H-H-              06-•02-90 WEAVER
 QOR639              H-H-              13-■02-90 S ’JI..KSTONE
 Q0R640             •H-H-              13-•02-90 B i.R C H
 QOR641              •H-H-             16~-02-90 SORSBY
 QOR 64/2           •H-H-              21-•02-90 8R0ADBENT
 QOR643              ■H-H-             03--03-90 CARTER

ENTER P 'TO PRINT QUEUE

              -h- h - h -h - h   h - h - h - h- h -h - h -h - h - h h- h- h - h - h - h- h -h - h - h -h -h -h -h ■   # • * # * * # * • » -h - h - h -h - h- h - h - h- h - h - h ■ » • * ■ « • # * * * * * * * * • « • • » • * * # # *
Incident    110     05-12-97      0P931      Screen print - terminal 014 - Plus; code +G£

                                                       •»•■« # -S-* • > • * # # * # # # 'S Jf # • » • * # # » * ■ « # # # # ■ « • « • • » • * * *

                          DOCUMENT QUEUE ENTRIES                  SCREEN 1 1 .4
 ENQUIRIES ON QUESTIONNAIRES          QUEUE TYPE NOV READY FOR APPROVAL

DOCUMENT NO       DAYS         RESUME
 Q0R644                  05-03-90 HEWSON
 QOR643            #*    0 5 —0 3 —90 DUNCAN
 QOR646            **    o: > -0 3 -9 0 WILKINSON
 Q0R647                  05-03—90 COLES
 QOR648           #*     05-03-90 LITTLE
 Q0R649           #*     0 6 - 0 3 - 9 0 SLACK
 Q0R630           *»     07-03-90 BROOKES
 Q0R651           **     23-03-90 HELLIWELL
 QOR652           #*     2 3 - 0 3 - 9 0 DICKINS
 Q0R653           ##     2 6 - 0 3 - 9 0 SHARPE
 Q0R654           **     26-03-90 JOHNSON
 QOR655             a-   30-03-90 R OH!8 INS
 Q0R656           #*     03-04-90 WORTLEY
 QOR657           **     0 3 - 0 4 - 9 0 SHUTT
 QOR658           **     05-04-90 HURST

ENTER P    TO PR INF QUEUE
Incident               110          03-1S-97                 0F931               Screen print - terminal 014 - Plus                                                 code +«E

•ii-ii * j f k * * * * * * * • : ! -a * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ii * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * -k * * - 3 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * i i * * * * * * * * * * * * * -a
                                                             O O CU M EN f          QUEUE            t~ N T R I E B                                          SCRHEN          1 1 .4
    ! -.N<iU 1 R I L S      ON     GU LiBTJ O N N A ) RJ-"B                                    QUEUE       T YP E!    MOT       READY        i- OR    APPROVAL.


 DOCUMENT              NO        DAYS               REBUME
  ii '■.1! ^ 6 \ >V               * *        0 ! > ~ 0 4 ..9 0 L. E A D B E A T E R
  OOP6 6 0                         S- *      0 9 ..0 4 - 9 0     RROOKEB
  QOR6 6 1                        ■i i *     0 9 - - 0 4 - - 9 0 WHAL E.V
  Q0R66H                           ii- *     1 1 - 0 4 - 9 0 C iA S C O Y N h
  QOR 6 6 3                       * *        1 0 - O H ..9 0 O B G U ’T H O P P E
  OP0 3 / 8                        X*        1 0 —0 !::>..6 9 W I L M O V f
  QP0361                          * *        •10..0 L>--iV9 B E A U M O N T
  Or 0 4 :]6                      **         1 ..0 H - - S 9
  QP04D7                          *•*        1 1 - O S ..(-v;> "! i. M M 1 N B
  OP0 4 9 0                       •ii- *     0 9 ..0 6 - 8 9   SOU rHAI...L.




  enter        p      to    p r in t       queue


  . ; ? • * * * * -a * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * i i * * * * * * * *   X ••••: * * * *   if X * * * * * * * * * *   * * * * * * * * * * •::•* * *   X ii-* * * * * * * * » « * * *
 incident                     .106               13--11--9 7                           OP 931                  Screen print                                             terminal 014                                    Pius code -f-UN

            # * * * # * * • * * * • » • # * # • * • # * • # * * * ■# • #               H--K                 » •« ••« • « • #                                                       *   « ••* •* #   * ■# ■ * » * ■# ■# $ ■* ■# » # ■» # # ■■* & # ■       R--H- 5f if-

1U8                                                                             UPDATE NOMINAL                                 -        MATCHES                                                                              SCREEN                6.8

          Hb.COKl.)          NO                 SURNAME                                                              FORENAME                             1                   2        ST      NO              STREET              NAME
  1
 2        N11561                          w I u.JA M ;:                                                       S ! EVEN
 3 C Z Z Z
 4
      I

  ? NS^y?                                 W IL L IA M S                                                        J AM ES
 3

10    MS7 6 4                             W ILS O N                                                           J QHN




                                                                                                                                    N UM BE R                    OF M A T C H E S F O U N D * * *
SELECT              MATCH              OR       C      fO       CREATE                                                                                            PR I N T < P > ? SOR i" CS > S U M M A R I E S

■ s   i *     * * ■ • » * - S # * * ' # •« ■■« •■« * £ * • » • < ?   ■» -M -S   -H # * - ! ( • -K * - H *      ■%■ ■'&■■&■■$■■&-S   - f t ■#■■)<■ Oi •*       \S • * # # • # • »               * •* •«   *   -M •« K M H i f - S M *   3 i i -S -fe-H # • * # • • « *
 Incident                      10$         13-11--97         OP 931               Screen print ~ terminal 014                                        Plus         code +UN


 108                                           UP DA ' £   NOMINAL..        -• AM END . M A I N        in f o r m a t io n                                  SCREEN             6 .2
N 11!“ 61                        W IL L IA M S                          S I EVEN                            L E S S .. 1 E
surname                           W n ... L I AMS                           r i tle                                                       SEX          M               IC
F ORENAMES                        STEVEN                                L E S i. ] E
DOB                                             B J'.R V H P L                                                                            AG E                      TO
H E IG H T                   TO
O C O U PAV IO N   POL. P C 2 3 3 4
EMPLOYER / S C H O O L NAME          M A I N S T P S "IN
                                                                                                      S 3.77o-
            XHhF            USE               D E S C R IP T IO N
    "I CA'T EGOR Y     L IN K           P O L I C E OFF ICfc-RS S I - R I A L C 7                                    P O L IC E        OFF 1CI-RS ON DU1 Y 3
   2 CA fEGQRY         A S S I S CEO    IN J U R E D PERSONS
   3 CAT HGORY         MOVED            DECEASED
   4 CATEGORY          P O LIC E D      S E A T E D WE ST S T A N D                                                  WES I” S T A N D
   5 CATEGORY          L IN K           NOT P O S T E D TO GROUND                                                    POL. I Cl.' O F F I C E R S               ON      DUTY         3
   6 CATEGORY          HELPED IN        S T E R I L E AREA
   7 CAT EG ORY        HELPED AT        CONCOURSE                                                                    WEST S T A N D
   3 A7745                              0 8 T R E C O L L E C T I O N S FR BE LO W                                   O F F I C E R S NOT               POSTED            3    GROUN
   9 S3773             SUBJECT          P 4 --G 1 9 0 W IL L IA M S

ADD DOCUM ENTARY CROSS R E F E R E N C E                                (Y )                              ENTER         1 /2 /3        TO      S K IP       XREFS
S E L E C T A / C / N / O / S / l / V OR O P T I O N                       PA R AME'i E R S

.!s..5!..}j..s..ij. S.   -M- S- 3- # # #   H-a- s-               -55-■» ■* • » • » # -8-tt -54--Si-           H- # # * * * -i- * * -> » Si-* # -SI-* # -S- * Sf- * S # * * - S R f - **•?<■
incident               I.Oft                   'I--97          O P 931            Screen print - terminal 014 - Plus                                            code +UN

# * # * * # * • » • * • » • * * * • » • * * * s- * * * * -a-* >>• * * * * * * * * * * * ;s■*■ a-» «•*■shs- «• a * h- a-* * * * * * * * » f t * * * # * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * »•*
)O ft                                    UPDATE          N O M IN A L      -      A M EN D   M A IN      1 N rO R M A T IO N                               SCREEN          6 .?
                                                                                                                                                                                  P
SU R N A M E                                                                   t it l l                                                    SE X                     IC
F ORENAMES
DOB                                                                 B I R 1 i-IP I...                                                      AGE                    10
h e ig h t                              TO
O C C U P A T IO N  AMBO              OFF- I C E R PARKWAY                                        I                    O o i
EMPLOYER / SCHOOL                      N AM E     8 Y O R K S A M B U L A N C E S)£
              X.RET                    USE                D E S C R IP lIO N
    1    category                ATTENDED           G Y M N A S I U M A T GROUND
    P.CATEGORY                   T R A N BP OR "I B I N J U R f I) P E R S O N S
    3 CA i'EGO RY                ATTENDED           ROYAL H A L L A H S H IR E H O S P IT A L                           HO SP I r AL.S
    4 CATEGORY                   TR A N S P O R TS DOCTORS                                                              MT D i CAi
    5 CATEGORY                   A T TENDED         NORTHERN GENERAL H O S P IT A L                                     H O S P IT A L S
    6 CATEGORY                   ATTENDED           CONCOURSE                                                           WFST S T A N D
    7 CATEGORY                   AT' S C E N E ____ S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E A M B U L A N C E                       AMBULANCE S E R V IC E
    S



A D D D O C U M E N T A R Y C R O S S REI- E R E N C E                   (' Y )                              ENTER         1/ E / 3     TO     SK3P        XRET S
S E LE CT " A / C / N / 0 / S 7 I V V OR O P T I O N                           PARAMETERS

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *# * * * * * # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ■ * * * * # * * * * # * # * # * # # *
Incident              .COS           1 3 —1 1 - 9 /            OP 9 3 1            Sc reen pr i nt - te rmi na !. 014                                        P J.us code +UN

■?}■-s # -K-   •« * ■» * * * -k * * * * * # ■.«■ # * # # -s-« «• * # * # ■»-s- •» # •»•*• •»•#*••» # * # # # •» •* * * * ■«• * * -a-«■ •«•'S * * -p.-a- * ■«••«■««• -s * # -a--s * # * # ■;? -k *
ID S                                     UPDATE           N O M IN A L        -    AMEND M A IN               IN F O R M A T IO N                                   SCREEN           6 .2
                                                                                                                                                                                             l:
SURNAME                                                                           r i TT...E                                                       SEX                        IC
! O K ii N A M E S
Doh;                                                                   B IK T H P L                                                                AGL.                    TO
H E IG H T                    TO
0CCUPA1 IO N                                                                                     N o
E M P L O Y E R / S C H O O L NAME
               XHI1F          USL                                   OESC R I P ' I I O N
    1 ADDRESS             HOME
    S TELEPHONE           HOME
   3
    4
   5
     6
     7
     8
     9

ADD DOCUM ENTARY CROSS K E F H R E .N C t                                   (Y )                                   ENTER          1 /& /3       TO      S K IP      XREI S
S E L E C T A / C / N / O / S / T / V OR O P T I O N                           PARAMETERS

*•»*#•*•«#**#**###«* *•■#*•*                                                      •a#*****#**#**#                       **•*#*#•*•»                            #** *#•**
Incident                    108             13-"11 —97     OP731                Screen print - terminal 014 •- Plus                                                                  code +UN

■H       -S # • »   «■- H - H - *   K       'S i* ”         * •» # • # *          -H * - • * # • ) < • « • * * • » * * * * * * « * • > !   -Si          -H-■ * ■ * • * * # -M 54- 54 Si « • # * • » • # • » •!> -K -H

J'.0 8                                        UPDATE     NONINAL           -    AMLNO            M A IN          IN F O R M A fIO N                                           screen                 <s » e

SURNAME                                                                        T IT L E                                                                SE X                                ic
FORENAMES
DOR                                                              I,] 1 R T H P L                                                                       AG E                             '1 o
H E IG H T                  "TO
OCCUP AT :( ON                                                                              C iS l.
E M P L O Y E R / SCHOOL NAM IF.
              XRE F         USE                               D E S C R I P T 1 ON
    1 ADDRESS
    2 TEU. PHONL
   3 CATEGORY         L IN K                             L IV E R P O O L SUPPOKVERS                  SUPPORTERS
   4 CATEGORY         P O S IT IO N                      SEATF.:i) WEST S T A N D                     WEST S T A N D
   5 A2378                                               F A N Q U E S T FROM
   6 G IB 1 3 5 0     SUBJECT                            0 8 -0 5 --8 9
    7 Q8L2888         SUBJECT                            1 3 -0 5 -8 9
   8 GSL28S8                                                         S T S SAW F A N S D R I N K I N G O / S I D E A P U B 0!M T H E S T R E E T
                                                         ON THE WAY TO G R O U N D , WAS I N C R U S H O / S I D E 1 4 3 0 H R S

AD D D O C U M E N T A R Y C R O S S R E F E R E N C E                 (Y )                                           FNTER                -1 /2 /3   'TO S K I P             XREF S
S E L E C T A / C / N / O / S / I / V OR O P T I O N                      PARAMETERS




                                        L
'Incident                          108                        1;5~11-97                                  OP 931                      Screen print                                      terminal 014                                      P 1 us code -i-UN

■v.                * # * # * « k # * * * .* # • » # ■«                                                     -a a - * - a s - - a - * * - a - a - * s ?                        -a--s;-M»*•»•«•« -a -if *-a -a -s-h-h-h-b-k                                                -a-a-•«•■«■-a--ss-a-
 IQ S                                     UPDATE                          MOM'IN A I... -                    AM If. IMP ivIA I N                           IN F O R M A T IO N                                        SC R E EN                 6 . S'



                                        _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
SURNAME                                                                                                                              'I   tle                                                                               SEX                                      IC
I ORbNAMLS
DOB                                                                                                              S IR H I PL                                                                                                AGE                                  1"0
HG I GH"I                      TO
O C C U P A T IO N |
E M P L O Y E R / S C H O O L NAME
                                                                                                                                                                                 S+ IbZL
              XR EF            USE                                                                            D E S C R IP T IO N
                                                                                                                                                                           <as i_ ^'z.o
    1 ADDRESS           HOME
   2 T E L E P H O N E HOME
   3 CATEGORY           TNVOi V E D                                                               SURGE'S     I N CROWD                                                                         CROWD             SURGES                     IN S ID E
   4 CATEGORY           TAKEN        BY                                                           AMBULANCE S E R V IC E
   !::> C A T E G O R Y G U E S T /S Y A T                                                       IN J U R E D PERSONS
   6 CATEGORY           L IN K                                                                   T R A F F IC DELAYS                                                                            T R A F F IC                PROBLEMS
   7 CATEGORY
   8 CATEGORY            L IN K                                                                    L IV E R P O O L                       SUPPORTERS                                            SUPPORTERS
   9 CATEGORY             P O S IT IO N &                                                          G R I D I...7                                                                                PEN 4 S T A N D IN G

ADD D O C U M E N T A R Y C R O S S R E F E R E N C E                                                                    <Y)                                                     ENTER             1/E /3             TO        S K IP              XREFS
SE LE CT " A / C / N / O / S / T / V OR O P T I O N                                                                        PARAMETERS

• » * *'• *   ■# » ■»   * -Si- !!• ■*   •» *   •»   *   -si- -IS- S '   «■ *   Si- * -ft Si- * * -Si- • * * # • « • « • • *   « ■»   -Si- -H- -Si-   -if    # # * • » -Si- • » “Si- Si- -Si- ■» * # * # # -S' * * *   Si-    « • * • -Si- -H-» -H- # -Si- -Si- -Si- -Si- * # -Si- * • -Si- « • -Si-
    n c i ’rt e n t   108            14     11-97           OF 931               3 erasn            p r :i. nT,       t e r mi nsi. G14 ••••■ P J. us      cods      +UN

•K                              CS*• « • * * •» * # * ■;< * •« #•» * # • • * * •«« « « * #•*#•>:■##-8 *#-K         ii-S        •£•« K-■« -a-# #* •»• » **#•«•##•«■■#«**•:»•-a-
108                                       UPDATE         NOM INAL.         -     AM END         M A IN       INFORMATION                               SCREEN 6.2
                                                                                                                                                                             P
SURNAME                 I---------                                             t it le          m                                        SEX                   IC
FORENAMES               |
DOB                                                                 8 I R i'H PL                                                         AGE                 TO
F-H-’ 1 C-iSIT                            10
OCCUR A T I O N
KMPLOYCR 7 S C H O O L NAMIV
         XREF           USE                                     D E S C R IP f I O N
                                                                                                                     Q    & u / 1 0 2 .
  1 ADDRESS
  5 TELEPHONE
  3 CATEGORY       ENTERED                               G A T E C CROWD E N T R Y                                        CROWD S U R G E S O U T S I D E
  4 CATEGORY      R E F E R S TO                         M O U NT E D P O L I C E                                         P O L IC E FORCES
  3 CATEGORY       GUEST                                 IN JU RE !!') P E R S O N S
  6 CATEGORY      L IN K                                 T R A F F I C D EL.AYS                                           T R A F F VC P R O B L E M S
  7 CATEGORY       L IN K                                L IV E R P O O L SUPPORTERS                                      SUPPO RT E R S
  8 CATEGORY      P O S IT IO N 1                        G R ID H i                                                       PEN 3 S T A N D IN G
  9 CATEGORY       A S S IS T E D                        DECEASED

ADD D O C U M E N T A R Y CRO SS R E F E R E N C E                     (Y )                                       ENTER     i/2 /3     TO    SKCP      XREFS
S E L E C T A / C / N / O / S / T / V OR O P T I O N                      PAKAMETERS

#■» a - * * * * * * # m-it- «•*•**••»# «•      -a-a-•«          a      -       u- a- a * * # * - * * * a - * *     «•** *#*• *#•*                k                   «• »•» -a- a-




I
 I    c::i.dent            10ft         14-11-9?             OP 931                8 cra e n            pr 1n1                 te rn « 3n a l             !J 1 4      ■•••■ P l u s        c o d e + UN

          SRi-                      *    *   *   »   *   «   *   *     *   » • » • • « • # # # « • a - - S - * «■ H--K- M--K         K-    ii- <i-   »   S--» * K- ;!■ -«■ s-   X-U-%
                                                                                                                                                                                    ■ tt-%
                                                                                                                                                                                         ■ }<■U-» H # » • » » • »
iu e                                     UPDATE'         N O M IN A L           AM EN D              M A 'i N I N F O R M A T I O N                                                 SCREEN           6 „2
N2237                       W IL L IA M S                                 J AM E S                                  8 T EP HE N
SU RIMA Mf?.                 W IL L IA M B                                    T IT L E               MR                                                       SEX               M             1C
FORENAMES                    J A M E S ____                              STEPHEN
DOB                                                                  L! 1 R T H P L                                                                           AGE                           10
H E IG H T                         TO
0CCUPA1 IO N          C I V I L . ENG 1 IMLER
EMPLOYER /           SC HOOT. NAME
                XREF               USE              D E S C R 1P I IO N
                                                                                        2 ^ 1                           S                                    %         1        °i | A-
     1     ADDRESS          HOME
     2     TELEPHONE        HOME?
     3     TELEPHONE        HOME
     4     CATEGORY         8 2 9 1 S H 9 1 A B O D Y 5 1 W3 L L I A M B N 6 1 9           DEC; E A S E D
     5     C A TEGORY       L IN K            B O D Y 5 3 THOMPSON N 6 2 2                 D ECEASED
     6     N619              1 D E N T I 1 ED W I L L I A M S                    K E V IN                                                                              D A N 1 EL
     7     S291             SUBJECT           1 6 0 4 - 8 9 W IL L IA M S
     ft    B291A            SUBJECT           1 0 - 0 5 --ft 9 W I L L I AMS
     9     Ml 926           SUBJEC T          1 7 - 1 1 - 8 9 W IL L IA M S

A D D D O C U M E N I A K Y C R O S S RET E R E N C E                      ( Y)                                          E N 'iE R        1 /2 /3          10       S K IP          X R tfS
S E L E C T A / C / N / 0 / S 7 i ' / V OR O P T I O N                        PARAMETERS

■h -s •« « •«•*•»••»• * # # •* •«                                            •»•*•**■* -m-s--m--s -s #                           -s * #                          •« -a-s *
Incident              110            1£-11--97                               OP931                 Screen print                                         terminal 014                               Plus        code           HV!I

#*-R-a *-H * * * • » * # * •S •» •* #              -istt-H- # » * *     -Si   *•&        # •» * * * ■ } > :   ■S 5*   -H -H - H - S   - -K ' - JS -   -S-- S - - H -   -5S-S      *# ••» *« ******•«
                                D IS P L A Y         M IS C E L L A N E O U S                       IN F O R M A T IO N                                                                                SCREEN              1 9 .2

                                               i      n o             OPERATION                        W A IN                                                                                          L IV E

     NOM[ N A L8                              1623                      SEQUENCES                                                            13                  MESSAGES                                                       75
     V E H IC L E S                              0                      EVENTS                                                           1 ? 17                  RE Tl OR T S       ■*                                        366
     STREETS                                    27                      O T H E R N AM ES                                                                        TELEXES                                                          4
     1 IOUB! ■ S                                28                      A C T IO N S                                                       733                   OT! IER D O C U M E N T S                                    409
     TELEPHONES                                 17                      S T A T E M E N T S •*                                              68                   QUEST CON NA IR ES                                         1136
     CAT EGOR I P S                            £16                      P D F 'S            *                                                0                   ■ft C O U N T S E X C L U D E                    suf     i-1 x e s

     U N ID E N T    V E H IC L E S           CREATED                                                 0                       STA TUS DATABASES                                                        NO I" C R E A T E D
     UN 1 DEN T      S T R E E T !:!          CREATED                                                 0                       H IG H P R I O R I T Y AC T IO N S                                         NO
                                                                                                                               H PA T E R M I N A L S LOG * D O N :                                    NONE
S Y S i EM W i . D f c            1A i. L S

     S ‘l A T U B D A T A B A S E NOT St. R VE D                                         D A T A B A S E B T A ‘1E :      DOWN
     DOCUMEN f PR I N r P ROGRA Ms                                                       NOT I N P R O G R E S S
     D I S K N A M ES 5                                                                  1 X T I ^ H O L M E S "I X I 2 = D B A B E 4
     !'! 0 L ME S R E I...E A S E s                                                      3 „4       R E V IS IO N S



■K K -S -fi             'A -S                 •» -S -S- K- H ->C--S   -K #    * • * * # • » • » * -H - f t # * * *                            •» * # - K   #-S          M * ■ » ■« -H-H fi *   l   i   # - S * -H * • » # 'S -K ■« * • * *
Incident                    1 10             12-11 97                       0P931                   Screen            print                      terminal                 014           Plus         code          i-QE

•iH * * • * * * • « * * *   ■« * • * • » * # • * * * - » * -K *   * -K * • * • * * * * * • • » # • » » #   X    -K -K * • » • • « • • « * • » * # * - » *   * * * * *   * * * *   * •» * * * * *   * *   * * * *   * * * * *

                                                                            DOCUMKN I"                QUEUE           E N T R IE S                                                       SCREEN                1 1 .4
     E N Q U IR IE S             ON S T A 'f E M f ' N T S                                                     QUEUE TYPE                        NOT          READY         FOR       APPROVAL.

  DOCUMENT                  NO        DAYS                    R E S U r iP
   SI                                  •Si*             17 - " 0 5 - 8 9
    SP.                                   K -*         3 0 - 0 5 ..8 9
    S3                                   •ft *          1 5 -U :j --89
    S4                                   **            30 -0 5 -8 9
    S5                                   **            1 4 - 0 5 ..8 9
    S6                                   * *           3 0 ..0 5 - - 8 9
    S'7                                                0 8 ..0 5 - 8 9
    S8                                   * *           3 0 ..0 3 ...3 9
    S9                                   *■!!          3t!-~0 !L >-& 9
    3 1 ill                               M -*         3 0 -0 5 -8 9
    S 11                                 ■S -5         1      1i 5 ••• 8 9
    SI 2                                 * *           30 •-0 5 -8 9
    S13                                  **S           3 0 ..0 5 ...8 9
    S 14                                 H -*          1 3 -0 5 -8 9
    S IS                                 **            3 0 ..0 5 ...8 9

  ENTER           P     i'0      P R IN T         Q U EU E

* * * * * -S-K * * * * * # * * • * -H * ■ * # # • « * * - H * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * • ! ! * * - H * * • * * * * * • « * * - H *- f ? * * *                              K* * * * * * *       * * * * * *   * * *
rncident           1 10          12-11 -97             0P931         Sreen         pr int - te rmi na 1 0 14 - P 1us code + QE

*** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * •« * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * **
                                                       DOCUMENT       QUEUE E N T R I E S                                        SCREEN           1 1 .4
   IL N G U IR ltS     ON    STATEMENTS                                  O U EU E T Y P E         NOT     READY       TOR     APPROVAL

 D OCUMEN T NO              DAYS                RESUME
   816                       **           1 c '--0 5 ~ 8 9
   S 17                      **          1 8 -0 5 -8 9
   5.; 1 8                   **          3 0 "0 5 -8 9
   & 19                      K-*         1 3 -0 5 -8 9
   S20                       **          3 0 - 0 5 ..8 9
   S21                       H*          3 0 ..0 5 .. 8 9
   SHE                       **          30-- 0 5 - 8 V
   S23                       **          3 0 -0 5 ” 89
                             **          3 0 - 0 5 ..8 9
   S25                       S i- ft     1 1 ..0 5 - 8 9
   S26                       **          3 0 - - 0 5 ..8 9
   82/                       a-*         1 4 -0 3 -89
   c>2.8                     ■P.--A      3 0 ..0 5 - 8 9
   929                       **          3 0 - 0 5 ..8 9
   830                       **          1 2 -0 5 -8 9

 ENTER       P   TO P R I N T          QUEUE

*** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *** ** *** * * * * * * ***« * * * * * * * * * * * *** ** * * * * * * * * * * * *** * * * * * * * * * * *
incident                   110                   12-11 “97                           Of*931                  Screen print — terminal 014                                                       Plus code -i-QE

ft*                           # • * * • » - a 'a                   ■P:'H -A -u ¥. -u 'A -n -a # * -h -p - a - a -p. * # * * # * « - « * • * * « * # * • » • * # * * * * * «             *•»                                       •*•**

                                                                                  DOCUMENT G u e u p ; E N T R I E S                                                                             SCREEN                  1 1 .4
      EN Q U IR IE S :: ;        ON        BTATEHENTS                                                                     (s U E U t:         "! Y P E      NOT           READY       FOR     APPROVAL

 DOCUMENT NO                           DAYS                        RESUME
  S31                                      •S-K            30 .... 89
  S32                                      s-s-            30--OS™8 9
  8 33                                     •s *            18-05-89
  S34                                      ■a - *          30-05-39
  83!:>                                    # *             16-05 .... 39
  -Ss6                                     * #             -i1-05-39
  S37                                      ■P.- A          03 .... 03-89
  S38                                     # •»             13--05--89
  839                                      •S-H-           1 3 - -05- 39
  S40                                     -3-H-            11-05-89
  841                                      * •»            IE.... 05 ..... 89
  S42                                     -5i--S-          23-05--89
  843                                      -H--S-          12-03-89
  S44                                     ■?!■•«•          11-•05-89
  838 A                                    •H »            30-05-89

 ENTER P TO PRINT QUEUE

              * #   • S - H - H - t t * # * -H -H--S * * • « ■ * • ) ? - * # • « -S • » -S -H * • » * * # • » « • • « ■ * • » • * * • » # * - 8          * -H -H -iS -S     •« H •«         # •« f t - # * - * * * * #   # « • •» # •» ••»
1‘n c i d e T i t               £ 10           1£~ 11 97                        O P 931               Scr e e n             print                       terminal                        014 -- Pius                           c o d e +QE

* * * * * * * * -S-* * • » ■)! • Si - f t * - * * " * * * * * • » « • * * • * * # * # * # - H - - S - S - H - S ■!! •« • « • * * -K * * * - * • «       # * * ■» > •« ■ «        * * * • ; ! * * * * * • « • * * # * # « • * * * • « • « •»••»■




   D OC UM EN T                 IMO      DAYS                      RESUME
       B45                                   •k-s        0:::>-‘-06-~89
      B46                                   •«•*         0 7 -0 6 --8 9
      84?                                   **           0 7 —0 6 —8 9
      348                                   ■» *         0 7 0 6 —8 9
      849                                                (.18-06-89
      S50                                   **           07-06-89
      851                                   •**          08-06-89
      S5H                                   **           14-06-89
      846A                                  **           16-06-89
      S46T!                                 *■*          19-06-39
      S53                                   **           15-06—89
      S55                                   **           26-06-89
      856                                   ■**          06-0?-89
      S57                                   **           11 0 7 -8 9
      8 58 A                                •**          1 8 -0 6 90

   ENTER             P      TO      P R IN T        Q U EU E

•Si * • * « • *   ■'& *   * *   K- * *   * * * * • * * * * • •« -K * *                 •* ■*   %*   * •« * • * # *   S • * -Si Si- •» « ■ # • *   V. V. #   "8 4 t *   *   * -K • * •»• *   -U K ■*   -S * • * -H * -H • » -S * •«• • » ■!{• -U •«■ • * • » • *
fncident                    110              12-11--77                     OP931                  Screen print - terminal 014                                                         Plus          code -t-QE

*--a * **■*■*■•**■*•* * -a* * *••*«•# -a *•*•* * -a-a -a-* -a * -a--a *•*•*•« * -a -a « * * * ■ * * ■ * * * * ■ * * -a -a a -a * * *•* •*•**•* * * •* •* ••» * *•* ** * ■* •* •* **•*•
                                                                           DOCUMEN f                 Q U EU E E N T R I E S                                                                SCREEN               1 1 .4
     E N Q U IR IE S              ON      STATEMENTS                                                      QUEUE T Y P E                     l-'OR      APPROVAL

  DOCUMENT                  MO         DAYS                     RESUME
     Bb4                                  **            H 7-D 4-& 9




  ENTER P TO PRINT' QUEUE

•a-*• -a -a * * -a * -a- a -a--a * -a--a -a--a-* -a -a--a--a--a a--a--a--a--a-* -a -a -a--a -a- * -a -a--a -a a -a -a-* •«•-a- -a -a -a--a- a- * -a--a -a -a--a -a -a--a--a--a- -a--a--a a- -a -a--a -a -a-* * * * * *• * * * *•
 incident                          110                   12-11-97                               OP931                    Screen print                                         terminal 014 ••- Plus                                                          code +QL:'

-Si- * * * * * • * * -Si- * -Si- # -Si- * -ft• * -Si- * •» *         %
                                                                     ■•«• Si- Si- *   -Si- * -Si- si- -Si- * •«• * * » * * # Si- -Si- -Si- Si- Si- •» Si- -Si- -Si- » *   Si- Si- # * • •*• Si- Si- -Si- -Si- H- -H- Si-* • Si- Si- -Si- Si- Si- -Si- Si- Si- Si- 8- -Si- Si- S- -Si- * Si- Si- -Si-

                                                                                             DOCUMENT                        QUEUE E N T R I E S                                                                                       SCREEN                                1 1 .4
      E N Q U IR IE S                    ON        STATEMENTS                                                                   Q U EU E T Y P E                             NOT             READY                  FOR             APPROVAL

   DOCUMENT                       NO            DAYS                        RESUME
    S58                                            -SS--S-          HO- 1 0 - 8 9
    SH9                                             •S-tt           0 6 -0 2 -9 0
    S60                                            -Si- -Si-        06-••02 -9 0
      S61                                           -Si'-Si-        13- 0 6 - 9 0
      362                                          •Si- Si-         1 3 -0 6 --9 0
      S63                                          -Si-Si           1 3 -0 6 -9 0
      864                                          -Si-Si-          1 3 -0 6 -9 0
      B6:>                                         ■Si Si-          1 9 - 0 6 ..9 0
      S66                                           Si--Si-         1 8 - - 0 6 —9 0




   ENTER                P      10        PR INI QUEUE

■Si -Si--Si--Si--Si -Si # -Si*-Si -Si--S -si--Si-Si-ii -SS--Si -Si--Si -Si--Si--Si -Si--Si -K-Jf-H -Si -Si -Si Si -S-3 -Si -Si--Si-Si -Si-Si--S-1 -Si -Si--K-Si--H -Si-Si-S; -Si--H--S-SS--Si-K H--Si -S    ■»-Si- *    -Si -Si- -Si- -Si-Si -S- -S -ii • * • * #                       *•« #
Tnc i ' d l n t        110               1 2 ..1 1 - 9 7                   OP 9 3 1   S creen        p r i. n t   ■ ■■ t e r m i n a J. 0 1 4                PI us          code          +QE

**•» •»       -H «   -n K H   S J4 M M- S S -M H # • » • • * * • • * * *                # # - 8 ■£ -K -K                     * * # * * * ■ » ■ * ■ » # # -Si -S-S -H * # • * • • » • *

                                                                           DOCUMENT    QUEUE E N T R I E S                                                        SCREEN                 1 1 .4
    T N Q U iR iiT S          ON      S T A T E M E N T 'S                                Q U EU E T Y P E           APPROVED

 DOCUMENT             NO           DAYS                  RESUME
  S68                               *■*             2 2 -0 & 90
   S6 /                                             24       0 7 -9 0




 EN TER       P TO PR1NU                      QUEUE
20/11/1337   12:11      01712732007                  HILLSBOROUGHSCRUTINY                       PAGE      01




                THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                Room 1106
                50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, 5W1H 9AT
                Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




       FAX
       To:      PC Ken Greenway
                South Yorkshire Police

       From: C F BONE
             Secretary to the Scrutiny

       Date:    20 November 1997                           Time 12.00

       Recipient’s Fax            0114 252 3855
       Number;




       Number o f pages (including this one): ONE




       To confirm our telephone conversation, I would he grateful
       if you could arrange to have the originals of all statements
       by Debra Martin, former S Yorks Special Constable brought
       down here by your Chief Constable’s driver next Tuesday.
       You said there were three of these statements.

       Please also arrange to have copies of all three faxed to me
       as soon as possible.


         CB
                            IF A N Y P A R T O F T H IS FA X IS U N C L E A R
                               PL E A SE T E L E PH O N E : 0171 273 2512


20 NOU   ’97    12:07                                                  0 17 12 7 3 S 0 0 7   PAGE.0 0 1
     **     TX   CONFIRMATION   REPORT        **         AS OF      20       NOU   ’ 97   12:24   P A G E . 01

                                                                    S    V    P




   DATE      TIME           TO/FROM                     MODE       M IN/SEC        PGS      STATUS
0 1 11/20    12:1?              0 1 7 1 £ 7 3 2 0 0 7   <33—   S   07 "43          12        OK
                                                                            Discipline & Complaints Department
                  South Yorkshire
                                                                            Hillsborough Scrutiny

                  POLICE                                                    50 Windsor Road
                                                                            Heeley
                  JUSTICE           with     COURAGE
                                                                            SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                                     Facsimile Transmission

D ate:       2 o -if.3 7

To:            t i l L L Z £®&OUCdl       < S c& M X (tJy    TM W


For t h e a tten tio n of:            p d     tw u s


C om m en ts:                       "A3                                                              7


                    Oo-pCes)    g+jqA                          <£j     S 4 ik J Z ^ e ^ '


  tQ '& lom ^ W v .c     M A r /lT i^ .

                       S ( jL 0*^T               flAJkaCt.    U-     1 ) t c - i j L * A ^ ^ - i

  dJUL                                               fbuce -


  **m .      y»c_                   f a *      o,                                //, s 7




From:                          /?

T e le p h o n e N um ber:          o//Cf      2 g 'Z /o ^ 7

N u m b e r o f P a g e s (in clu d in g t h is p a g e )           7 ^ / ^ vfcf

In th e e v e n t o f a p o o r c o p y , p l e a s e c o n ta c t:-
S o u th Y ork sh ire P o lic e - D isc ip lin e & C o m p la in ts D e p a r tm en t
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106                                        Our Ref:      D&C/KG/NJT HD 114
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
S W 1H 9A T                                      Date:         21 November 1997




RE: LEE NICOL, STEVEN ROBINSON, TRACEY COX AND DEBRA MARTIN

I refer to your letter of 19 November 1997, relating to the body files of Lee Nichol and Steven
Robinson and your facsimile of the 20 November 1997, requesting the original statement of
Debra Martin.

I have made the necessary copies of the body files of Lee and Steven for the Hillsborough
Family Support Group, and enclose them together with the body file of Tracey Cox and the
statements of Debra Martin as requested.

Thank you for your assistance in this matter




K Greenway
Police Constable
Discipline & Complaints

Enc




                                               The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                               Police Constable Greenway
                                               Tel (0114) 282 1047     Fax (0114) 2963113
                                                                                                                                                     •/
        s

        j                   S si                                                                                                               WG 412
                                                                                                                                         (Amended 9.87)
                                                           W est M idlands PoSice
ILE
                                                   S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E S S
22 29                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M,C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C, Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25          Jame
26
27          ^ge . ------------- 1. . . (yrs)                   Date of Birth
28
            )ccupation

22 29       ^ m e or business address
23 30       ind telephone number
24 31
25
26
27
28

            rhis statement, consisting of            page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29       and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
            lave wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
27          Dated the                 ^              day of
28

            signed                                                                       Signature witnessed


                                                                                         Officer's Name


                                                                                         Rank . . . .T-.W

                                          I . . iv H v .. k b a           jClv.Vs.                    .Cv.vird. .1 U vr.               ty x


             iuyue. .! CmV .fvW a 3 ^ . # . .ppUc* eov^tabk A\m tip£r Z2Li.

             y h \ vce.
                               Ovv.                                        : W v l. \Q ^ b ,      J. . f k h X t t a                            ............


             wr^. i\ ,bc\rfvv\q. |cw:.cut                                       yvvv^Y^. W                                                    ........
                                                                                                                  ;j \ k >
              tlX      ^
                             . . . . \ p; Zc v , \ v w                _iCVvij'v\0r t o . .tU tA v |v v .&£. . A U e ^ o o t b a it

                                  & :A           . i c y e . Tr i t e .     4        ;      .    # e o & . e o v j M t e * ............. ,.
                            /W             \ Q -2 *p (v .lVV .V                 . V\*                       H -                             .........
                                                               . .^ p v > lrt „ .V o . , 4 p p .      XWr                                 lA f).

             &\                           . c ^ . .i t e M        t # . . 4 k ) v v t e / ^ .1               AV.H5. w # .


              CK. yf rty.>ovvfl.                         VWiM A t p ^ .                                iVv#-. ^tf<nvpp>v,:/tt . ...
              Uvbjii.vK.hJ,                     W & d r t o . CjO. t o. & ? * < A<>..........
               & >e«;                             o u fe y d f :tV &                                                         &       . i % . .............
                               (bgc£gy> ^j t y               '. /li. t o .                         . \ . .-^(\V>i. C1£*6tit                             ,\qa$
            Signed                                                               Signature witnessed by'
              Delete as applicable.


                                                                                                                                 T
                              £>
                                                                                                                                                      WG 413
                                                                                                                                                (Amended 9.87)
                                                     West Midlands Police
                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                   (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of                                                                    ■   IV \ ,‘ \ f i » 1

    \.       .vV.v.u*v.                             Ay^&iV\ .i\\VA. .ivUsVi^                         .Oifo.Q.
, ,<NC\\x. vWv'»V iv‘M                               bcR v. /wt\p:oVr{ a\v\ ftvylA, A e \ ^ / ^ ry f wHo
.Vhc.vv. /vPNA.ci.v)Uj. .v.\‘'A.vVvfe> ft#(V .v6^]V . . Q , t . > h v ^ . - M w f . .                                                    ..............
            vV\C),                    vfcbiv)............................................................X ............................................
                     r i i . . >VP.c? ^ v k ^ , .4>?i>ivl. . . ! .               .................................t
                                                                                           . k > . , M fyfee.. W^ ) Wi-Wj.
                                                                                                                      w . y^ p . .tW ,
                           uamc.                             & . ) . .^A M A . HV.yat.\ IVvvuS M .tite .
,S\ lA^.vV^ . t o iVl^r .S f k i r+.                                 . /Wf. VlV) \$VlW.                                 . <M;Vi4. .<VqW>v. «...
                 M . . i’ybcvvi. ?. O o o ivv.. i W . w<fv\ .fe v b k / i t / l i m ,tu» jvfok*
w v v                     .(^ c V U .g s ? .# .                                  . t ^ v \ \ mv. i i ; .W i v K j . Vq T.Hc^V.            o v V1,.    .
 w t.<y..A .uS jH .^. C\vyv^Vvy. ftK -. c o v v V A .                                . p p y . ivv,                yfycyv^i^j-.
.ivvo'vlvv^                        'Vvu.yvs\vv>               vh v^r.V) t.^yyy^.                vjyy.v*-) .\m. .t^vyjAi^sAs sti
.fe w v ^ V k ..fc v fe .                         . C W f £ .p t c f l w i t . & k i & v K ]
 dvvjiV . \ . .V y a d .                                .m     AW        . ^ ) v ^ c y t S ( .< t iv v ^ ;                     vy^: ^ | v \ m .k W .
    i , , YSCV>. .c.VV. U l t . .OcihV. **V£t& xC\vV\..lHC,                                               , vVWKts-. .y&?£
  wyy, M C U .OVvl. .cm <. , AVu:. , Awy! vsVik^&vy& .'iKeiy. m \ \ . vt\u
tevftc. .vvtVyvit^. .ck J c m te^vv\n , Vp . . f y t , Wl. J&W A p., VvUvCVv U ® £.
                d ftu o iu v H . M t f . )yc)3B ^ . to vvQ .$mW&. w p                                                                                     ..
:\V \k . y>iTv^W.        . y y t A . .liyy>v(). .k n o w y s .^ i/ft                                                                               ........


  h t e . \3AiL. ^ c o v H v d ; A ^ ^ M . .*yvv)4€if. f e . U i ,C C k \W A .
  AA i ... / ) I y \ i 1
.           .C ^v^,yvyM^pk.W.
                       .. \ ill* 1*-A.-<* i'fv I .' I i I V' O
                                                                         ..'WCivvto. g
                                                               ik A ^ I i s !; f ^ ^                                           - -i


    Q v t o ) : > d . VyOrcV. .to , \ d . ,oh.                                               ,V\>
 . ^ v y V V a t ' . ' k W v v . Vyy>.yvd\;K...i. , ^ V . ^ i V ^ K d . t o . /IHc. 4V o o J . ...
 . f e . c ^ e t . .b c K ^ V o .             ^ t f c t > y . ^ \ v m k ) . s y v v ) ^ . Uf.
   C v . ^ v f v / v C x .to <C;V C .1A k t y y . r^Jy'vti'wUxr. c ^ v v v v i f l .JVVVJ. £&.■$,.C\w\. . .
 . /(iyyaviivij. j ^ v w e y i . . W y t t c V . . W i t . f\c p . v . i M . , . tor f o t y v p j . jike, ...
        — HxV"teKCVwd.                         C M c i . v y a c i .fc>4y \ .beKiM.iv^.• I.
                      : M . ^kvi.V'(l. oyy,.iVie,. i^W.. jo .fet i# .o il, b\4 . &&$- .
     VU;.                     r i i ! . K & ,o\^v\                     . i t . u |v a i , ik i.                                .


            vvu A . UytcV. to. .v\tvf..m. A .ife . !vvow^yi^'/®»Mf,           M .
     ivCi:Ve...vvp. m 0 ^ ^ .. t W . y ] a t .(^ c w m \.yfc. a. .4fe v t, .H ^ frv v c V .
    ,Vtt..iyvt             "l,y
                      J   v k i     aybyc^            \.m        \ y d j w ^ . . ^ m w < \d f& .ty
 .M      a'V^,   •                            Afe.
                                          ^ y b t\^ i t Xvvvd.
                                                        . iicHBstti. .b y                                                                . / t y y ,.
         1’ ‘''" 'iyvy\ .i.ttck>. .^. .An)..Awd.calV .^ /.
Signed                                                                     Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                            WG 413
                                                                                                                                      (Amended 9.87)
                                                  West Midlands Police
                                         STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . . . .                                               M    /N ^ , 1 \ -.

.to. .V^.. .l-.».v»yV. ,^CVyVL\C .IVU' . .(^VW;v;V'VV\tt. ,^V'MmiS                                                           M
 * M iG         a h u v . V k 'U K U A . b a c k . :W                 .l y ii.; f t v v a : .1 ,             te .A V u

                - & .1 4 . d . . i w . .(UpVvVurt, {\vvybVVVA>.i'C£>.i'Vvvci. P p fe -.p X V :)
                 tW^vvvvrt u> I K i a                  0vv{v o f       \W        A f t v v n d - VhVviW \ _ M                     to

. U .K . . f t W y y y c f - } / A W . . A - y y d . . P i . . m t . A \ ^ v ^ l . V .#yy> » a A u w .                                 ...........
. & $ v v ( ? r c v v t M r . ; \ k e :t> v \v v ^ v v W . ;Vf M \v v g . t e .c ^ i . W v ; t t . wwv^t. k \ V k .
.§ i m      . . .^ v b o ^ t / b i v v : U w v t 4          ^ a u ) f ». . a W u u         M                                                .........
. m . P i k * . . M R ' t ; . AC /VVvtXt.VHvVvVV. y ^ w v i t a                                     £ ( p v v d a t . i f e ................
. S ^ Q y v v . W cp. .r-.vvcV.. r v t u v v b ^ c c v . A . f c y v t . lo e ^ v v V '^ ,tWVA. .1 . v s < . W > . . . .
     x.Mi'VVi.V.V..OJpQ.vvt.. 4 opo cutovctfc.
                                      ;e r v \ v t . . \   UVv) , .      )      Vvb?S. . f e vM D \ y l . . ^ V i d i O N . ,1.
.CjjCt'.\v^.v%r^u.. tyswKV, &\ \ cvyjv. ytit..va ic\.c. fete;                                 . .^vyyryv ....
.Wvv>.                     &>y;L.(..t y i c U & ' v v j ? . o v y . M . fAf t t i hq\.^c....
. ity^.vvi\vi.             Vyvyyy^dk..........................................................            ' T . ...

          T. v. . . . . . .O.VWX. .C.v.v. . i k e . |ytcvi. \ . ia.vM. a .W     V. d . .fv’cpfc ,h H .p . .
>*:.»£. oiivovvitj                        rvw i . t .0 &VV. <?.ivwvfe<. k.MftVV. GcivVvvvq
          JVMs. .~#yCVyVyV\i), A."Th£^«.&s.xho i > c / s p > . . .V......
.\V\tyV. ^AH. ^O0 £ HVyO,.kppatf'd. to. te.ctecvd,                                     . H^C...4 C»EMyiiVi(]
.CvvyA, >yto.lytyyy0 , {VyvA.^yvtWt) vyci%\ M y £ . ct)w » > £ ) . p y v t e .ttip^fo.ku
                    1 ^VMv-W.y.K uvv ti,!. Kv.vycx. U : vu nww c vuvw''.vvvvvr........
             .^C(^U.,.c\vvOk,HCV?4 i.^ . k?yfe iViUvi- pyv.                                        to ttu

                                             \be» A&vMJ *c i j "i ■ ti e
         ,U'vld 1 CTvVi t' iVU'l'V.........................                              ( W'od seats)
                                                                                         v
 C^MC 1utoV fctc -


 v v v k ' f t k , . Pv WCV . w       v # .          .^ : V    \ vjvvvq. t $ . l e w               . (X . . ^ v v u } . b o y ) A . ; . . .

                       .. A O M ^ v u v a V v v W v v v q . . o v t . . % . . f e c k . p . ^ . f y y v ) . . W c k t b u t
     v   $ \d iiA                                    ^ v i t v t ; yyvw cV i . U # r . n ' y ^ !. j P » M                   . A - ...................

  V A u jC . , - M ^ f i y w ^ . J           C .O y # . 4 0 c /                                     . t7QVVVC^^>.tvt . O H            i % . ..

                                                                                                         A . t b V . .c ^ v v v t.o f.

            v v v w y v b er ; .c ;( . . b a t o A                                     (’ a i u r w i t o      tV u ’ .a w v t .- .



 lk        m \c v v . y i f t y t H ) s. \ \ t                        b \ . Q & m } . ko. A .                        . W v ^ . ...
     iW . .^ w x c l . \ m              ^O M . V p l \ l ? . i v w w i e , m d .                              d e e m .       m         .
 S s s m c X . K . - m y k t . f e ^ t t y v y y q . #( \ v \ A . c | M                    . Ha
 .   s ^ iV .            .   A 'nA q m \ . & Y \ & ; M y v . K< t" hVU(........................
                                                                     ',i4



Signed                                                                Signature witnessed by
                                                                                           4
                                   & b !                                                                                                                     WG 413
                                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)
                                                                       West Midlands Police
                                                             STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                             (C.J. A ct 1967, s,9; M.C. A ct 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)




......... A t...4 o tec>\vv Es*?. Co(Wfcj4 tCv t f c i . dCCvW).£WKt .1...........
iiM&i. wv\V. wUVV i WO.W. ,'\cxuVC \CvV/-, (V vAuV %             Aok
 S V - S T \*- ©vVv-j, iU*u biw)id iXuri. biQVMvv Wait. wiIU l\
..e.n,t..wvu:ii:r. vcvd CVwvv , k feci                           l)diie ShiXt
 .................................,...................................................                                         , V ],




                                                                                                                               .
 w m .                                                                  Vyvte.IpCM {.W.ufe S0O.ckb. civvi.
                                                                                     iV y o ife W     l.   j w u V . i K . i v i c k v t . C k ' w w .

.KV.VW. .tx c p K V .                      vvqvvv              Q\.                                                Ifc & y        &VVCV. . & W ..............
.^vfevy^^.^.%.' .V$4                                                                                                 w .w m w                ,.\.Vftfo..
, & v v \ c V . .o v v .; .. tV vc. .vvyv\vte.*.'. c j ^ v v . f e . t t v v ) . f e y ) . .i ^                                  . t5 \ . . ......... ..
........ I...                                       . .w.v.Uy;W.^ .tr*.Vv\.cvvvcw. .QX.-5?*7Qk^ss .^vv.vK-kWj.
It                          Avv. A)Vi£M.\YVttLCU\WA. fyy.vct. \. .vh(-vvP. . .vs.tfe :th4-.........
f c a ,V v \.                                    h y f i t ,T>.-                               .c v v ^ V .^ ? ^ n H s ..t a



          t\). i v i i l v t . l i e . iwvJi                             ’< ^ ( 1 . O v . n i .                                n ! v )V.1. <Vv£.'. I__

          "                                 V' ^         ^                                 ^                  -CJ.V b i v v v d a y . i b . " ...........


                    A x             ab o u t                                               A lp v u V u ) S .              \
                                                       "                                   h u.^.\                                 jvSvsk . £vt...
 \W\AA V v o w u i-, ’^ c                            i > W ^ U l t . Vt> \ y C                   .&                   j. COfvp          &   . t g f e f b 't
 o       r . d            ^                                                 \      'y M v v ^ p k          a v b .e -M                           \.
  l\ M . W .HrVV^. VV>..C.VV3 )TK.d . LW. . b ctH          111 1 1 4
 dwvCV- oli.lv.'PQV^X.'vi. ...d$& k C\Vv. >VV&YYVC). .k&flMAS . tV.Ud*,<L.\Vlct.
fe w .vvo. 7wvJ>(vcfi\:vot\.ivvCklc.hM.iivttevts. 1.v#Mfc V>o>vvcf(lit-...
 I     oaw                  m             \ \ .\ M                  .iw v v .s t i f l m .to .b a t y . s                 l }.                         ............
                                ^yvV, M.vv.iV ,Hiuu»^s..b.-.gr/:S.r7.3.. o i l                                                                    ............




Signed .                                                                ................       Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                        SA/17
                                                                                                                                    WG 414

                                        West Midlands Police                                                                        (S.8.)
                                                                                                                                    (Amended 10.87)

                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                            (C.J. Act 1967,8.95 M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Name
               fy                                                                                      <5
Age                            (Yrs)        Date of Birth      Cwtf-          '
                                                                              2.1

Occupation                    {^£kJ tac .
Home or business address
and telephone number




This statement,consisting of    I    page 0 each *signed by me, istrue to the best of my knowledge and belief
and I make itknowing that, ifitistendered in evidence,I shall be liable toprosecution ifI have wilfullystated
in itanything which I know to befalse or do not believe to be true.

Dated the ^ 2U. day of


Signed                                                             Signature witnessed by

                                                                   Officers Na m e             T       v(»Uuocw

                                                                   Rank                                            No(^8
        Further to my previous statement dated                                                                1989, on
         — *                                                                                       U
liH.                          1989 I was shown a video tape Reference Number

              )     Exhibit Number (                   ) by PS/P£

of the West Midlands Police.

        At tape reference number                                                                         (Da ta— %ets€l Re a 1

Time) I can identify myself on the video, located in the top lcffr/top

          /centre /-bottom lof t/botfcenc right of the picture.

        At this point I was engaged with the deceased



                                                      ,U w „         U              cckW
                                                                                       tv '    X X                                           +

                                                                                      i        ft         t    «   =    w       A     V
              it    AJlO.


       (L *   ,L ,,                  U jtj        w e ll       ^          ^               -Q


                                                                      U/S
                                                                                                        (Lit       A
                                                                                       r

Signed                                                      Signature witnessed by


 * Delete as applicable
                                       *(Please describe involvement)
                                                                                                                                                                                             WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)

                                                                        West Midlands Police
                                                                STATEM ENT OF W ITNESS
                                                 (C.J. Act 19 6 7, s.9; M.C. Act 19 8 0, s . 102; M.C. Rules 19 81, r.70)
22 29
23 30
24 31
        lame , . 0 . V .                                           fM s j €                        W \ ff \ v     . A _\ f c s j .
25
26
27      kge                                       (yrs)                     Date o f Birth                 ,
28
        )ccupation . , , ,S p '.- C v ^ i- x

22 29   lom e or business address
23 30   ind telephone num ber
24 31
25
26
27
28

        'his statem ent, consisting of        \       page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best o f m y knowledge
22 29   ind belief and I make it know ing th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        lave w ilfu lly stated in it a nything w hich I kn ow to be false or do n o t believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
                               Cr ­                                                                                                                         19    <
27      eated the                                                 day o f
28

        5igne<                                                                                                   Signature w itnessed by .


                                                                                                                 O fficer s Name




         ..                                                            . . . .' x w                    .                                                    . . . C.-i.              c)

         . ' S y r r . ..                                       . . w s p . ,:                         . .                                    . . . \ 0 C = L .                . . . « V


                    . i'N .    . . . . . .                                  j   .    . .   .'I                                  C ..’.   .    .

                                                                                                                                                                                     ; v - ...............
                                   /r o s ./n N t v ’g T T T T . .
                                                                                                                                     .v./^ ^ : \ v . .. Nv:

              .t^Vs-C :*?-                          ,C                                           . .                                                .   .   S A c v W -^ V p o C ts

           , W         \ . V . ’ .- ,0 i w \ .    - *. .


                                                                                                                                                                  • • • -v                             •



                                                  . . . 3 . . . . Ck                                           ,o J v .-sY *                 .-rVfes . . \S> P^., :.. Nr \..V
                                                                                                                                                                          r ^ v \<

                                                                      .,c3 .e .c.                                                                 9-V.v.’C'. . . D                           .Q~A. .
        V O . vX^Vxc .vn.-'v^ ' d .                        .   (< 'P P P ? H        .C                           Cr4V >. <?




         Signec                                                                                                Signature witnessed

         ’ D e le te as applicable.
                                                                                                                                       1... WG 412
                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)
                                                        West Midlands Police
                                                 STATEM ENT OF W ITNESS
22 29                                   (C.J. Act 19 6 7, s.9; M.C. Act 19 80, s . 102; M.C. Rules 1 9 8 1 , r.70}
23 30
24 31
25      Name
26
27      Age                              (yrs)              Date o f Birth
28
        O ccupation . . .

22 29   Home or business address
23 30   and telephone number
24 31
25
26
27
28


        This statem ent, consisting o f 5 " '          page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best o f m y knowledge
22 29
        and belief and I make it kn ow in g th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
24 31   have w ilfu lly stated in it anything w hich I know to be false or do n o t believe to be true.
25
26
27      Dated the          I                      day o f
28

        Signed                                                  I                  Signature w itnessed b>


                                                                                   O ffic e r's Name . . .   /N.PP.lfc. AO jsj. ..
                                                                                   Rank . .                       No. .




                               . Jbvx W&k ... Ac... VYvvt... .. .^Q^vVwvJr.                                               ..
                                             ... XkVx... to... .C^d/k ..... .IjgUcwvvnQ. ....
                               .. ,0v\... SaXu* cVo^v                                         .. P^m t.... \ M C\ . .. A.’.!..
              I a j e y .V m A . . . 0 y > . ..         X                      ^              .        . . . c . y ...                         ..

                                                 X U : ......... ..........................._________S ^ v w v : . .
           . .ja c A V x x X L .. .v v v o k U                  ....                          ... U     v tx p tA J . . . B e . , . . .

           ..^ 0 J y H X .. . . Ki.w \ \ v w \ & W X * v \ . . . . F .o w tS .\~r.......... F. C. . . ..
           . w c ^ . s . .. f c ^ v v q . . . .                      . , . ^ a u ^ d ........... o k . . .                 .......................


                                    \ Y v ^ . . . r U ^ X u 3 L v c v \ .. .0 1 .. . A : W .. .                                     . . . . oO Ll . .

           . X W x X ............                       . . . . 0ws .>' .~vL. . . . V r Q s Q l s ^ . . . . . Q ^ v & . . U ^ \

           . .As... JX.... V(                            Uc                          \ !r rA                JL S'* ^ \ fi . ,
                                                                                                  C U 6 .Q S>k v
                                                                                                                              I \
                                                                                                                               \
             Im G      s




        Signec                                                      (. • • •   Signature witnessed by
        * D eiete a s applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                WG 413
                                                                                                                                                          (Amended 9.87)
                                                  West Midlands Police
                                           STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Ruies 1981, r.70>


C ontinu atio n o f s ta te m e n t nf                *             jCLy\v...... Cy) A Cl \jjJ _                                                      z
                 _______ |.. .1... \ J d X . .. .^UWr. . XX... Z q m )qs L .
  .A.b           £X. .. .HrauXV           o y ... JlW ^          )       ud.                                                         IWxfc...........
                        m w s . e y : u . . . . , ..................................... r U v C . l U d l o A ^ . . .               d i    . ..             j&   V.

                                         ....'.is .... p o ^ .^ l.u                                     U v C k j y ^ x U ...».............
                             Q jm                                      .......... , € * | ............. . w s A i V ^ V ................. . . . 1 .

   CUrf.iv-Mi. . .Osl.... A s iL .... .Up p wvca........L cua c . ..
                                                                                   i f\ . ^ . f.
   A fe.. ,-^W. . .c^f.e^A.cX. . . C« r y . . . . rv         \ ^.           i
                                                                . V w w _i..........
                  D v\.... JtL'A ... $AhXs           ^w X ... J         X lx d ..........
                y.. Axmt.... .i.. .... C^c’t ... ,cw\ti....             .... pA \vV>......
   i V...    VX,i l ... .A x\... .W . .VVVCi^            Lc>a. Vu^cw . ,.
                                                              .                                                                                              .



   WrOr^ ... p.csWji..                   ./CtuvcL         .tkojpo   csv.Hues...
                                                                 p CSV ■t- W f.'D       .QAk
   O.vty. ALsJU . p \ QoUl          \        Ic w U L ... SUL'....
                                                          .VJL.... O |LLCp
                                                                       LC pk... ifciW -.
    > c u i ^ c u ^ d , . . . . t o . . . S o * ______ w v y t u c i C i                                C v M v t k ..                            w u .|..

   CkLMk-.v. .W^LvsCi.... .Ov\                                    kXsX ....pi. ItlAa .>.... I .... .w a s .. w * . .
   XX... ^teXx.                  ^Vmelw. .       \      .C^vCVaX V         Vv-AA/C.vvr.
   WXvXL.... ,-fa o ..... d j i ........ Wudi.  vv        \\CxhjJi £iX..\V\ SfajALk' .
   Wu.^i.... Vd . ... .VvtLi... \ V l \ t      plc.p’        . A/y>....           .. !cLtt?h..      .   .


   u\j-      ,lV\ CUi          !         U5VsUl .,.....
             !.... UXvX V.... .Xk/uA^L'Oi.. J&              S\SS)jy. . . VNA. . ,CXMA4......
   CWJctul v .. .Yv\ a^. ... £x O xt.......!<V\£X*tmuA.t}.... D.vj-o.. JX>i‘......
 ntxJb               V >ak... ckvv... w , u    e x ... s d .,... >            .v t .........
 'tWXV               *     Oup.^ /.C^a^vvd       ’v U i'^ '.o L      pxc.pVi...
   tX\ .                                                  .VliCL......
   \ ... CWCl.      \i\£-V Cv\ VrL.... CVsa-wu CsL .. .-kX/\lHt. —                      ......
    .^Vusx^kiux. .h i.. . ) € w £ ) j £ k > \ .\o k u -.^......W \a ,5.sa a 4 ... , ..........
    ,'^fcferC..dJLCU^JJl                  i^\/\0JL ...                          .............
                               ^ L L C .^ \ j w           ( i x o d j ^ y v . Q . _____ . W             a .U » \   .,. ^U      a   JL . . ^ h j ^ L W s v n

  -C J b            ^V LvSi                . V n^^ k' v \ C A . . . . L         A
                                                                                oL' : a JL                  'ri.N /vd ..
    .. JjlxJL... £xi s w a                 ixVAC,           Nj\vDJ&J------
   \t> .. A i c X . . . . . .^D y-x... V s X n . ... E v \.i.... <j L .. -XVsJLJ . .
   . A ... !>$vvv&-...           .... A W jJ t         bocU^^             V M txi....                                                                            ...
    UO l v x . a d               H       sy v \           iiv > x               U     ^     .   u a         <^a              L o - v ^                       )...

              ............. \li . . . . ..k^/vi    Sp.UJVA.     Vua^l . . r^V>.d . . . .o y
    . A3v>?-...... c^f .nwy^.0                cxan 3..      -A^si-kv..........         *\a .                                                          .

                                                                               r i t c I < VI
    . pYOv^tj.          GY>            JviyvL.    p.i \ x k           I
Signe                                                      l .        Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                        WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                  (Amended 9.87)
                                                              West Midlands Police
                                                    STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                         (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of                                                 .. .d O w v v l                     ty \A ^ T \        J                       3
          -U *. . . .                      xj. .. A                      v                           . . . .0 ^......... .. .G o w d -
. .lM                                                                               h . e w s _U / . M v ...........- S p V G W . ' \ k M n . .

. . - 4 L w b v . . . . C ^ . . .v X r V v l-...............^ \ V x M . . f . J j v a I ' O .                         A i o J U .. Q u ^ a .W C c

. .%U/sW>. . ... .W -W -V t............ < \ . . . . Vtvw^.cs* .Qo a a . ... .VVVCK
.! • > & & . ., . W . . .                                     .. ^ _ p . ...... I ...                                                                         .. J .

. . . - f c o. .     .        .     .          © y       ... A X   a i m      .......................... m j D i p \ j u . . y . . . .u s v n /x                                    ......

.. / i b ' & b w . . . .O j s m L ■. ■. . W                          . u u a a ............... V b . . . . t i : . a s S A J L A H t . . W                         m          . ..

...I....QuVvn                        .iLvvOLkiXiL... ..to).. . . . . . Owwi. . . ......
.. . ^ \ X \ L                      QXO. p X v . . . - V m CVlVc^ \ ....................................' ..........................
............ % A x ■.. \ V \ K h                               !r b v \L                I            H I /O llL j               X aIX a.4^               U / s .....

. j x ...                AoJuI... .t>y.... ^ W s ik .. r .. j.... u^uiLvv. V... .fei.tu.ui....
.. v < k \ * o J L smus                                                            ... ,‘^uu^A.a_\ .. .s^iuvvucl....
. . h ... . b t .. .!3y>                                Q^v^^vvs^Oojl. .. .fu.W t...,...... JVlu...........
. . f y .X b i V V u V U . S ............C k H - . . . . . V : t ¥ . u                      U m        .Wa s A         / i ......... 4 X \ L d .................

                                           ....................................... >.................. g .............................................................
................y ... i£Lv>... .rtgCUX.                                                 M^X.uUaOl .... jOl .. .UOXnUa.....
.m     Vv q        ...   \   ..   .vs-CiVs)                                ... . t o           .W -.                  .W   W w y > .....
. . . W .» .L U \        ,^yy\S.....W . o < v \ . . . J & o a ,                         ifU I x U                     W .. .                ....................................

... .C ju w N .v s c s ^ u J ^ r s . ..... Ak.... . u ^ s > .... .. A a s i ...           ...
..      oJc... A..... Cx^^.^.Vtcl.... Ua........UX>r.                \y\a. ........ \ .......
            t       u         ... . s ^ w i                   V JU jv*......WvWU. f\VWS . . . r^4.ws .& ............
.. ,C5V\... yWv.4                                .^.VlXa                     V\X£KX                 Vo... .ri)/\JL.... □ m l ) .........
.. .QJr&X             (Xk                         ....... v?£H.Q\A ... \ArC-p fev>&.... £i j.................
. . . JUwjl.. . . .Ci { j s w v ^ c \ . . . •.................. . A t ________k ^ v A A . . . . ^ C t M X x ..........V v t ...........
.. U fos.w V ... ,ov\... Cs                        W o o f. dx.sAQ                  oy. .. .CX                                        ..
..   \...                               \& U *                AX/\ak . . .            J d /s M H L                W tJ T ^                 ^         ...........................

. . S ft ^ T iV .O w L . . . . Q l O p X j l ................. G              j (.G   v iv V sd .               ^ W l r V r t .......W              . . .V s C ^ ..

 \m      iu x c ^ . . . . . . . \ . . . . . l a > v . \ v. V . . . . v t u a l L                        C xa />a a -       g v m      . . . .Qu .m' u         a .q      ..
                                                                                                                                        \"v"i '. "AW
                                                                                                                                                   a >VJ
                                                                                                                                                      s fwe S^ s.)
 .w. .b^V’VVr'           ... yV N A 3v4Jv\                    Vd             W s-£ V s J U V \ . . . ,            \       . . d j C 7V' .\~0
. . .Vsj.\.V/V\                   J& yL                  V s t W ) . . . .0 ^            .C ^ a J L ^ .            ^ L 0 p . V j L . (. . . !v*^VvQ............
. . \ . . . .U 3w V > \V                   t t U t O J v . v. . . . . V y v v ^ v s . . . . \j\l\V r U A v V v S . . . .                                   5 ..............

.. i p ^ s u k                          O n n At d             A                 .W      i w . c W ^ - .a                                          ..............................

         UX^N. v li4 ...                   M    v   X   j u        id/ss____ C ^ # v \.w .0 J &                       X tu fy s     . . . . . S e w v ta A X .
. . -L v \ “Xi V \ .V V cV ^ds............. V V vi                        .V o                                   \ A T \ k k \ . . . JA f'S C .....................



Signec                                                                            Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                  WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.871
                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                    (C.J. A ct 1967, s.9; M.C. A ct 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C on tinu atio n o f sta te m e n t o f .               t& h         ( Q>            J c b v V ir                         'OO        \ i i J ............................. L^.

                     1.....     j   S   j   J S jn s: V               W k v O w . .. .v s4 /.\C K A ,                               A & . .CM j. . . . . . \ .........
    .(IaX/Ws/vA. . . .VJKXaA                         . . . . A jo .......fe^W U-Tt. . . . -Ajvvl-. . . . klGLi. .. VsiO.b. . . .
    ( A im k                         ..................................... . W               v a / g .w             ...   . - 4 - r .. W   ,   ... J. w      tx .^      ..........
   dm & A ... oy:... .Vva V...... W t                                                           \.... .d^Lulxjd...                                                        .\             .
   w        A     ... .O^k.                     k >                  Q i ^ v v ^ V . X U s > . r % . . V.\A jy V > .                            ........................................

    \           ^ Y c v x .Vm A t ...... Vd                           .Ch \j             ... .Vv s ^vn                     yyyt$vAV>... .V^.. WV5'4"V>
    }Q N X . ..                                                        .0 .. & S W .V                               V sM axW                    w W          ' .;           ...........

    h c w u lW -d '.... vysL                                £v>                  A A v ^-                           SW ^kU ^                           C W vm: .........
   V d ^ L .. y>ML. . .                  V \ t . ... .W tA .b,... X U                        j Cm    I                                .. J i v v v > .. . . h .* w v .

    y v x e v i ........... V u o a L ........... W         x d . . . c ^ .c w - l .. v. ..                         \           v s k - s ^ v /v V .. Oj ^ X               x^        .

    .% .'.. . w W J t . .. A.                             w to .                          C) t v W u ... .crv. . . . W x t .                                                        ..
                         . . . V A p . ' ^ S A ^ V s C x ...........................................................................................................................

                         A t . .. ) . V . 0 ^ . . . , v W                     u < '.                     b s d i K . . . . . Q w & P . W . ......................

                      .iu^....... Vnxmvv>                  W h u j Ayyy >                  QaMj. ..                                                                          Vs l ( \
        Vy^vw... < k x j ^ j ± .............................................................................                                                                 0
        —______ 1                                   w \ W rv .., X X                             CJLA^l)c\ vjX... .O.^vUX 7
                                                                     .....VnU^,VW\Ca ...XVO-. ...\rc                                                        l0YV\^)VlXi
   j v w > £ >.9.... \os:y\ \ .wB.cUaa... (XxwXs...
         V... .^XMavydw..... WvAm .... Aiv>t.....bed**... .Wvsk\ L...
   A^~. . . . . '.Xajo.s^ s c.y... .Su^.dcw....). \.bV      v'.Pyp.'0.l..
   Vv.V\Ly>... A           .-^.“b.Usx ,\rt£\.... .Vs 4 atvnts ...                                                                                                 . .wV.u^.
   :Oyk . A i < v J ^ . . . . S k z s j z k x           .... v s c .V ...                                                                               . A & u :0 a

                           . .to .             A k/>& , } . . ^ ? ) 4 j X                 j\ a j s              V ju ^ C v ^               U u v v W l L . , .............

           )        \.d 4 A - v V N .V \.t d .                      A k s t . .. . V x S t U * . . ..                           f e u ..       . i k i .

    y u j u w ' W . ..........> £ O O u a u c x H A . f . . . . w . V w ^ W .                                                     A /V \         AX     a   I        .VCVSji.
   U s f O ^ ......... N ^ v > t W u . .. eo . i . . « ...........1..........\y £ X &                                             .v U i

    ,                                   . . . U r \ ) d / v ..........V A a x u a                             U i vV-L! A w \.^

                   . ( ^ T ^ .VV?fc-                                                            :         ~\ . .T~:Vvc ^ g c
   !               n W .6 ....                                 vi-iyvV                    \S.                 (V\<x A jL . . . . t o . . . .J O w t..........
   . b i t > V . .. , o y .. . ^ v u i . . . . .\t <,c o .U j u )cvpna                                        . .   J & jv sX X      . .



  .^Ov ...V d ...................................                                W.u A^n ... . l i O V v X W ^ / . , .
                                                                                                          .                                    .V X A A C kiA T. ........

  AA»I- U jt. U j^ N \b                       S                                      \              OCLw .v c V. ... W -
    j jw j jc ..         . J d /s jL            d s jc u s \s                     C u~t                  C u x u L ^ g jo L




Signe<                                      . .^ I? C.                  .           Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                                            WG 413
                                                                                                      (Amended 9.87)
                                     West Midlands Police
                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of             Dlbi              .;J                fv.\.A.Is..........>?.
                                                                                            exT/vv-

          A.... V>Cu^...           W A ... 0y>....           ... pA6wvn.. .G^. .Jd>.
                                     D. .v.■. Cv\.. A.. ^........ ........................
    0,pfMr.o.^vyy'. <rA-M-.... \ glcxLaovn                         .. A... Av/.^.V
   .(j^yv\£. VyvVp... V^yJr. GuOf UaAAa. ... xM oi... jdjMMvCl\od,
   . .V v tM W                           -V s) > U r \




Signe<                         .     Q oW-A.'            Signature w itnessed by
                                                                      v5

   **      TX   CONFIRMATION         R EP OR T   **    AS   OF    24        NOU   ’ 97   10:50   P A G E . 01
                                                                      i
                                                                  S        Y 1°




DATE        TIME                     TO/FROM          MODE       M IN/SEC         PGS      STATUS
I 1 /2 4    1 0 :3 0   9 0 1 2 1 6 2 6 4 1 G0         G 3 --S     2 0 " 1 6       42        OK
              S o u th Y o rk s h ire                                      Discipline & Complaints Department
                               -----------------------------—             50 Windsor Road
                                                                           Heeley
              PO L IC E                                                   SHEFFIELD
              JUSTICE          with       COURAGE
                                                                          S8 8 UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                   Facsimile Transmission

D ate:                         2 .V • VV- < v \


To:


For the attention of:

Comments:

                     G M       a i*      m c c e M ffW      -         U II $60
                                                                « .   r4 3 1 7 1
                     & C t-           <M<*
                     ft       2182.
                     S fe 3 3

                     M
                     <n S S t
                     <V       ^ 2 o t>



                      P i l ' j H
                          *




From:                         l/             x?


Telephone Number:                  0\\^

Number of Pages (including this page)                                  $£

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
incident            K)o         E41 I V ' /    OP V3 ' t                 NOMINAL          R E C OR D     PRINT

   Mo m       a j. n a . N 11 ii 6 0                         HAS's ER
   B u r nar<ie      MCCOM8IE                                            Ti t 1e       MR
   F o r e n a m e s GRAHAM                                JOHN

   B i r t !"i p l a c e
   DaB                               Age E l       '! o 10Q               S e :■< M                          J c.
   O c c u p a tio n        P O L OS   L l A s', SON OFF £CHf?
   L i.'m p lo y e r /8 c h o o 1 name     W M 1 1)1. A N D S P 0 1.. i C t
   He i g h t               to              B u i id
   H a ir C o lo u r
   H a ir    Type

   !;:■ y e s
   C o m pi. e:< i o n

   F a c ia l h a ir
   G l a = i 5 e s wo r n                     Use
   J ewej 1e ry                                                                                                     A cce n I

   K e c . i n j u r y 7 t a 1 1 o o s , m a r k s , <3 c a r s , p e c u i. i a r i t i e s , a fo n o r ma .1 i. % i e s




   Knows V ic t im                                   N a t u . r e o f r e 1 a t :i o n «;h i p
   A t Scana                                         f i ngs r pr i n ts

   CHO n u m b e r                                         L o c a l r e f , , no
   S io o d S a m p le          U                      G r o u p (ABO)                      O th e r
   S a l i v a S a m p le       U                            i-i e c r s t e r 0            S u. s p s e t              E 1 i m Code


   Ci ot hi ng




          Cro s s - re fe re n c e ? s -
N 11 B&::>               0U0S1Df U                  M CCOM iUF                             GR AH AM
ADDRESS                 EXBUSINE SS                 F URN i! V A L H S E , F URN f. V A L G A T E , SH E F F i E L D
1 F..i„ E P H O N E      E X R U S IN E S S         0 /4 ?              731^46
TELEPHONE               EXPAGER                     034^               333111               0 iJ 0 fJ 6 8 4
CA' i C GOR Y            L i NK                     P O L 1 C II I... 1 A 1 SON OF F 1 C ER S
N 1 3 /E                L  IN K                     FOSTER                                MICHAEL.                   JON
S366^                    L O SIER

S3665A                    FOSTER

S36feh>B                  i' O S 'I F.R

S366I5C                   FOSTER

S3663D                    1 O S TER
                                                                                                                                                                                         r hln


  Norn i n-3. ,i. no™         IW ltttb U                                  MAS f’t^R
  S urnam e           MCCOMB a.H.                                                         T itle            MR
  F o r e n a n 'i s s G rt A H A M                                    J OHN

      C r o s s - r e f e r e n c e ?> c o n t i n i t e d s .....................................................................................................................................
8366_>K                      KOBT HR




                                                                          F N i)     Or
                                                                                                                            P A (at.



     N o m in a l n o.        N3177
     S urnam e        "I AYl. OR                                   Titl e       !v
       o r e n a m e s PAUL.                          ! OHN

    C r o s s .. r e f e r e n t s s co
CATEGORY               P O S [ T I ON 1   C-iR I 0                                           PEN   3   STA N D IN G
N&3H0                  B I N ! .. B
N8324                  AS SOC I AT' E
N«3Eh                  A SSOC I ATI:-:
A218E                                     O B T F A N Q U E S T & TV S T F ROM P A U L T A Y L O R                        T OP E
S633                   SUBJECT            11 •-□!:>—8 9 T A Y L O R
OS I...4 "14           SUBJECT            1 1 - 0 5 -89 TAYLOR
M13 9 b                SUBJECT            0 i • •-0 6 -8 9 TAYLOR
M386.                  SUBJECT            05 0 5-89           TAYLOR
DEOO                   SUBJECT            1 1- ( L . r - 8 9 S T A T E M E N T OF A C C O U N T P A U L T A Y L O R - O W N AC COU NT
A 1 52 06                                 RESUL. r j        AYl-..OR N 3 1 7 / S E E N ON V I D E O I N PE N T HRE E B Y
                                          B A R R I E R , T H E N H E L P I N G T O R EM O VE B O D I E S V I A G A T E T H R E E .,
S633                   TAYLOR             L * P O O L S U P P O R T E R I N P E N "THREE . A T T E M P T S E E S U S C I T A T I ON ..
                                          A S S I S T S W I T H D E A D / I N J U R E D OVER PER I MET HR F E N C E ,, D K S C *8
S633                   TAYLOR             8 0 0 I E S WHO H E SAW D I E & H O V E I.) TO S I D E OF P E N , N 4 8 9
                                           ( B O D Y 1 4 ) •„ N 7 1 7 ( BO D Y 8 9 ) , N 4 3 S < BO D Y 0 1 ) &N 4 6 3 (B 0 D Y   61 ) .
QSL1660                                   N 8 3 E 0 STS W ITH N 3 1 7 7 H S 3 2A N 83E5,,               DEL. AY ON M O T O R W A Y .
                                          CROWD O U T L M N G UP OS., P E N 3 W I T H N 3 1 7 7 , ,
G S L 4 14             TAYLOR             M 3 1 / / I ..POOL F A N A R R I V E D A T M AT C H 1 4 2 0 TO P E N T H R E E ,
                                          H E L P E D M AN Y T A N S D EC D OR 1 N J , H EL T ’ ED L A N S O VER L E N C E ,,
Ml 395                 TAYLOR             M 3 1 7 7 H A S C A U S E D U P S E T TO N 7 1 7 F A M I L Y 8Y F A B R I C A T I N G
                                          THE T R U T H . A R E T R A C T IO N BMENT HAS                B E E N T A K E N FROM H I M .
MS 8 6                 TAYLOR             STB        A S S IS T E D    TWO P E O P L E   WHO D I E D

DSOO                    TAYLOR            M 3 1 7 7 ' S S T A T E M E N T OF A C C O U N T . S T A T E M E N T A L S O O B T A I N E D
                                           ( S 6 3 3 R E F E R S ),   I N D E X I N G TO B E DOME f- ROM "I HE S T A T E M E N T ,
D":>01                 FAX     M ESS AG   F A X L I S T FROM S H E F F I E L D 1 0 0 5 8 9 S T A T E M E N T FROM S U B J E C T
D ‘.'>D"i              i- AX   ME SS AG   FROM SHEF {•' I L l . D D A T E D 1 7 0 h 8 9 S T A T E S ST A T E M E N T O B T A I N E D
                                          fro m       suejeer.




                                                       END    OT      KbHOR I
I nc       1n t      :cos       241197          OP9 3 1                     NOMINA!.. RECORD P R I N T

    No a         J. n a   N31 / 7
    S urnam e         TAYLOR                                                    i 3 t.
    F o r e n a m e s PAUL                                 J OHN

    B i i“t hr-] a ce
   DoW                                   A ge                                                                       j c:
   0 c c. u p a t, i. o n   L A B 0 UI \ E R
   I."' rn p i o y e r / S c h o o j n arne
   H e ig h t 5 M O to                            B u ild      STOCKY
   H a i r Co 3 o u r            I..T BROWN                      O TH ER
   H a ir Type              SHORT                            0 THER

   Lyes
   C o m p J. e x i o n

    F a c ia l h a ir         MOUSTACHE                          BEARD
    G la s s e s w o rn              Use
    Jewe l i e ry                                                                                                          A c. c e n t,

   R e c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s »m a r k s , s c a r s , p e c u i i a r : i . 1 1 e s , a b n o r m a 1 x t i . e s




   K n o w s V i c .t i m                           M a t 0. r e o f r e 1a t i o n s h i p
   A t S e e ne                                     f 1nge r p r i n ts

   CRO n u m b e r                                         Local re f.                       no
   B lo o d S a m p le          U                      G r o u p (ABO)                               O th e r
   S a l i v a S a m p le       U                            Se c r e t - e r            U           Saspect                     L I im        Code


   C 1o t h i n g
  M I D G R E E N ROUND NEC K               K N IT T E D JU M P trR,                R ED          PU MA   Tf; E   Shi I R "         IJI.UE       J LANS,         S ILV E R
  TRACK S H O E S W I T H RED               S T R IP E S .



   O th e r F re e T e x t
 I N F O ABOUT C L O T H I N G & D E S C R I P T I O N FROM S 6 3 3 „
 H A S S H O R T R E D D I S H 8 ROWN HA £R , R E C E L D 1 MG & A G I N G E R                                      MOUSTACHE.




        0 r oss      r e fe r e n c e f: -
ADDRESS                    HOME
ADDRESS                   I”' A S S E N G P H     $ ARNLS          K P i V i”                P R 1 0 RY   RD ,    A N F X Ei D ,           L. I VE R P 0 0!...
TF- L E P H O N E          HOME
CATEGORY                  1 IN K                  i'30DY 6 1 S E F TON N 6 4 3                                      DhC EASh.U
CATEGORY                   1 NVOLVED              K I C K OFT                                                       CROWD S U R G E S                 IN S ID E
CATEGORY                  S633                    8 0 OY 8 9 H I C K S N / 1 7                                      DECEASED
CAT EGOR Y                 L IN K                 i.’ ODY 1 4 C H U R C H N 4 S V                                   DECEASED
CA I 'EGORY               L IN K                  L IV E R P O O L SUPPORTERS                                       SU P PO R i h.RS
CATEGORY                   I IN K                 BODY 0 1 HOWARD N 4 3 S                                           DECEASED
CATEGORY                  R E F E R S TO          UN A U TH OR I S E D A C C E S S
CATEGORY                   P O S IT IO N E        G R ID A6                                                         PEN 3 S T A N D IN G
CA fEGORY                 S633                    B R A V E R Y AC TS                                               R E C O G N IT IO N
                                                 r l l ^ z f h O




                                                                                 Q S I ~/ L u u -




                   LORD JU S TIC E T A Y L O R 'S
                           J U D IC IA L IN Q U IR Y
                                     INTO THE
          HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER
                 S A T U R D A Y 15 APRIL 1 9 8 9




                ■ ______

SURNAME         -r A '/(_ 0   rc__

FORENAME(S)     £>P jo 6   I-o 6 h<o .

ADDRESS
                                                                    v.cv*:

                                                                                      j :■ \ :



AGE                        DATE OF BIRTH                           sex           m

TEL. NO. HOME                                   BUSINESS                     ■

                                                                                         ^Vi x'£.
QUESTIONNAI RE



THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TOASSIST LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'
JUDICIAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER
ON SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989.



1.   DID YOU GO TO THE FOOTBALL MATCH AT HILLSBOROUGH?

          V(£S
2.   WHICH FOOTBALL TEAM DO YOU SUPPORT?

        L W £ flP o o L _
3.   DID YOU GO IN AN ORGANISED PARTY?


4.   IS IT AN OFFICIAL SUPPORTERS CLUB OR INDEPENDENTLY
      ORGANISED?

                           ero                     C l         o R g -A K iX '1* ! }



5.   WHERE DID YOU GET YOUR TICKET FROM?
                              " T iC K to ' o f ^ i .              cj£_                                      v CJtCfcO" V ^ o u ^ i f L )


6.   WHAT PRICE DID YOU PAY AND WHICH STAND WAS IT FOR?

          i t       .        S r n v '-^ i^                                                               L -A M id   .

     W TTTA   Tv T 1~\ T7 A T T » r r >   k   1 TT>T   » r/\   *T* T t T> />   1   * Mf\   -nrr




8.   DID YOU GO BY CAR, COACH, RAIL OR ANY OTHER MEANS?
      (IF BY COACH NAME THE COMPANY)

      C & .\U r \            ( ^ b A a ( v > e S " ' n X A . \ / f c j ^ N)                        •

               LjQ-^IT          (-TLoF-v                                           ClX) (         L-ivJ               t_ _

                                                                   -1 -
9.    DID YOU STOP ANYWHERE EN ROUTE TO THE GAME, IF SO WHERE
      AND FOR WHAT PURPOSE.


       (M O




10.   WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY TRAVEL DELAYS AND IF SO WHY?

       fV>Q

11.   DID YOU WITNESS PRIOR TO ARRIVAL AT THE GROUND ANY OTHER
      SUPPORTERS CONSUMING ALCOHOL?
       7£S

12.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE IN SHEFFIELD?

13.   DO YOU KNOW WHERE YOU PARKED OR ARRIVED IF BY TRAIN?
                          Ccv\C-h             P /V O -K ,                          ^

14.   DID YOU RECEIVE OR SEE ANY POLICE DIRECTION OR ESCORT FROM
      YOUR ARRIVAL POINT, TO THE GROUND?


15.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY DISORDER, FIGHTING OR DRUNKENESS
      BETWEEN YOUR ARRIVAL POINT AND THE GROUND?
       MO-
16.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE ENTRANCE TO THE GROUND?
             ^ - 9 - 0 ( 2    jP'V

17.   WHAT WERE THE QUEUES LIKE AT YOUR ARRIVAL AT THE
      TURNSTILES?
                               ,   -S iV \'   o im l .   M AS*   o f   P ex>P u£         A A oo*u> -T K e T o P c N S T iu i-S
       (V H nL O jL   iaA S        L oT   O f-     fV ^ i   \                          • )
18.   WHAT POLICE DIRECTIONS DID YOU WITNESS OUTSIDE THE
      TURNSTILES?


                              T h e

19.   WHAT STEWARDS’ DIRECTIONS DID YOU WITNESS AT THE
      TURNSTILES?

        (M o
                                                     -2-
20.   DID YOU EXPERIENCE ANT DIFFICULTY IN FINDING YOUR ENTRY
      POINT?

       MO

21.   DID YOU HAVE DIFFICULTY ENTERING THE GROUND. IF YES, GIVE
      BRIEF REASON.

      OfOUrj       -rkt...       A A A U    or        PvLO,r?ac_                         VWA.Q^        <T




22.   DID YOU ENTER THROUGH A TURNSTILE?

         YcS

23.   IF NOT. HOW DID YOU ENTER?

        (\i\ k




24.   DID YOU SEE ANY GATES OPEN OTHER THAN THE TURNSTILES?

      foo

25.   DID YOU WITNESS THE OPENING OF ANY GATES OTHER THAN THE
      TURNSTILES?
       MO
26.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO THE GROUND, AND
      IF SO BRIEFLY DESCRIBE.

      " S o v r             w*                   fe a -S o i^      -rru -x   (\r ^ n >     C c ifH d

      C *j«d fL   T V itL    T o O J ^ ^ n u i        M    u    , (lor            IA *\S    S rcsPfU sO

            TH          P          C tL -

27.   DID YOU HAND YOUR TICKET IN, IF NOT DO YOU STILL POSSESS IT?
      (SEIZE)
28.    ONCE INSIDE THE GROUND, DID YOU SEE ANY SIGNS DIRECTING YOU
       TO YOUR MATCH VIEWING POINT?

        'k S (Tineas                               A   Ui                  -

29.    DID YOU HAVE ANY DIFFICULTY AT ALL IN FINDING YOUR MATCH
       VIEWING POINT?


        KXj         ■


30.    DID YOU USE THE TUNNEL TO THE STANDING AREA (TO PENS 3 & 4
       ON MAP)?

           v/ e s       •

31.    DID YOU HAVE FREE PASSAGE ALONG THE TUNNEL?

32.    WAS THERE ANY POLICE CONTROL EVIDENT AT THIS POINT IN THE
       GROUND?
          (Vj O
33.    WAS THERE ANY MATCH STEWARD CONTROL AT THIS POINT?

          (O O
 34.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY DISORDER OR OTHER INCIDENTS BETWEEN
       YOUR ENTRY POINT AND MATCH VIEWING POINT?
        (BRIEFLY DESCRIBE)
         SAv-a.             CANi   o f-                at   omcc.    oc-




 35.    DID YOU WITNESS ANY CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE GROUND,
        IF SO BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.


         (\iO-




                                          -4-
36.   INDICATE ON THIS GRID YOUR POSITIONS IN PEN 3 OR PEN 4 AT THE
      TWO FOLLOWING POINTS;
      I ) YOUR FIRST MATCH VIEWING POSITION.
      21 YOUR POSITION AFTER THE EVENTS WHICH LEAD TO THE
      DISASTER (USE NUMBERS I AND 2 IN THE RELEVANT GRID)




                                   TUNNEL




X     I          •\




            PEN 3                                   PEN 4




                          FOOTBALL P I T C H
                      y                        -*




                                  -5 -
37.    DID YOU SEE A BARRIER BREAK IN PEN 3?

         (Vj G
38     WERE YOU AT OR NEAR THE BARRIER WHEN IT BROKE?


39.    WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?

            2 _- U O      fjv v -

40.    WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY EXCESSIVE CROWD CRUSH AT THIS
       TIME, IF YES, BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.


        M O



4 1.   WHO WERE YOU STOOD OR SAT WITH?




42.    DID YOU WITNESS ANY FIGHTS OR DISTURBANCE OR UNUSUAL
       INCIDENT AT THE TIME OF TAKING UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING
       POINT?

        ( l3 o ■
43.    DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD CRUSH?

          V e -S •
44.     WERE YOU INVOLVED IN ANY CROWD CRUSH. IF SO, CAN YOU SAY
        WHAT TIME THIS HAPPENED?

            Q - - <S ^ > ( U V \ .                           o f U A K                  T-fc     Sex   UtoOfe.-




45.     DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD SURGE, IF SO, DO YOU KNOW WHAT
        CAUSED IT? (BRIEFLY)
                               £oin'Udk*l_\     f u j        A'"-3
         0 ,o   m ot                 A                  y   \ r (\   c ^ r iA O o ^   < u io ^


 46.    WERE YOU INJURED, IF SO, DID YOU ATTEND HOSPITAL IN
        SHEFFIELD?

         S0« c r.,n             A                                    Oor

                                         _6 _
      DID YOU WITNESS ANY DEATHS?


48.   DID YOU ASSIST ANYONE WHO WAS DEAD OR INJURED, IF SO,
      BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.
                                                                                t^ tr iu r   (Is m

                                       .   fin   -n ^ 'i^ S               S ivj£i      A ^ t v T- iCitri-v

      jL    A cio                           <<€>               f ltA n    A \*>      iU j O /lt n       o o -a .    tk G         fe o tt,




49.   DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER WAS A FACTOR
      IN THE DEATHS, OR TffE INJURIES TO ANY PERSON?


        POO


50.   WHAT TIME DID YOU LEAVE THE FOOTBALL GROUND?

            U
51.   DID YOU LEAVE ON THE DIRECTION OF EITHER A POLICE OFFICER, A
      STEWARD, A LOUD SPEAKER ANNOUNCEMENT OR OF YOUR OWN
      ACCORD?

        L& T'                     /^ s n io c r ic > N i£        o r -A         L o o r>     Sp^ A *a^




52.   DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A
      CRIMINAL OFFENCE?


       f O O


53.   DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS OR OBSERVATIONS ON THE WAY THE
      INCIDENT WAS HANDLED, AFTER THE MATCH WAS STOPPED?

       OcrT                 *£.     '"l    1 fH<=L.    TKi4T         fht          i V W 1 Ci-i                        PCkjO


       A   / V    U     j   T                                                                       AGSviUiTfc             C *7A ot

                                      TV v i m ^S      ^ T ¥ \ flJTtt)   T \i                OfLyyHSfc£>           _ ~ T T ti£


      A P fUrf\ fUsT)        ^                                                                ft>fcAmSfcr>         </vWv-T

      hAPfMcKixsiy                                    -7-
54.   IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS
      VITAL TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?


      -THt_ Tofo.->c.L S.\ioov-r>                  Gti=fc^       Ria^occt') off-
       W htLr-   T H t     fW-3             {~Ov_a_, , T h ^ r ^    1^   SofUc

       \-r          a- t   V?AUt.    H a Pi'U'-t w D




SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED .


NAME/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK
CAPITALS)




SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING ..




QUALITY OF WITNESS                    IMPRESSIVE
(TICK BOX APPLICABLE)

                                      AVERAGE                n



                                      POOR                   a




                                    -8-
Incident             108       2411?/   OP9 3 1             ACTION       RECORD        PRINT

                                                                                                AC T]O N   N U MBE H A S 1 8 2
A C T CON R E S U M E      s                OB T' F A N   QUEST    8,   T/ ST   FROM     PAUL   T AYLOR    P I DC I T O P E

  OD T i - A N G U E S T & T / S T i- ROM PAUI . T A Y L O R      P1    DC1     TOPE
  H /A
  A S S i BTI~)> TWO P E O P L E WHO D I E D A1 MATC H

R A I S E D IlY    0PERA1OR s                  1047                 DATE;          0 7 ™0 89               ) 1 ME s    162H
0 7 “ 0 : :} -- B9 16H5      OP 1 0 4 /   R A I S E D FROM M 5 8 6
08-U!:?-8 9        09!:>?    OP 4 9 0 9   Ai 1.0 C A T E D t o DC I T O P E
11-03-89           1S3 7     OP3 8 0 5    COMPLETED
 11 •■-□!.> 8 9     1840     0PL>80!:>    REBUTTED
DOCUMENTS T A K E N s              S633                0SL.414            l)'r>0G
 1 ) S T A T E M E N T O B T A I N E D FROM PAUI.. T A Y L O R RE H I S I N V O L V E M E N T ,
■£) Q U E S T I O N N A I R E AI..SO O B T A I N E D RE H I S    i NVOi.. VE M E N T AS A S U P P O R T E R
3 ) A S Y F T BO DY N UM BE R S NOT I D E N T I F I E D .
4)    T A Y L O R A L S O S U P P L I E D H I S OWN AC C O U N T W H I C H H E WROTE O U T H I M S E L F ON           040589,
T H I S A C C O U N T I S A 1 Y P L D COPY AND I S A T T A C H E D .
O F F I C E R S RECORDED                                      DC S. T O P E
.1 4 -0 ^-8 9      1446      0P!::>439    : 1LLD
                                              ' Jc.
                                                                                                                                                                           WG 4 !2
                                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)
                                                              West Midlands Police
iLE
                                                    STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
22 29                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
.'.'3 30
24 31
25         lame
26
27         ige .                           (yrs)                  Date o f Birth
28
           Iccu pa tio n .                      fe t. . .
22 29      lom e or business address
23 30      nd telephone num ber
24 31
25
26
27
28

            his statem ent, consisting o f    8             page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best o f m y knowledge
22 29      md belief and I m ake it k n o w in g th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
           iave w ilfu lly stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false or do n o t believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
27         )ated th e            YV\                   day o f                                                                     19^      .
 28

           Signed                                                                              Signature w itnessed by


                                                                                               O ffic e r's Name


                                                                                                Rank                                       No.

                                               .......................................................................... . . . r«H «roe~ . A s . . P a o . l ........................

           J o U 'IVM.Q*?..                                   . . \ .........1                ..uh...                          oW pc                      c*cldress
           u?»H» m^j                                              .
                                                                                                $V .            S \l.^ C M T V . . . o . * i . . .S ^ V o / o \ < x u j

                              Q n r il        \°V%\____1.......... ieP.k                 . . nr»H . ■ Wn?&.




                                                                        uoc»_=*         . • • P.«<                                          . .   .   .   Vfc.   -



            W               . L loe)p© l • CW.Ui^Ucov>. . F c /'e ^ k                                                 ,Sc.«vu.
            flta tx J * . .         chV.   . . H » ib U r .o u ^ l> . .                                       C»tcun.ol                .S V teffV e ^ -
                                                                                                Vsle .. all                       .Vied               . .Vi-ckefe.
            ,pc( . . H \€ . .              jrm lrd k ... aUW w eol....                                                . . A « p » .e ta f.                       K q W J-
            di£.\c<?. . . . . iW c o c ^ k                        VUe. . . .                                     . . ,-5»cJ«€.nrt.e . . \ . .                         itJ    .



                                         ... . r o v |               b tc .k e K             f c t.       .^ W e .                                    ..    U x» e .

            S lr e * W 2 ilm « i. .                                                                                                                                      ,       '
                                                                       ......................... VJ<£ . . . W k d . . . p»f f o u n d e d

             Ir m u e l       .. Bftf wes... C c ^ c ^ . .. .lesium^. .p.o*» P n o t ^
                                     . UVc,

             Rad , ft»f.elcl.        .. co- c k     U fk        "I- °l- IS ~ ». ^[Vei
           Signed                                                                            Signature w itn essed

            ’ D elete a s ap plicable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                          (Amended 9.87)
                                                                   West Midlands Police
                                                          STA TEM E N T OF W ITNESS
                                           (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s . 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C on tinu atio n o f sta te m e n t o f .                                . .s k .H M .                               ....................................... ......................................

 gccvcA                                                           ... h ) . e            k to u .e U e o l                                      S k e l e t a l ..                               ..

 Hr».e.... mQbr.cocu^.... .aurol... macvole .. no...               „...........................
 ...................We .. .arcweci.. .\.<o... .S?We^p.\e.\c\.. .ci\r.. ^?:OSpm ..             ..
        ... iVie .. coe».ck .. ,p90K.. .cund ... uo.ql^ed.. .cjle
c ^ P U t f o l . ^ S ) n s . . . ,o p .o > d ^ . . . . p p O . k . . . . u l3< ^ s                                    c * W s } V \ . . J S . m i n u ^ e-h :.............

 UjeiWZ. . . .£fte<on . . . . , ^ e . . . c^PPV. r v d ............... C u n c ) . .                                         U JQ S .             I k e . . . . c * & . .. . ^ e - . ..

 .P a k c e                  .u u e ie .. . .                         r\9|.. . . .c,.\l....... & e .                    .. L».ue>pp.ol... .Cp<=,c-ke-S. . i n ..
 W e . .          sc c m j.       . . . p e c ^ f > W . ..                              .. ,c ic c u .^ o l             . . .O n . . . . H , e                    < ^ r < s s s ......................

 evy»lc>cu*»l?yvjey\\s..                       n ...           s ».H >'                                  . ik e ..                              ." T t tV e v j . . . . u _ > e r e . . . . .

 dir                                Cund . . . .                                        . . . W >0 • • • cXouU[                        k o k . . Iflxa . . C O uoS.1 xVwf.                                 . .

 c u a t | . . . h ~ p O . U e . - . . Vsi                                                         o ff             Q .k —             Ik e—                                          ...................

                 . . .C utnoI .           .           .                     ItC m.q . . . f p . u c . . p ^ c f e s . . .                       ____ b e e / ; . . W & . . k s c l . .

 i^voo . . . court's.                     . . . ©=a„cJk . . . .|>r.ic? .r                           K i . . . . / S C v c in i'ic ^ .. . A k e . . . . c y p ^ o n c l ,                               • •

 / . . . . liy ? v > != ^ k .        .                            Vive.....                                                         ... .c,r.conoi....                                                 ...
 \                               11.                         .W»                W re           V o . . . « = v e . V. . .                         ...........i f p . t a c e s —

 ik e                W?C5.V.ck............................................................................................

                                 £W.... \... (.'tved ... 1n.Vc Let >.<yv                 Lcx»\<       1
 cp^\cji. . . .                  ..... u^>. . . .Ike .... Vu\l. . . ^o.f.Hvt/' op . . . Le^?iy\<3j5. . . Lour**.,.
 ik            u >ss                               ________• c f • • •                                    • c u r i o ) ------ .................. oAsci . Jj i . . . ^ e j n . ..

 .ka>. . . . Vxz. . . . . £V\CtO\w^,.................................................................................................................................................................

 ................................... V s l e . . , c v r . r . \ . u ? c j . . . c t k . . H * e . . . H v U s W r p y p j l * . . < v * h e s .                              .1* ......................

                         . . . UeM've . . .            .cJc..        .3.-Jlopm... Vslke*                               t o e . . t a r r e d . . \nb>... V k e........
 p ^ ct.h es . . . V W             ..                  . . . .i r j ^ r o o l : . . . o f . . . . w s . . . . i - u s s . . .                                       „. C c r c . ' - o . d e . d j .

                                   B \ - ; . . . W>jS>. . .             ^?cpvif\.V. . . , c u (                   = jf P .V .f?                              . . .£ c u ( . .                          .

     ?F                       c ^ d ..                                         uj£wV. ...               .W.v^cjok.... .U»e . .sWnds
 Vs4rio$V\le. . . 0 5 . . .                                   ... .u oeie....                                                                    cx«d                  1... W c J .

 .V<s . . . r m t e e                    .^ o .f            .u pcju ^               .V^uoc^dU.. . . . ! r u t u s h i e .. S —                                      s o Vm c J h.        .   u j <^s

 .C-\e<=JU|.... .mp^kecif.. riln.e...                                                    .. .loss. ••.Cil.fe<=iolvj. .c.ovoc^es.V.ecf.(. ewe. .
 L O e i e . .<S\U                       3.c^ O f^sin€Q l—                  u p .                                   .f t u * c l        ■   \              V.ri.ccJ.. . b . . c^ uppc.

           ... . c u /               \r o r « s V \lie 1                     ...    ,rkc;e                . u^c;^. . . . !rx o . . . . .c. f CjOjn                                           .

 < \V » e !e               vx>Q e,                  Wntee.. . . c f . .                .^V .oC          . . P p .ltc.etx .S r1. . . . c . o . . . .                                                   .. .

                     . . . .W. . c j e k . . p e o ^ i - e . . . h =>. . . .-g - f g f qo .                                        . . . \.\r > € .5 * ..           f= w n .o|..                           ,

 b oj-____ t ^ « o . . . . ^ u s . i r                    l.q o \c ) y \ \ . . .                     ____ u _ > . e ) . e . . . Axxp. . . m o w r » v |. .                                                 .

                        P<=>W ,e .» y \6 r '.. . . o . o                       k o r s ,e b = ? c J rt                                  . . .S^r?<^i'A r\«^.. W s » } t ...........

  pecfle                      ua.^fe-                     s»k«=v».V».^                    \ps<^k                   Weccxo^e.                            Cj.oo. . c.qoJ.oi.ri i . .
 Signed                                                                                        Signature w itn essed by
                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                                                   WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                             (Amended 9.87)
                                                               West Midlands Police
                                                    S TA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                        (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of .. . ( W u . . J s w u . . .TrtVLCJ?..................................
 <=^e.lr. . \'T>\v. . .Itrves. A. .                                      . .9\ ...                                                       <kr. . .«?ne... .q(1.......
j-k e . .       fUiicervwn.. . . on ... .Wrse.UcicJ^ .                                                                                                                          . a«o.
 p ? a .o       .             W .lo © r\             lu e .                          .............\ > ........... V u .r .'o S .V iie . . . . B t'........... i ..........................

S / m -o        . e;... PpA*cer*aun .... <^o... i*a ..                                                                    .. .Q^... .s>cju^i«=^... I                                ....
                . ^ J n c u e ^ r . . . .& p. . . f o l S .•. . .M .e . . . . U j s s . . . c ^ e H .^ C f . . . . a e j Q C ,3 k < g d . . . Cfcnof. .

p .u ^ lje d .                . C J a o . n d ................ W / & .% 9 . ______ Q r p u - J c J ,. .____________                                            d               I.

iu e A -                    W q ^ . V ) . . . . W.< n s V i ! l e . . . . S ' . . . .                            ____ ^ c ^ v . e . . .                     .. . V i c k e b : .

 m     .. Vsi. e, .. .lu a e .. .n cV                             &i?.eucJr>.e?d.
                               C>.y\ . .. .er>Vfink«^.... VV>.e\ ... fif.fs ... Akoewe^k... H»e... .VocwsAtle.
 A . . .                      . . £ ^ y .i\e . . . .<«. . .                            . . i? Q \lc^'rw©r». . . ,- s i r w s e J .'! ^ . .                                          . }

 . c c u . l d i . n l . . . k ^ S i u e . . . . h p . u o . . . . mn o c - . ^ . . . fc & 'o o                  . . . & e f O . . . .UJtsS. . .Qr>. . .                 JWh . .
S i d 9..................                        Iiqcju. ... pscl32d . . . . . . n.ol.                           .. c,W>tac                         )V...M-pa......
C A ^ d e . . ..................................
 .................................... \ ............t a ^ . e _____ V ?.€?e*> _____ lre>.. . H i\V 3 W .f.< > v > ^ W .. . k e f c c ------- c ^ r i o l . .

 .k n e w                    L o W « f.e               !■£>..               o.                                   .ounol . . .1. . . . f-u.e«nJ^ . . \t>. . .

 H>.e                 A o w r v .e A : . V sJ.e                  u j* A ta d . .. £ f ? e J v j                        t c x c c t f . . .cfc>w^K>.. .Ik e -.

 Vu'O                      Pwr             V ' c k . ^ b . . . , W 9 e . . . £ c / . . . . ,C5?»r>pc.owcl . . . Bt . ,CP^»r». .^ h ) . ..............

 lo p l               u -j .e ..        5 ju e < v h . . i   oh*.. . .        .C'^tnrt^i'pu.oci.. . f t ! . . C f e n . 3 . ) . ■ ■ W c . c m j ^ t ...........

 .C o m p       p.urvoJ..               B*. .C Re*l. SM .J. . . .VJOCS.... ©yJjiW?.... f SJ.U. .COrvcJ. .ccxvx.pe.00c/.
 f t . . C ’f e * . . 3 J ........ s ^ . . . . w o V . .................................................................................................................................

 ........................V 4 e . .. Wv^cJ.s... .cv.f. .                                                               .. .Us^...                                       ..............
 .cJbAi.o^.... Quad ...                                     .......c.o ^).. . .W                ..   . o v f . ... r.vojln. .CVc, voejcis .Pe«. £■)
            . . . . ujp / .kr>d. . . .qmC .. v ^ > . c .. .dcxjuo.. . . Vfc>...                                                       .. .ffCcnh.. n.ecJ.. A W .
                          .f^ o c e ,         go^q      I            $       >                i o ^ fo n .tr.. . o p . . & —                    t ^ r a e r . . . W e ...........

              . . .IWtS. . .        .^P5.ih<?*?. . . . U.p . . .oiftQj \ ...                                                 A. . . .CoolcJ. . .S C £. . . Vt* . . .
 rv i^               r\«^V\t__ _______ ______ secKvVsa ... u ^ s .. .sV.»*.\l..                                                                 .c^w»Ae.           .e ^.p b rj...
 u ~ t n d . - ^ > © pp W                     u j.e J e                  W & i                                 ...      o l c s - u . n . . . .5»v».'oU^lin.n<r^............

 0 o ( ..                                  . .C. P&o. .3 .3___................^.e.y-i>r».^— mcf.e... au*cl. .cncie
 c feijocl.ecJ.                         CM<vd                 \ ...........Wv> e v o                      m©-!-.. . .                           . . . .m c f-e^ .. c?>Jc! .
                                                                                                                                           'I
         u          Irt

 ..........................VsJe . . . S»We.ci. . - - .C^.<5.U                                  . . .W . . . COO                     c\ gX.      . )*l.cur> . . . f V j ...........
 (x... .uiA>W.. .bulr                                  \V>Qo                 ?H .. .WcJ.... .We.h'/icJ... .Ike.. . . . h ^ u k r . ............
 r.eiifcu.eci    ,V»inn3 eip ... ■ aoocI         uw.c,... .cl.€Cid-e.o/.... .b^.. tr\aofi-.. •
 V) e.    m ooed       six- ■ c i    3»<?.vJ.en... .pee!-:.. .b». — Ike.. .incljoiGiv^..!—
 .^ e n c e                     V?e.ic^>€.e»a.. .o s .. .cv^ ol                                 H i.c ... .u ^ id e ... .e n c lc s * j(e ~ ..

Signed                                                                                   Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                   WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                             (Amended 9.87)
                                                                         West Midlands Police
                                                                S TA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C ontinu atio n o f sta te m e n t o f . .                                             .'rV .V iM . .T          T        ......................................................................

 f.cvrvoi ... lr>.. .Ike... .fen-esir... .skw^s. C.                         2.                           ...
                 . .PWple              -skuVed            .h*.. .b^... o^no!... olioob... i*\&.
 JW.. . e*ac.lp.sg >.<?-.. . . . c - m . . . . rr»$^... f       . , C . P ? * r » . I z > . . .<^.ek . .co.k
 *p ...             % e .                     Sc^ycisU .. .\*o... .c o r... p.e«. .C.Pe*>. . 3 > . ) ..... ! . . . p ^ k . . rr»s-<j.. .£<?<?(-
c r v . .c .                         t a v . .. c £                iV e ..                              . .cjjrxd                Insd —                        — I k ^ ln . .. lik e .
C \ .. .sVoftl.... .^ep-pie .. .to © e ,...                                                                       m         .. .<=.* ...<=;___ sWpp-'oCj......
 £>V p .« ? l. . . i O t n c l                             I                           .       .. k^lpAAQj............... Ik sum .... fcu.er.».. C\k.eT..........
                  .sVesjWd.. . \ b . . . . . .Vrrc^ .. .cx^sd . . . . c.U r ^ o .
                             .                                                            c u e ).... \ k © ..
          ... k o     .Ik e   piVck... O n                 \<k.cJ....... C y c X . . . .QrrVa ... \ U e . .. .^tVek . ..
p e * * c e ,. . . . c w n c l                             u jc , _ s . . .       . V-e 11j<v                                                 \& .             ^ ? w S .. V ^ e k u ^ .c J ^

 H e .. . t o .... ^.llec!... .e£C . .. .Ike                                                                                 ... ,V?s-f. .. .ki:>. . .. W ic .
                                                                                                         ■f
 lee).          .   OUUOGUL^

                                          .<1Vw            ..   Pp.W.^                          ^VjII .             d.Cci.nV . . .                              . . .V& . . <=^rc;j55p. .
 U>A»ik . . .UJC.5 . . . .                                            ...           C y ) ...............Q i                      . . . . . ^ £. q.p l e _ . . . , u o                       ...........

skeck'rte^. . . . c*k..........                                                   ... , W . ...                       . . © jo c A . . . .          la ? . . .                     ....     H>e .
<y*Ve ?. G>*>.e... .^li remote.                                                   . . S c .kcJ. . . .                    . . . ^ . u - s W iA ^ . . . \ k e * w . . . o u e / . .

 .............................................. .   CM . . .
                                                                                           rn    . . . . c u e .......s>ec.k p.*\ . . . C .p e r \. 3 ) ...............

                    . . . . - ^ . e l h 'r v ^                  S>.q . . . o « s d                              .. .c c o ld . . . .                                  ... im?iO€L.....
                             ... o o c u r» « e^ .€ ,o l                  It?              <=^ek... .cv & . . . ,1 k... .Wec<?wv>e .. S o .. p ^cta d
\ ___U*^>. . .^.MS,W?d... C4Ce-u.<vd. . . . .cxvid. . . . lOc^S.. . . pq»OJhfij. . . .Ik e . . . ..skotfcb
Ico.k-vn'q.           q V .W e . . . .                  .. .s A V v ^       \y»... A W ..
Uouoe.. ssWwd». .Qs* .. . \ k e        r o ^ V d k . . . ^sW iVgcJ.. . .               .. . U X 5 ...e,.

 S mjcuu^.                           v«o— .Ike .                       .Cre.vjud.....OOrtdl                             1..........ryvCM^.c?.<^€C^. . . Sr?> . .VuOo .
                                       c w \cJ— W . .. f f t c . e . ___ W e. —                                       ^.vVck......................................................
              ......................... . ^ w s W e d . . . . ki.<^.V»V...                               c ^ « > r i a ^ : .. q j a c ) .            ..                                           ..
 Pifyyxs. . . . u i - e j . . . . ^ ? m n e d . . . . Vw... Xwv^ • • • S<vc)es7 c M . e - ..                                                                             .. k ? . ^ . . .
 ^ ).u ^ k e o l.. . . IrW o j^ y k                                      l k^T. . . ,r.<=»!iU'\‘=j5 ..                          .. . I k o . . . . ^ e c V tc v i. . C
 P u c l . . . .Ujcjs                                   V iu r k i^           ... u if - * j    . . .c k ^ k . . .                        . • ■ .kwr.k'r».Sj. ..Q-S..
 cunci                    1                 V>«*fi!........krc*>W e.___k»ces=v
 ..............................I k ....... u x s . ..                                                    .. . \             W ak\c ■ecJ... .a.
 h < s [.m e .e x \                                                  . .Qk*=s>k....ty .e e .. ■. people-.                                        inprcwK                    . o k . .ity ig u . .

  kljl5. . . fevCe. . . .LOC^> . . . .                                                                         c -Ik.eJO . .S»Wj.k€“d. ■ • lz?                              ,Vur.n .. . k l o e
 P M nd                            V • • • (e«*l 1§ c c J i. .. . k>e . .cots. . . . Su^f.ccoktn<?}. . . C*j<vCl-                                                           ci.'
    \                .W AoLd                            d - e j ^ c i W . .. .ktVw .. . ViV.'ke.,..                                                 .. l b Jxp.u^f^.. .CJeiv?. ■
   skajuen . . . .ujt.Vk . . . .^kprVi&ln. . . MoAH. • •                                                        '■W         . . . t a o r ...... \ .. < w l d .. Cn                               .........

 Signed                                                                                               Signature w itn essed by
                                                                                                                                                                                    WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                              (Amended 9.87!
                                                                  West Midlands Police
                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                           (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement

                            . V%            . .\                                         s e e      . .W    t m . ..     .                  U»e           .C f<P.«-oJO(     . .   fe e ^ r

in tjm . .                  ...4...                                                          .m Q jrrh o J       . . . . . .u o U e t". . . . . h e . . . . u u - s

Ijo e c j.in ^ . .                 I....                                                     k                                k.i. i<wc o . . .
                                                                                                             i . C e , . . . ,b                             . . . Vi 13

s W o o l e l el's*         . . .      o p -..

                            T ^ fk e . .              5 > .e c ^ *d                      . S c j u e e ^ e . . . . s V o j k e c J . . . , c x * d . . . . \ . . .f k p .w ^ k k

\                                         r \9 \      . . . .h > .. . ,d> e . , . .                              . • • € s o .e / .v j c * .e . ■ ■ ■ .s > W ^ V e d . .      U>

f!c=i\l,.. . p p / u j c x r d ,. .. kk ii iI jj kk.                                     (nnv|. . . <Kj.m . . . .CeuJ^Vvk. . . \ o . . . .Ik e
                         .. I . . . £>W *^e.d........ u>.e).e........... 1...                                                   .pecsjp.I.e . . . . l u e i . e r . . Gjcivic^
p t s l r . . . fine.. . .                                     Vrt>......... k < d d . . . .                                 h ? ......... rr»e^-. P & ? j » J e . . . .

u ^ . e J .e . ..       . o n   . . .k».p. . . .        e-.fi . . .                      ... .cunoHter... , \ n . PrcwV...                                  ...rre... r"ike.
         p i e . . . . s k e n - u * i .........i v a                      )k            .............. . . . .p                     S>k«?dl.                                               .


D   .e ...                                       u j.e > .e r........... .........................................s k o u w c t i ^ .                C r? . . .                             .

                                O O .k < p .                V v rc J                        P^D <b * i

           .B            h i o .   k» n h . e                                                                    V W .           P«?\ i c e .          W=iq I. . . . k.n?.tee>'i

(W.. .^Wvce,... k ^ ... Ike..... kwone J                                                                   £>o.ke/eu<'.ce,.... cwvgI . . . .                    k s c i ...............

.C ^ - f i^ e d ..............\ k e . . . .         .< r f^ r < £ r . . . . 3        c    . .              . .   . !-M=v5 . . . VTnP.f.^-. . . .f.Q ^ rrv .. . . k

:5>VeoVed.. k?.. .fvcrk
                 -
                          f«cp!e,.... u 'f ... .c&... \ke.
                        • '                             ~
                                                           ■ •.f.W/....
                                                               *    -I
                                                                        w>U».. I.<
                                                                                 '
                                                                                  ?)keis
cvicA .                  w s . k e c i.                                                   g o .&.            .tt*                C - f e v n c e - . . . jvn.fc.A. s ^ c - c h c n . .
                 f
O n           rc ^ .               .   r.» c ^ k lr    ... C.Pe«..2..).-.
                                                                                \.              lr><^cI                             ..   .e .c ^ f k e r ...                 ...................


ktae.               .   ,U-?4S                   o p .w . .             Cn                       .Vke.             ^ .\oc;rf c u o d                  )...                            __
 kiro.              .p u ^ I , . . H e . . . u s o ,                  . ,c \ e p » /A « - j.. d e a d . . . . \ .                  s k i l l . . . r .c x r il-.. .   (e rre y r\> e f.


 .u-?Wvl .... k e .... ,c*xs...                                       uu.*eQU            \< n ? \   ............
                    .1..... )ke*r>....... s>j>.^Ue<d... .<=». .c^/rk .. .udiAk ... k»er... .\ecjs...
Yrc*pped... <?uadt..                  .. clc.M^«a .. £*U           fttk..   Ike.. £V:c(ok op. Vke
                                                                         .. Ike.....
Cvri.closure.. .C Pen. .3 .3 ... .uoiHj                        Ake
                                                                Vke         c<5'.\ker
                                                                              ^ k e r.... W^d«.e5... .1.. .^>.o\led
Viei. c.oV.                 ... Ir.oecf.... k>... . W .. kiss... c .. kpe., o n o d a jr ........
C c u rx v e    p . c r a . . . .k e r . . . . . . v m c .o .Vk , • ■ V • ■               \ v ^ . r o f . . *sk e . . tjjGS. . .
die^d... J.... p o lle d               V>-^.. .co.v>o... .c o l-.. .<=£ .... k-e/. ■. .coi/.d.«c=|Cx»v........
cmoi... .Ccoef.ed..... .kej ...                             Jk.. u->.<^.... ?nU....... |..... coolcJ . d o ........
c*.k.. AW             Vic*<?.-... k ... .UQ<?.0ldl                     cl«-59.r.»f?e. . . . V k c s . . . < = , ^ 1 .............
0 \S.. . . ViJkiW,..                                 I \ b.v^.ecj-s.;. . b.ok.. jske . -Wei- • ■                     fe.......
£»Wv>.\cl#...... l.€«<^Vk.... Vv=itc .. .UGccm ... .vVt... .9*.. pc *r^.k«s>.1...UJ.dk ....
 Cv. .                     •••.CCcpccoii!^. .. . .kjp.e-... . SoQ.i.r.. . . c\v^.                                                          c,.k. . . % e. . . .kftC fe.. . .
 S ke.                    Ujc^s                     uo.ecg.v.^                                   «?».... .^cok. ,W\o(^... k>wVWn. .u.js?......
Signed                                                                                                           S ig n atu re w itn e s s e d by
                                                        U 1
                                                                                                                                                            WG 413
                                                                                                                                                 (Amended 9.87)
                                                Wait Midlands Police
                                           STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                              (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . .                                                  .............................................................................

.\be.          ^.r.cvn.k                                     , uoVu.he.. !T.'. .S»V>jcV:. .o*ioA.. .$— AKiyik,.
                .A ....             V           if2r*\cy*_>. . . .UoVsqIt . . . sAac.eS                            . . Je^.oJl
roo.^dl.... . W ^ e                        eov/ ,on<=^>....
                   1        cc^c\ eol                    <*>&.
                                                      W e(         W . . AW           W /IC T ..,. .WUween
OWj... .©nC.lc>SV>/fi-.. C€&o. .3. .) .. . PMrvd. !ke .<&oc.l<=iVf«r. ... .C.n ... YVty^.........
n .<\V ll... C pe*.r^5t. ) __ 1... ,(€.m ewb.9r. . .>S,.W                      Vr~cJ,. .(usk. . c»n.. .\\Qf.
p*.ce.4 \Wnfe. \W s.. coume... £ rc m .. Abe . .Se.£K^.                              .. A W A \. .\?/p.\Se..,
..................... V\l.<?__ C.«*J.r.'€Q?........nwce. .cnol rtte./.c____ pecple^----- \z>.............
H^e                        v . AVvc^lr     \ ......... ^co.^g)....... c * k .. IWe..               .a.......
c\j(           s e e k e r . . .C. Pen .3.J... g*3.qI          h>          I W . ... o f a . * .s - e s ^ k i.. • •
o na                 . .r.i^.hlr... I b S t e r i .. .C .^ e n ..2 J                      ., .u >e).<Zr- .......
 cxWe                          vue>.e           \ tm.(?................ Upe.less,.. A.......
 ,V\^yo.€ol.............Itaam . . . . . .<Pue)      H ? e....           ., .cx*?ct., Po\\<^&nn&o
 Ho&e.    . ,ca 1“cJU,iVwj           H*em .... i ......dic.nl'— . \z# pm^ —            . .'omemcj
 .1       lifte d                w s J            i           vjO-c^s. . . .               —        f t .c-K               . . . I’k k m .                        .

 Q 5, .. .1            C a rv e                 Ic o            ik & m             <?r>.. I r e . . . .pA e . . . A . .Ccwi.hcl'
 >ev*eyyh>eI.......... w r u ^ m c j                        .o k ^ jr            i'Vu^w; . A .                              .. J i a s k . . . . . .
         H.in«j.          CAoA^.^f^kt         ........ ......................... ...... .......................................
 .................... A. __ U?B*1 ......... ^Wrs>__ . W « -|. .. Av^-v^.... An .,. Irirwe---------------
                                                                  _




 p ile .. .c. \ . . . . .   kc.ok«.s                        ... vw> £r,c^o
                                                                         k . .C.Pen . 3 ..                           J .C*nd.
                                                                                                                   ........
 . ki.s...                                                   ..sAt^kHr^ ... im.covv\Q|... .fY le ,. o * o l '. .. cx*ictlri4C ...
 rvwv . . pu lied                   .\u m :___cAepJ. . . 0 » c J                   polr                   Wwv . . . Hexk. •                                ••
 H ie .. cprX            . \ . .. AilVec^        V>\s                — . W c k .. ... \                                                ... .
                                  k i m . . . . W e ...... Vt es. ...cJg....Upe...|


 r^V.vs                t^coVk... .                               wVmV^.                    ..             ... 1V>                ., c. \ e c v n . . . . .
 .s V w & i             5*A>W              S ! ?=?        - ■ H-e.. . ]r*Scl. . .JiyXn^.e'xs.l).. .^ W lri ■ .£.es?4V«f..
 .CO.W            V ft'.C .... .Vl.-C...................... . . . s - m . ‘ n<^.. ..C\..                                     .. .V'/.Q.vOn,.. .
  .W^j.'                 U^pC... ,js<Joe=4-... .S*WI-                           wuji.H».... .<k ••-.cl^We/...Wc^u.n..
  .C irc le ........ \<n...........\.Vc               W'cJcil<?. .. . . ,tw i % . • • .£ r yyjcr.... .vrcvp.VC^P . . . fin-.,.
  A . . . j p A c W / e . . . . c~(. ■ .                       . . \ . . . . H n v n . V l . . . .W > 3....

  .Wp.vjan ,.\ i^ V V .. . . V/.qa^!^. . . . e.o rc)/.Q vj..                                           .oj«c|. ..1.r . AV»lnk............

  *     ' ? * * ^ c W;*i
    ' ? .W
  3 .W                 V /i'^
                           .CC^h      - vJ r. '
                                 . . .U>UK.   .S..■w. . 2,» ■' •                                     . . •C^Jr'.CA J. .Shi.b^K K^. .•
                                                                                                                                    .
  os.         \W>      cJ m s         \'i~c,, ,.y ...s Wv ^C                                                                         ., .,W.0»,
                                        _




 Signed                                                             Signature witnessed by
                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                           WG 413
                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)
                                                          West Midlands Police
                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                         (C.J. Act 1967, s. 9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . .                    .Pflvw.                                            ........................................
.IWSvtsk-                        \      W ? k . . . fl-r. . .«?£(!                GAnd                               . . - .tats,.. .                        ,.
Lln.Wi ... .i\r                        I .. .       . . . . W m ... .w-e^lr... .W         \k>e .,                                           .............
.......................!                C.oo.k\**vJ.<?pt............... k o p.ic.k .... wp. . .                                      . . . . p€P.(?le.

(Vp-kw. . l We. .. . ^Vcyxk:. . . .                            .. i k e                                 . P.&n . 3 . ) . . . 2>^...                           ..
A ...CeuAci, ...V-«l|..........                                                  .LwRJ.e... cle.oo/..                           ...JD?=AAt>. ... .l^S- ..
UO&.fLr . . pciSS}rv.«^. . . . H i6m . . .                                               . . . . . IA>C?       , . . .^f-iV^v. . , UO.VlcAn.
 .W d ..          .bee*                 QpeneoJ                <?n.U            w .      . •.   p.'lxAs.            ............................. ...............
 ........................... \          U->e*Ti k            .Vte>. . .                         «^=!.,Q........... p^.lr. . .mCMS.               .

 |.ta<?.. . . f V . c * \ i r .                 e £ . ... m v j            S .e c A r v * * .'- -C .V ? .^ . 5                 ...U > « . s . . .9 i . . .

 ,f>vcun                   u A o c.. A                    kv=d. . . . . .^k.«.pp.€£0.........f->r\ ,. .C^J. l‘.e f. > .c*>kR. J.
 ,bie«o                                              d.e<s.ci              h*            c^sh                       .0 % $ ... ...
 H e . . . . t u 9 3 . .............9>......... , . .t jo U iV .- e                .ry»<=Ae,.. . . ^ ) r . . . ,k*j.».ljci. t , . .1 .,. d i d * \

 s^r«                 tais —            ^c.c,—           Y U . . . . .wsvS.              w.esJ.'srv?*                            vkVv'I'e.......
 n.'. .                     ...........pA^ocl... U1c;jcJz. .. .bo^us.iB^ . . ^ 0 l                                  Hr'ftVi.., .^U ... A ..
 Cewr\__ f.^memV>eT.*— .............. .................. . •..... .
 ...................\ Vve.Vp^d.... kk>. ....d ir .cAWer.... people.. .coe>.. \Vo. . . . .
 ,£©rce ... .(ffiw                               .\r>iv|... 5,-cchvon..                         .3.3— W —                \W            e lk #          ........
 .S »e.cV \c*». . . . o a . . .                       . . . x \C j.W r. .C.pe*?.«2.-). . b o .I t —             . | W . . . . . R ^ lv -^ . iCKlSS.

 A. . , cs*m                                           cn            «rc          ik e                       — oyrvd,,                                              .
  GLrcJ                      IW               fab-. • • m cM r\,..................                                                                   ,•, • • • •
  ........................ < f \ \ C .            V iE /T S -C C ,          «♦ f .k © '. . . . I k ^ . . . . . C.r.y^k> . . .U a > S . , A w -fi/C P /

 v^-M'Vk .                               . . s c .q jc > .« s .(. . . .u *5 > V ^ c V » « 5 .. . . s W e -.c s —    h ? * * d b p .c ^ s ,. f-Mr\cJ.. .

  . c o . ^ b , .. 'I 'U e . . . , k d s . . U ^ h k . . . l o U e . . ^ c .c k i.1 - ., . . W d . , . . c c n n c . . . c f f . . . .

  .t u s • • ■fc ic e ..                . -S o . . . . .1........p ic f e b d . . . . d r . . , u p . . . . . Q * v d . . . a k , .
  S»W>es .,. c ^ c i       W »dW .c^. . . . . .a « c i. . . . . pc$s,<sc£... .Ikem...           ..
  .Wt^               . c ¥ it> ...    • . . p‘i^ k ... . u a e / e ^ . . Ak»- • • •   . .uwe).e..
  .'p.»K.'n<^                        iV&m ••                                                                                                                    •••-••—   •—
  .........................I               le ^ ir            \k e            C f s ^ O .b d              c ,k ..                    • StiUrS; pr*.. . .

 d jr \c A . . .         .J&AyvGCl.............. -IVu?. . . .         fe.sk-. .                 ....   fP.^.. . C£>0>C^7---- pedKj...............
 V9H...                                                 u?«c._WJk ... no..., .WcoA. .olieolr.............. ..
   ........ JD.rv.•,. W e .... c\cju-j                                            .V...wets. , . . . . .c,... .
  m td rCjf.^ &n . .. fcw^ct.                                  . .V?irvi.Vl:eci . .^uwpfi/ y. . .f.'CDl. ., pvrnc,, 'X. . Sk.vcK
   ,C » \u e . . d *jr« x * . . . $ z v m s , . . . c u « d . . . . s \ W . . . V ^ c . V t , . . s . W f S . .
   5                             A       ccm ... 2^.’'___ .S.1,lo .'... Si.ook^.. E u d c /... .^ A k . . .sWcrU...
                            .. .bcc***.*?... .V>sac . .c-c.c .-e.«?<^.v<v=^ ,.. cx... fi^1.^ S T . • • .ChQ-v>sl^cJi€!...

  Signed                                                                        Signature witnessed by
                                                 ( J/
                                                                                                                                                     WG 413
                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)
                                          West Midlands Police
                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                        (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rutes 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of .                     Hi\J. ■ - .T T ^ 7 (-0 .t? . .   ............................... ..............................

       . . .<P=wC£cJ-...................................................................... . ,

.......................\ ................... . .. . <=*.ss».^Vecf.... . p » r , b m j? ,..                                .., \V».e...
Y.-&Jo.c.e__ c^e.U.vA^...             |?ecf?W — c.ueX,. . AWe—                                                . ,\tn.h=>.. .Une .
/.v<^V>V... ,\oQ u a d .... ^C.cArto». ..,C H e n .. 2 . ) ..... W ^ . —                               e*             \c.cJ.

■OoyU.ecA..
                  ..M.«_...                             n o c .... 4o»*rt*4... ^eAr. •                                           ..cufcJ..
k o l-:. . .            t u e .......... ,\<=vsV...................... . . . . c p. . . .eA-CJi. .9-.B'0                     'f .                     .
 .Gijf.W       jl~. .. .U jss,          .c«|l     PQ€f ...................... ..........
 ...................\ .... V>cxv.e... ,Wa U.en... , .ciftuO*v . . .                                              • •. V. .cpJt\cJ. ...
 ASwr*V?€i. . . . C tbssJh.   ..   AW? . . . . jdUw^. . , . .QMocA . . . .                 .......
 InpMJ.e        U;(Jt         I .It                        Cw*4             uwAl               ^»vV?...                                  .........
 Coi
    fi




 Signed                                                      Signature witnessed b
incident          108       2 4 1 1 9 7 O P 931                  DOCUMENT           RECORD         PR TN T

                                                                                                          Message      Number         Ml395


Message      D a te                  010689                                       I'irne         1030

Message      T yp e                  Of f j cers      :inf o rma'Iia n

Officer      receiving               1 0 0 07


                              M C C O H B IE

F a r e name 3                DS S/ 9£

Add ress                      DECEASED          1 NQU IRY T b A M , Cf \EF F IKI. D




PAUI     JOHN T A Y L O R ,

           MADE    A S T A fEMSNT 3 . 3 . 8 9 ,          AND ALSO A COPY                Of       HIS ORIGINAL          NOTES

(ATT AC iIE-D ) .

T H E I iKMALF M E N T I O N E D     ON PAGE        4 OK    SOKE. W O U L D A P P E A R            1 0 BT" V I C T O R I A   HICKS       (BODY

N O 89 >.

TAYLOR      HAS BEEN PUT           IN TOUCi I W I T H       THE MICKS             !• A M I L Y




HE H A S    SPOKEN       TO MRS HiCKS AMD                BAH)    ALONG       TIC      L I N E S OF        "I G O T V I C T O R I A    OUT    OF

T H E P E NS ,    I WAS GIVING           HER     THE K I S S OF       LIFE        AMD THEN          A P O L I C E M A N SAI D,        "LEAVE

HF.R A L O N E , S H E *S GONE . "             WITHOUT     FEELING          FOR     PULSE         ETC .

THIS OBVIOUSLY            CAUSED      GREAT' U P S E T       TO THE H IC K S.

TAYLOR      WAS     RU   I N I E R V I E W E D 3 1 . 3.&9 A N D HALF          RETRACTED             WHAT       HE T O L D M R S      HICKS




TAYLOR      IS W H I T E M A L E 3*       10",      HEAVY       UU IL D ,    RED      HA IR,       RUDDY COMPLEXION,

MOUSTACHE,,           ON T H E     DAY    WEARING BRIGHT              GREEN LONG                 SLEEVED       SHIRT    WITH ROUND

NECK    A N D JEANS,,         (PHOTOGRAPH           OF    TAYLOR      ATTACHED),,

THE H ICKS        FAMILY      HAVE SEEN          TEMPORARILY P L A C A T E D               CAN      THE F O L L O W I N G    B E DONEs

1.     ID T A Y L O R    IN CR OW D .

2.     ASSESS      HIS    INVOLVEMENT.

3,,    ESTABLISH         A M Y CON"! 1 N U 1 T Y      RE V I C T O R I A     H I C K S.

PLEASE      REPORT       FINDINGS        TO OS MCC0M8IE              IN O R D E R       THAT        MR A N D    MRSHICKS          CAN   BE
PROF 1h R !....Y A O V i 8 1£D R E P AUL. XA Y L 0 R .


                                                         i.i M O f c . X s I ^ S
 ACT 'XOMs     YES/MO




                                                         RirCI-IVFR
 AC I'ION N U M B E R   ;

 A N v! 1'UR i        AC I.1O N !

                                                         of   K j. c i.\
                                                         MANAGER



                                                         S K N 1OR
                                                         I/O         i
 o n- ib.R R'cl" iiKhNCLS   5


t'!MD OF   RLI"'CRT
 .ncidgjnt.        108         2 4 1 1 9 7 O P 931                    DOCUMENT KLCORD      PRINT

                                                                                                    Hessaoe      Number         M::i


Messag©        D a te                 OSO'389                                 iime

M e s s a g e T ype                   P h one    ;ln

0 f f i c e r r e c e .iv i n a


Surname

I"o r e nam e s

A d d re s s


T &1 e p h o n e


PAUL     TAYLOR                                                                                                W A S AT     1 HL HATCH

lie   gave     help      to    rwo   people     who    d i e d   ,,

                                                                               HL. 1\K.)Ul..D   l   xK E   i0 L/U‘. i.N sE!\ V JL.wi:;..L)

COUL..D IT 8E           DONE      URGENTLY
                                                 PAGE                  2
                                                 i\ vi.../i n >i~_.?



                                  INDEXERs
 AC i ON;     Vtri/NO




                                  R l.C E 1VER
 A C T ION N U M B K R 5

 ANY    I UR'iHl'IR A C T I O N

                                  OFF ICE
                                  MANAGER




                                  S EM I OR
                                  I/O s
 0     i!IhK REl~ h.Rfc.NCtS !

c.NP OF    REPORT
 Incident        106      341197     O P 931              ACTION     KECORD     PRINT

                                                                                      ' A C T I O N N U M B E R Ab£?06
ACTION     RESUME                         tNSP L A Y T O N S   VIDEO CREW       TO A N S W E R Q U E R I E S IN M i 395,

   INSP L A Y i O N S V I D E O C R E W TO A N S W E R Q U E R I E S IN M l 395.
  U S E P H O T O & D E S C R I P T I O N TO TRY T O A N S W E R THE Q U E R I E S AT 1, H, 3, OF hessaoe „
  P H O T O & C O P Y SMEN T 'OF PAUL. J O H N TAYI..OR (110 85 9) T O A C C O M P A N Y A C T ION
   (LI A St W I T H i)b M C C R 0 M 8 C E )
R A I S E D BY O P E R A T O R ;                1494               DAT E :       05-06-69             T 1 ME s      1735
05-06-69 1735 OP "14 9 4 R A I S E D F R O M M l 3 9 5
0 !:>■-■06    9    •1616     O P 4909       AI..L0CAT ED TO 1NSI’ L E Y T O N
06-06-89           3053      OP7347         COMPLETED
.07-06- 69         1553      OP3663         RESULTED
DOCUMENT'S T A K E N :
 1/ M A N P E L ] E V P D TO HE P AU L 1 AYI. 01\ S E E N ON V I D E O iAPE m a p 7 15?1 40 IN P E N 3 IN
B O T T O M R I G H T H A N D C O R N E R OF SCREEN,, ME o O E S t"H O M V I E W AT 1533 04. S E E N A G A C N
G O E S F R O M V I E W 1536 40„
3/ IN T H E         F I R S T I N S T A N C E HE A P P E A R S TO BE S T A N D I N G DY T H E H A R R I E R O B S E R V I N G
T H E PIL..E OF B O D I E S . EN T H E S E C O N D I N S T A N C E H E A P P E A R S TO BE A S S I S T I N G
R E M O V A L 0!: B O D I E S T H R O U G H G A T E THREE,,
3 /NO VISUAL. E V E D E N C E A V A I L A B L E .
P H O T O G R A P H & C O P Y B M E N T R E T A I N E D IN V I D E O S E C T I O N .
OS M C C O M B I E IS A W A R E OF A B O V E „
OrF1CERS RECORDED
 18-06-89          1043      OP 1531        F ft...ED
I n r idj^nl          I Oft       24-1197 O H 931                  M O M IMA!      RECORD      PRINT

   Non'iTfiai no
   Bus- m am s                                                       3. t   .1 0

   F o rename1


   DoH                              Age             Tc
   0 c c:u pa t i o n
   E m p l o y e r / B c h a a 1 na m s
   H e ig h t             ta                   6 u i i.d
   ila 'i r C o I ou r
   Hair Type

   Eyes
   C cintP i.e x i o n

   F a c i a l h ai r
   Glasses worn                          Use
   J e w e .13 e ry                                                                                   A c ce n t

   R e c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s , m a r i<s , <»c a r s , pe cu .1lari t ies ,a b n o r ma 1 .it i s s




   I n o ws V i e t 1m                          N a t u r e of r e l a t i o n s h i p
   At S c e n e                                 F i n ge r p r in t s

   C RO number                                        S...o c a 3. r e f ,, n o
   S i o o d 3atriple            U                G r o u p (ABO)                  0 1he r
   Saliva Sample                 U                        Be e r e te r U          S u 15 p e c t          E 1 iiT>   C o d e




   C 1 o t h :i.n g




   O th er     Free           1 ext
 G [864.




      C r oss ••••r e f e r e n c e 5 r,
Auurt E S m            HOME
TPLi: P H O N E         HOMF
TELEPHONE              B  USINESS
CA1EG0KY                POSITION 1             G R I D fci.3                                        PEN 3 STANDING
CATEGORY               LINK                    LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS                                 SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY                ENTI R E D             TUNNEI..                                             WES'i S T A N D
CA i'EGORY             POSITION 2              PENS 1 A 2 STANDING                                  WES f STAND
CATEGORY                L INK                  F A CU P Sh'MI I-'j NAi.. 1988                       S L M I I'IN ALS
CA FEGORY              ENTERED                 I N T E R N A L GA fE P E N 3
CATEGORY                EN'i i-RED             'TURNST11. ES
N2297                  ASSOCIATE
N7833                   ASSOCIATE
                                                                                                                                CON!
   M o m :i.na .L   0
   Su rname
   F o r e n a me

       C r 0 3 5 - r e f s r e n c e s c o n t i n u eds-
N783S                    A s S O C 1A iE
A£34                                          OBT                       iia II- R E Q D F R O M
A4->3S                                        03 T F A N Q U E S T     r
                                                                     ROM
Q 1B64                   SUB J l:IC~i         E6 ~U4 o
QSL937                   su s je c r          04 -03 ~89
A4b38                                         RESU! .T ?             Ai.HEADY SF.EN            A E 3 4 & G S L 9 3 7 R E F E R.
OSL. 1 i 30                                   M 7835 ST S WEN f T O H A T C H WI VH m £ 9 / N H 6 9 d N 7 8 3 3 A L L
                                              S T O O D iN P E N 3 T H E N C L I M B E D 10 P E N TWO.
GSL8E3                                        N H S 9 7 S T S ON A R R I V A L E N T E R E D T H R O U G H THE FU NN E L INTO
                                              P E N 3 iN C R U S H E S . WIT Pi N 2 H 9 7 ,N S 6 9 ,N 7 6 3 3 .
QSL937                                        S f S INET.[ALLY IN C R O W D B U I L D UP IN P E N 3 & W E N T T H R U
                                               INT'GRNAI G A T E 8 1 410 H R S INTO P E N S.




                                                 E N D OF    REPORT
        c^n
3.n c i d en t    108       241197      O P 931               ACTION      RECORD      PR 3 NT

                                                                                                  ACTION NUMBER         Ac'34
ACTION      RESUME      s                   08      FAM QUEST       & 'T/ST      if   miQD F R O M

RAISED      BY O P E R A T O R s             1237                    PATE;        2 6 0 4 — 89              T 1ME :     18 1 :3


 OBT FAN QUEST & T/S T i E R h S S FROM
 H/A                                                                                ,S T A R T E D IN P E N 3 & H U S H E D
 P E N 2 L E P P I M G S LiM E N D , S A W P E O P L E B E I N G C R U S H E D A N D C L I M B I N G F E N C E S IN A L L
 DIRECTIONS.
 A C T I O N N O W A L L O C A T E D TO
 A C T I O N N O W A L L O C A T E D TO
 Q U E S T 1G N N A )..R E OB "IAI N E D , A C T I O N C O M P L E T E D A N D F O R W A R D E D TO NEC FiE L L S „

26--04••■89 1815             OP 1 23 7 R A I S E D F R O M 0 1 8 6 4
26-~ 0 4 ~ 8 9     1831      OP 4 9 0 9 A L L O C A T E D TO DC I W I L L I AMB
27-04-89           1 15 6    OP 1 16 5 A C T I O N U P D A T E - A C T [ O N      TEXT ADDED
A C T I O N N O W A L L O C A T E D "TO |                                                     1
0 2 - 0 5 -89      1633      0 P 8 0 6 4 A C T I O N U P D A T E - A C T £O N     TEXT ADDED
A C T I O N N O W A L L O C A T E D TO
04-05--89           1 53 6   0P8064       A C T I O N UP D A TE - A C T I O N TEXT A D D E D
Q U E S T I O N N A I R E OR"! AIMED,,      A C T I O N C O M P E L "IE D A N D F O R W A R D E D TO NEC! -IF!Li. S »
06 -05 -8 9 1 6 58 0 P 4 9 0 9           COMPLETED
H9--05--89          1933 OP 6 1 3 7      RESULT'ED
D O C U M E N T S TAKEN;          QSL937
QUESTI0NNA1RE COMPLETED.
N A M E S OF P E R S O N S T R A V E L L E D W I T H TAKEN,
OFFICERS RECORDED
02--06--•89         1530 OP 1531         F £LED
incident          108        241197       O P 931            ACTION RECORD           PRINT

                                                                     A1SG5                      AC iION N U M B E R       A433S
ACTION      RESUME       s                    03 T F A N G U E S T   FROM

RAISED      G Y OF SIR A'! OR s               3502                   DAI t's      28~ 0 5 89                'IME:         1636

 OBT FAN Q UEST FROM
 N O M E AD .                                            r 1 ii i fii..:'!AT! C; NOT KNOWSS
 A Q U E S T HA:-> B E E N O B T A I N E D F R O M                               IN W H E C H                           ro     n-i£
 MATCH WITH                                                                                 „


28-05-89          1856  O P 3502                                               A 1805
28-05-89          1924  OP3502
29-05-89          0845  O P 4909
1 1 - 06 ••-89    1852  O P 3/39
12.0 6 .89        2012  OP 7383
DOCUMENTS         TAKEN
                                                                             ST A"i PS AS R E A D Y   IN"l E R V I E W E D .
( A C T I O N A 2 3 4 R E F E R S)
N H 6 9 & Q S L 9 3 ? REF ER
Or I I C E R S R E C O R D E D
17-06-89          1136       OF55 4 3 9    F 11 .ED
                                              Q S L /q S -^




                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S
                   JUDICIAL INQUIRY
                       INTO THE
          HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER
                SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989




      SUPPORTERS QUESTIONNAIRE

SURNAME

FORENAME(S)

ADDRESS




AGE               DATE OF BIRTH         SEX

TEL. NO. HOME                     B(
QUESTIONNAIRE


THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TOASSIST LORDJUSTICETAYLORS'
JUDICIAL INQUIRY INTOTHEHILLSBOROUGHFOOTBALLDISASTER
ONSATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989.



1.   DID YOU GO TO THE FOOTBALL MATCH AT HILLSBOROUGH?



2.   WHICH FOOTBALL TEAM DO YOU SUPPORT?



3.   DID YOU GO IN AN ORGANISED PARTY? M               c
     W ~TV '      F^Pi         •



4.   IS IT AN OFFICIAL SUPPORTERS CLUB OR INDEPENDENTLY
     ORGANISED?!^ \A •




5.   WHERE DID YOU GET YOUR TICKET FROM?
                          t\c_yj=nr                ,
6.   WHAT PRICE DID YOU PAY AND WHICH STAND WAS IT FOR?
               fc — O O   <



7.   WHO DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GAME WITH?




8.   DID YOU GO BY CAR, COACH, RAIL OR ANY OTHER MEANS?
      (IF BY COACH NAME THE COMPANY)
       OWtNj                          t-AESloR \       J   .




                                       -1 -
9.    DID YOU STOP ANYWHERE EN ROUTE TO THE GAME, IF SO WHERE
       AND FOR WHAT PURPOSE. O vo           srro P -




10.   WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY TRAVEL DELAYS AND IF SO WHY?
       Y\(o>2~      AaePi    Tvysrr            Qe^-e,(2A-t^ i
                                                            \X.-ot> v>m >

11.   DID YOU WITNESS PRIOR TO ARRIVAL AT THE GROUND ANY OTHER
      SUPPORTERS CONSUMING ALCOHOL? v b S- P ^ v ie
      ^                          T^er\ o p f

12.   WHAT TIME DID YOU1ARRIVE IN SHEFFIELD?K^e       .
           \ >5 v<*-
13.   DO YOU KNOW WHERE YOU PARKED OR ARRIVED IF BY TRAIN?
            "Te+p\-s r>y        5<xe\<                                                              P'^aY-

14.   DID YOU RECEIVE OR SEE A M POLICE DIRECTION OR ESCORT FROM
      YOUR ARRIVAL POINT, TO THE GROUND? i ^ o .
       niweh wAS ' m t                  ~~Te. o v s r                                               f’
                                                                                                     Cuca         mao

                 c;
                  tV i  'if¥wr  n-oe_ hvri^ o f vbuce.
15.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY DISORDER, FIGHTING OR DRUNKENESS
      BETWEEN YOUR ARRIVAL POINT AND THE GROUND? M c ^ e ,

16.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE ENTRANCE TO THE GROUND?                                                 .

17.   WHAT WERE THE QUEUES LIKE AT YOUR ARRIVAL AT THE
      TURNSTILES? K lo           o < ^ ^ Nji'z^rvC)(Ni ~3-os~r              a    CtprWes^A^ c f tM 0
                 ^G.                      ~ r^(4 srp/a^-                                 tbucc
       vW'rv.Oq                        Qo&U&S-
18.   WHAT POLICE DIRECTIONS DID YOU WITNESS OUTSIDE THE
      TURNSTILES? ^ c t v i £ .
          i he>i                   rh e ^ e            S m f i c M (*JC j   \j       '7 > j \bf-o<Jct h d ^
         B o 'r    isjcST   o f’< A r J l 'L t           T H t         ^ fo E          'f o O U>oU CD
         {E.'t-       l'
19.   WHAT STEWARDS' DIRECTIONS DID YOU WITNESS AT THE
      TURNSTILES?         ,




                                                 -2-
20.    DID YOU EXPERIENCE ANT DIFFICULTY IN FINDING YOUR ENTRY
       POINT? NviO — V V-VJf-WG.                              *




21.    DID YOU HAVE DIFFICULTY ENTERING THE GROUND. IF YES, GIVE
       BRIEF REASON. K j z > •




22 .   DID YOU ENTER THROUGH A TURNSTILE?



23.    IF NOT. HOW DID YOU ENTT?D'>




24.    DID YOU SEE ANY GATES OPEN OTHER THAN THE TURNSTILES?
               fi* <  2   s   C   -   v  '  E   _   O   , w-A ^ .sfVrsi
       ^    U 'rK -e     WAV      w \W v A                              Q ufM tO irJc,        fr,           i TH6W
              wgvs.       TrjCL         Palace. oF                  Rkjcc
           ~TM VS      Q a T E . u<L   T v -,e i rto ie .   T H A > U /ftS   U V T E rt   G         r   t     C ^ i 'H N C,
25.    DID YOU W H NESS THE OPENING OF ANY GATES OTHER THAN THE
       TURNSTILES? K i o . H o t  oJT s >xd&




26.    DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO THE GROUND, AND
       IF SO BRIEFLY DESCRIBE.   •




27.    DID YOU HAND YOUR TICKET IN, IF NOT DO YOU STILL POSSESS IT?
       (SEIZE) V b s -




                                                  >■*
                                                -J-
28.   ONCE INSIDE THE GROUND, DID YOU SEE ANY SIGNS DIRECTING YOU
      TO YOUR MATCH VIEWING POINT? '"S v is rr c K»cL
      t       KtOcW    YoO COv.UO    CvC "Tt) TVve 'SvCjss ^ GoT
       |Oo                    tsj5*        \* •
29.   DID YOU HAVE ANY DIFFICULTY AT ALL IN FINDING YOUR MATCH
      VIEWING POINT? tO o .




30.   DID YOU USE THE TUNNEL TO THE STANDING AREA (TO PENS 3 & 4
      ON MAP)?



31.   DID YOU HAVE FREE PASSAGE ALONG THE TUNNEL? V ’B S

32.   WAS THERE ANY POLICE CONTROL EVIDENT AT THIS POIOT IN THE
      GROUND?    O -                               v fJ ^ c,0<*n o
                          C"J     ~ T V \^   ( c t 2oiW
                                                      *Ysj'Qil   i op.   oF   TH e_
      -rvj't N» S T " U _ ^ S .
33.   WAS THERE ANY MATCH STEWARD CONTROL AT THIS POINT?
         NO -
34.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY DISORDER OR OTHER INCIDENTS BETWEEN
       YOUR ENTRY POINT AND MATCH VIEWING POINT?
        (BRIEFLY DESCRIBE) kJ q .




35.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE GROUND,
       IF SO BRIEFLY EXPLAIN. ^ 0




                                             -4-
    36   INDICATE ON THIS GRID YOUR POSITIONS IN PEN 3 OR PEN 4 AT THE
         TWO FOLLOWING POINTS;
         1) YOUR FIRST MATCH VIEWING POSITION.
         2) YOUR POSITION AFTER THE EVENTS WHICH LEAD TO THE
         DISASTER (USE NUMBERS i AND 2 IN THE RELEVANT GRID)




                                           TUNNEL



                                                        1
1

2                                i
                             t

                         I
                        "T

f                       /

L                   /


1


                                                   ..    .




                PEN 3                                                       PEN   4




                                 FOOTBALL               PITCH



                                                             ~ ro
                                                             V>e    ~T\ML£^Otf4q .




                                       -   5   -
37.     DID YOU SEE A BARRIER BREAK IN PEN 3? ^                .



38.      WERE YOU AT OR NEAR THE BARRIER WHEN IT BROKE? M o .



39.      WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



40.      WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY EXCESSIVE CROWD CRUSH AT THIS
         TIME, IF YES, BRIEFLY EXPLAIN. K io ^ c e s s ,v/e- CVK
  W          TPv dSTT      S.T&OQ v»->         ^   (VV        Q__r o S P ^   iT
  fovv-                       fvtMCi x                                                  ^ h e O
                                                    09         ?65?ce             ^' vx— ev ini
       p<2orv       THE,      “TOisi^'iEW^
41.      WHO WERE YOU STOOD OR SAT WITH?
         ~T~v-ate_ ~-x ^ Q x = ^                                                             •
          vni vao                  irj'tra         -2-    w cxv\

42.      DID YOU WITNESS ANY FIGHTS OR DISTURBANCE OR UNUSUAL
         INCIDENT AT THE TIME OF TAKING UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING
         POINT?      ■



43.      DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD CRUSH?          V&    S>



44.      WERE YOU INVOLVED IN ANY CROWD CRUSH, IF SO, CAN YOU SAY
         WHAT TIME THIS HAPPENED? i um ^      AioT  in m o o ^& o i

         CO^-O     CJP^h   f>\TT IT- yl&Ctfiri      T               c M w A ^ S<



 45.     DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD SURGE, IF SO, DO YOU KNOW WHAT
         CAUSED IT? (BRIEFLY) y e s ,   'tva ^o jc.m w     i/6cv;<hp c f=
          ^£o $o£.               "I'M R-6'Jq h         “T^ rJ                       •




 46.      WERE YOU INJURED, IF SO, DID YOU ATTEND HOSPITAL IN
          SHEFFIELD?      .




                                         -6-
47    DID YOU WITNESS ANT DEATHS?
               Vfee!?t£, |                                                                   v*t~VC W\
        \?x7r t-iAO fJo iN1\JC(_                                          wj    CVH     'TVlP'''i
48.   DID YOU ASSIST ANYONE WHO WAS DEAD OR INJURED, IF SO,
      BRIEFLY EXPLAIN,




49.   DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER WAS A FACTOR
      IN THE DEATHS, OR THE INJURIES TO ANY PERSON?
      tO o                                              '~TO        'Y & e ^ O N C ,.
      -TV>^T           TVCt      Vter^ 1>                                                       <V\         a-^IVK
       vJVaiO     a      S Vx k -M}   WVtfg,                                    No^CE O
      "T *" ^         v b c - ic ^    o4~    S r*< ^ fV < 2 W i         C jc ^ i- O                     3 'fO o O   A T
                                            -Tt> S-eMJ              (>PbP«£L              Tt-f^e Sm O P -
50.   WHAT TIME DID YOU LEAVE THE FOOTBALL GROUND?
      ftv2>oo"t   I}-* i S ^ m

51.   DID YOU LEAVE ON THE DIRECTION OF EITHER A POLICE OFFICER, A
      STEWARD, A LOUD SPEAKER ANNOUNCEMENT OR OF YOUR OWN
      ACCORD? o "F 0 0 R     O w ^i   ^<^ot2-0
         1      W ol/ l O            t . \ y j£ ~^z-> <,>qv/      T v ~ iiA Y    Tv-VEL    pvj\VuVC_-        A -O O yteS *
                                            T s ffV c J ^          N ^fVO ^Q W i^Tt -         A tv io      ?M4K'M9
        tv/wjcj-i % & & & £ -   ceNSir?B^^    fT 1s». r n e oajW u,*vy
       "T"0                   ~T& ~rT-rt Cj2oW e
52.   DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A
      CRIMINAL OFFENCE? ^ o .




53.   DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS OR OBSERVATIONS ON THE WAY THE
      INCIDENT WAS HANDLED, AFTER THE MATCH WAS STOPPED?
      ^ CTT                                 "X^Efi£.                                           U n U e L- UvA^i
      'T'H'fVV
       s-otfiteo .                                                 moe,                                                   •




                           E h e ^ W c y                    sb£vAoe S                 S^^P O




                                                 -7-
54.     IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS
        VITAL TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?
 iH t     — TTo<&T             ps,LVoc_('xtvCsrJ             wfv.'i         ~TCM~A.t_L S       w<2cNC^          wvavO a

  COiO~^a,\<*»\iT&C)          lo         THE                 y>fv<£\~ Cr          Tt~tE      cii(2cvisj'0     Afc}_Gc/lTE: Q



~’T*V-t£_       U & cj^            ov       Poc\Cj£                    Cj Q-Cx                               <2-{x_ “TVOSEL
  W   H v c k   w A 3      O ^ v ix O v iS u V   'v X i v ^ i T &            $&r*J\o{2~      f b u c £       O F H C ^C S .


            H A ^   If^iScsrJ                    Fo^L            'TVi<5_ " T A - O £,£#>   ' F&eC
              u^Tv' I H                                          ~1 M-g, "rvirviN^a. |Q>F"T€ 1^ 2L f ^                              '


SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED



NAME/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK
CAPITALS)




SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING




QUALITY OF WITNESS                                                   IMPRESSIVE                   □
(TICK BOX APPLICABLE)                                                 CA0 0 O

                                                                     AVERAGE                      O



                                                                     POOR                         Q


CorrL                                               ,8           o ^ v o . ^                       wte^c,                           <=*
                                        -^o-c2_       fx t-\<S~VOV\               La\0€_ ^"WE-
                ^ -v rvi'C^ V. .


                 ^                       <~J\St        Ht^AA.             fv -Q      C e ^ i '-o e fc       TV C      C        A(->

                -AO                          "G -E ^pj                    to r      tl-e^V E :^.        fVOTVvovjc V \        foq     \>^M15Hf2e
                                        5Jv>spXCverjY-.

                                                                                    ?r T Q    *


                                                         -   8   -
                                 V s*        Z         i^rro            K-

       ^"°   **°        '^S     r^sOK^c^         -to      T V ^     *2^/0    CT=
        ^     <*-r--0     W ^ A . c *.Mc,   -TK^vi^K           a   C.^'re
PC*"    'A^»JX_    0*' 10            13>£^we^f4                       «2j _^_ £
               CONFIRMATION   R E P OR T   **    AS    OF    25   NOU   ’ 97   16:17   PAGE

                                                             S V P




     DOTE    TIME           TO/FROM             MODE        MIN/SEC     PGS      STATUS
01   11/25   16:09   901216264160                            07 "44     12        OK
                                                    Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                    50 Windsor Road


              POLICE                                Heeley
                                                    SHEFFIELD
              JUSTICE     with    COURAGE
                                                    S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:                               uesr                Powicis

For the attention of:             CSU fx>£X£&.

Comments:                                 PAjg               fettJrOHSTJ
                            fan    VIQWiT} ftHb SAtfAti Hick?
                            +*           inFo          fincn*




From:

Telephone Number:

Number of Pages (including this page)             1u)£LV£~

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
Incident                   108      H3--11---97      O P 931       Screen    print         -- t e r m i n a l        014 - Plus                code       +M1

* ■ * * a- s r c * a- a-                                                 a # - * * * # * * * * a - * * * * # * *■* * * # # # * * * '* * * * • * ■» * • * ■* * * * • #
                                 DISPLAY      MISCELLANEOUS        INFORMATION                                                          SCREEN           19.2

D E T A I LS FOR             i NC I D E N T   108   HILLSBOROUGH                                                                       LIVE

     NOMINALS                           13315       SEQUENCES                            22.             MESSAGES                                    2203
     VEHICLES                              30       EVENTS                        10833                  REPORTS         *                            109
     STREETS                             7579       OTHER NAMES                      316                 TELEXES                                        8
     HOUSES                             10021       ACTIONS                        8 6 7S                OTHER D O C U M E N T S                     3970
     TELEPHONES                         10303       STATEMENTS *                   390?                  QUEST IONNAIRES                             7973
     CATEGORIES                           844       P D F ’S    *                      21                * COUNTS EXCLUDE                        SUFFIXES

     U N I DEN'I V E H I C L E S C R E A T E D                      7          S T A T U S DATABASES                          CREATED
     UN I D E N T S T R E E T S  CREATED                         2<b6          HIGH PRIORITY ACTIONS                    NO
                                                                               M P A T E R M I N A L S L O G ’D O N 5 N O N E
SYSTEM            WIDE      DETAILS

     STATUS DATABASE NOT SERVED                                DATA B A S E STATE*      READ
     DOCUMENT PRINT PROGRAMS                                   N O T IN P R O G R E S S
     DISK NAMES;                                               TXT1=H0LME5 TXT2=DBASE4
     H O L M E S RELEASE?                                      5,4    REVISION 8


ft#####*****####**
Incident         £08        2 5 1 1 9 7 O P 931                   NOMINAL RECORD PRINT

  N o m i n a l no.  N717
  Surname        HICKS                                            Title
  Forenames VICTORIA                                JANE

  B i r t h p 1 ace    13EDF O R D
  DoB £ 0 0 7 1 9 7 3            Age   2 4 To                     Sew F                          Ic    1
  Occupation           STUDENT
  Eriipl oye r / S c h o o l n am e   HAl:!ER D A S H E R S A S K E S S
  H e i g h t 5 ’4     to              Build SLIM
  Hair Colour            DK D R O W N        LT B R O W N
  Hair Type          SHOULDER LENGTH

  Eyes                 BLUE
  C o m p l e x ion

  F a c i a l h air
  Glasses worn                         U se
  Jewellery                                                                                           Accent

  R e c . in . ju r y, ta t to o s, r n a r k s , s c a r s , p e c u l i a r i t i e s , a b n o rroal i t ie s




  Knows Victim                                 N a t u r e of r e l a t i o n s h i p
  At Scene                                     I'i ng er p r i nt s

  C R O n u m b e r N O TRACE                        L o c a l ref. no
  b! 1 o o d S a m p 1 e U                       G r o u p (ABO)                   Other
  Saliva Sample U                                      Se cr et er U               Suspect                 E l i m C od e

   C 1othing
 N A V Y B L U E V N EC K C A R D I G A N B L U E J E A N S WHI TE TEE S H I R T B R O W N B O O T S                        BROWN SOCKS
 S 5 9 7 A s F O L L O W I N G P R O P E R T Y W A S W I T H BOD Y; P A I R OF W O O L L E N S O C K S                          BRA
 B R I E F S D R O W N B O O T S W H I T E T SHIR'!
 SI893 - WHITE BLOUSE |
   Other Tree Tent
 I NF O F R O M 0 3 3 6 .
 PROPERTY MISSING - NAVY BLUE V NECK CARDIGAN
 IIOSP REF N O 0 2 0 ( N O R T H E R N G E N E R A L H O S P I TAL)
 DECEASED              FROM SS7S6C WEIG H T WAS 49KGS HEIGHT 156CM
 S I 8 9 3 ~ H A S B L O N D E S H O U L D E R L E N G T H H AI R




      Cross-references:'
ADDRESS        HOME
CATEGORY       N EAR TO                       BROKEN BARRIER PEN 3                               CROWD SURGES           INSIDE
CATEGORY        1EB /3                        P L A N S OF I N S I D E G R O U N D
CATEGORY        ISDECEASEO                    B O D Y 8 9 Hl'CKS N 7 1 7                         DECEASED
CAT E G O R Y  L IN K                         LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS                               SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY       POSITION                       PEN 3 STANDING                                     WEST STAND
CATEGORY        T A K E N TO                  NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL                          HOSPITALS
CATEGORY       C A R R I E D IN               SOUTH YORKSHIRE AMBULANCE                          AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                                                                                                     CONT
                                                                                                                   PAGE


   N o m i n a l no.  N 717
   Surname        HICKS                                    Title
   Forenames VICTORIA                        JANS

                                   nt i n u e d s -
N 10489          STOOD BY            REX                                JEFFREY                     ROBERT
N 10670          S T O O D BY?        HAND                              WAUL
N 10672          S T O O D 8 Y?
N 10673          S T O O D BY?
N 10782          L IN K
N 1 0 7 97       L IN K
N 10892          LINK
N 10894          L IN K
N 11064          L IN K
N 1 1 3 30       L IN K
N 11602          PLACE AMBO
N 12883          IB SD F O R M
N 12837          LINK
N 12888          L INK
N1303            ID EN rI F IED       HICKS                             TREVOR
N 1310           MOTH DAUG            HICKS                             JENNIFER
N 137            SAW LAYING
N-139            SAW LAYING           MADDOX                            FREDRICK
N 1 980          D I D PM?            DENMARK                           LLOYD                       NEIL
NH160            LINK
N2736            L IN K               WHITLAM                           PHILLIP                     KENNETH
N3163            L I NK               TAYLOR                            S"l E P H E N
N3271            R E F E R S TO?
N3336            S T O O D DY?
N343             R E F E R S ro
N 36 1           LINK                 FORTUNE                           SHAUN                       MICHAEL
N4302            CERT DEAD            DOORE                             JANET                       ROSEMARY
N4366            LI NK
N5482            LINK                 MC G U I N N E S S                PETER                       JOHN
N3397            R E F E R S TO       PEARS                             RUTH                        C HAN'T El ..LF.
NS623            L IN K
N37-19           AMBO LINK            EDWARDS                           ANTHONY                     JAMES
N5998            LINK?
N649             SI ST                HICKS                             SARAH                       LOUISE
N 7765           L IN K
NX 9 9 3         L I NK
N8021            LINK
N9186            OWN DOCTOR           JAMES                             ELIZABETH
N9737            L IN K
N9862            L IN K
A 1080                                DC I TOPE            D E C E A S E D VICT O R I A JANE HICKS BODY NO 89
A6133                                 TV S T J EFT- REX. IN P E N ;•< N E A R B R O K E N B A R R I E R & B E L 11::v e d
Dll 6            SU8JEC r             P7-
                                      C. f -04-89 D O C U M E N T F O L D E R 8 0 D Y 8 9 V I C T O R I A J A N E H I C K S
a 1 00 7                                         IS I S W A S D I R E C T E D O N T O “IH E P I T C H B Y N 4 7 3 3 . T O OK
                 1
                 -------
                                      N 7 1 7 ( B OD Y 89) T O N / G E N E R A L H O S P I T A L .
S 12&0CF          WE1GQI _D           N 2 3 2 3 S T S AT M E D I C O C E N T R E N 4 3 6 3 D I D ID OT N 7 1 7 (B OD Y
                                      89) T O H I M . N 2 3 2 3 THEN D I D ID f'0 N 1 9 8 0
81280CZ           WE1G0L_D            N 2 3 2 3 C L A R I F I E S B O D Y ID TO N 194 3 , NOT A L L P A T H O L O G I S T S
                                      P R E S E N T & D I D N T ID B O D Y TO P A T H D O I N G P M IN T HI S CAS E.
S 1283H                                           C L A R 1F IES M 1S T A K E 1N B O D Y B O O K W H E R E B O D Y 89
                                      H ICKS WAS E N TERED AS BODY HO MCCABE ERROR RE C T I F I E D
                                                                                                                          CONT
                                                                                                                                  PAGE            3



   N o m i n a l no.     N717
   Surname          HICKS;                                       Title1
   F o r e n a m e s V ICTO R I A                   JA NS

        Cross- r e f e r e n c e s c o n t i n u e d : -
Si 3 9 2 A           WARDROPC              N 7 2 4 7 S T S N 7 1 7 R E C E I V E D I N T E N S I V E R E S U S C I T A T I O N UUT
                                            THES E E F F O R T S W E R E N O T S U C C E S S F U L .
S1458                TUDOR                 IM3864 S I S H E W A S A B O U T 10 FI F R O M T H E F R O N T OF P E N 3,
                                          S A W N 6 4 9 (B ODY 64) & N 7 1 / ( BODY 89) A F E W F T IN F R O NT .
SI 4 6 5                                                S T S N 6 4 9 (BOD Y 64) & N 7 1 7 (l:)ODY 89) S T O O D O N H I S
                                          LE FT , N 7 1 7 P R E S S E D N E X T T O HIM, B O T H F L U S H E D „ S W E A T I N G
SI 4 6 5                                             I S T S P O L I C E L E T S O M E O U T OF G AT E, A F T E R G A T E S H U T
                                          D I D N T S E E N 6 4 9 OR N 7 1 7 A G A I N . T H I N K S H E S T O O D O N THE M.
S 1514               MARSHALL,             N 5 5 9 2 L I F T E D B O D Y 8 9 O U T OF P E N 3. T R I E D T O R E V I V E HE R
                                          O N R O U T E T O N O R T H E R N G E N 1-IOSP. H I C K S N 1 3 0 3 W A S P R E S E N T
SI514A               MARSHAL L             N 5 5 9 2 S T S L A T E R G A V E F I R S T A I D T O N 7 1 7 (B OD Y 89) T O OK
                                          S A M E T O N / G E N E R A L W I T H N 1 3 0 3 G E T T I N G V / A B U S E F R O M HIM.
81523CG              LAYTON                IM201 V 1 E W E S V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RE N ? 1 7 ( B 0 D Y 89) A N D D O E S
                                          S C H E D U L E R E I D E N T . D O E S P L A N S M W J L / 1 0 8 & 109.
S 1!i96 A                                            ] I D ’S f:!ODY 8 9 F R O M M O R T U A R Y P H O T O, NOT S U R E IF
                                          T H I S IS THE B O D Y IN O T H E R P H O T O S . S U B M I T S P L A N
SI 6 5 6                                            IS T S SPOKE. T O N 6 4 9 (BOD Y 64) & N 7 1 7 (B OD Y 89) P E N
                                          3. S E E N A T O T H E R G A M E S . L O S T T H E M L A T E R IN S U R G E S .
S1819                                                   S T S H E L P E D N 1 5 7 W I T H N 7 1 7 (BO DY 8V). W A S PRESEN'
                                          WI-IEIM |             | B R O U G H T T H E O X Y G E N . S E E S H ER P L A C E D IN A M B O
SI675A                                   |           |ID *D B O D 1 T B 8 6 & 8 9 O N P H O T O N G N 1/55._______________     A L S O ID'S
                                          BODY 86 FROM C L O T H I N G PHOTO. SU B M I T S PLANS I                                            ~
S 1893                                                  S T S S A W M A N Y F A N S L Y I N G P I T CH , R E C A L L S G I V I N G
                                          N/-17 H E A R T M A S S A G E W I T H N 1 3 0 3 B U T N 7 1 7 A L R E A D Y D E A D
81893                                           ^       S T S S A W N 7 1 7 P L A C E D B A C K OF A M BO . N 7 1 7 W A S L Y I N G
                                          V E R Y C L O S E T O 1 8YD A R E A O N IM S T A N D S I D E OF G R O U N D
S1893A                                   E I I Z D S H O W N V I D E O / P H O T O " B Y N 118. 1D E N T S N 7 1 7 (BOD Y 89)
                                          & N 7 2 5 (B O D Y 92) B Y PHOTO''. D O E S P L A N |                            |R E N 725 .
S 1900                                                |S T S H E G A V E H E A R T M A S S A G E & A R T / R E S P I R A T I O N TO
                                          N 717 F O R A B O U T 8 M I N U T E S W I T H O U T S U C C E S S .
S1996A                                   _______ S T S S H O W N VIDEO/PHO'TO', I D E N T S S E L F C A R R Y I N G
                                          N 7 1 7 (B ODY 89) & P L A C I N G S A M E O N PI TC H .
S2056                                                   S T S IN P E N 4 B U T ID'S GIRL HE H E L P E D A S B O D Y 89
                                          F R O M P H O T O IN D A I L Y M I R R O R 17 0489. A C T I O N TO C L A R I F Y .
82101                FLENLFY               N 1 0 2 2 D E S C S E E I N G B O D Y S 6 4 A 8 9 O N P I T C H S A W N 1 3 0 3,
                                          N 1 5 7 , N 159 W I T H S U B J E C T A L L T R Y I N G T O R E V I V E THE B O D I E S
S2186                PEARS                 N 5 5 9 7 S T S S T O O D B Y N 7 1 7 & N 6 4 9 A S N 1 3 0 3 D I D ID & T H E N
                                          H A D T O R E T U R N 'THEIR P R O P E R T Y .                                          Z Z
S2198                                                   S T S O N L Y 2 B O D I E S ID WHIL.E AT N O R T H E R N G E N E R A L i
                                          F E M A L E (N717) & 1 M A L E W I T H S I G N E T R I N G . ID F R O M DESC.
0 2 198A                                               |S T S A T N / G E N E R A L H O S P I T A L , W H E N W I T H O T H E R S HE
                                          SEARCHED &          & D O C U M E N T E D CHETHE A B O V E N A M E D D E C *D .
8220                 FORTUNE               N 3 6 1   S  T S   W I T H   N  1 0 4 8 9 & |          1 P E N 3 N E A R N 6 4 9 & N'7’17.
                                           IN S U R G E S . O N E OF G I R L S IN T R O U B LE C R O W D S H O U T E D T O PC
SH320A                                    I Z I I D S T S S H O W N V I D E O & P H O T O * BY I                       H &I              I HE
                                           I D E N T S N 7 1 7 (BODY 89) & N 6 Q 2 ( B 0 D Y 42) & I D E N T S C L O T H I N G
S2352                                                   D E S C B S FEMALE" N E A R H I M P E N 3 (BODY 8 9 ? ). A L S O WM
                                           N E A R B Y (LOST' S I G H T OF HI M). A L S O D E A D B O D Y W I T H F A T H E R
S237                                                 S T S S A W 2 G I R L S C L E A R L Y RE!     R E L A T E D , P E N 3 , P U S H E D IN
                                          C R U S H , P O S S I B L Y N 7 1 7 ( B O D Y 89) & N 6 4 9 (B O D Y 6 4 ) , TO \
8 2 7 5 6C           DENMARK               N 1 980 REPORT'S ON P O S T M O R T E M OF N'717 (B O D Y 89) -160489
                                           a) M E D I C O C E N T R E . C A U S E OF D E A T H T R A U M A T I C A S P H Y X I A
                                                                                                                                        com
                                                                                                                   PAGE          4



   N o m in al no,        N717
   Surnam e        lU C K S                                T i 11 e
   fo r e n a m e s V IC T O R IA               J AN E

      (:r o •?'p •• reference?;     conti nued
S2 75 6E               DENMARK          N1980 STS DATE OF D EATH OF N717 IS A M EN DE D TO 150489
                                        & DATE OF PM IS 160489 BU RI AL NUMBER FM 37619X
S2884                                               DESC G OING ON P ITCH & DESC A BODY HE TRIED TO
                                        R E V I V E NOT ID SAW B OD I E S 89 & 64 HICKS & N 1303
9317                   IICKS            N 13 03 STS W ENT 10 THE GAME W ITH N 1 3 1 0 , N 6 4 9 (BODY 64) &
                                        N717 (BODY 8 9 ) . N 1 3 0 3 IDENTS N649 TO N 9188 AT THE GYM.
S317                 HICKS              N1303 STS IDENTS N717 (BODY 89) TO N 91 89 AT THE GYM.
                                        N 1 3 03 G O E S IN AMB O WITH N64 9 (80DY64) WIT H NS482.
S317 A               HICKS              G I VE S A NT EC L D A N T D E TA IL S ON D A U G HT ER S B 0D Y 6 4 & B0DY89
                                        L I ST S P RO P E R T Y R E T U R N E D & P R O P E R T Y O U T S T A N D I N G
S317D                HICKS              N 1303 STS TOGETHER W ITH N1022 ATT EM PT ED R E S U S C I T A T I O N
                                        ON N/17, ALSO IN AMB O WIT H N348H.
S317C                HI Cl              N 1303 STS S HOWN VI D E O / P H O T O ’ BY N P 0 1 & N 2 7 . S HO WN 2,
                                        F O L D E R S THAT RE LA TE TO N64 9 (BODY 64) & N717 (BODY 89)
8 3230                                  ______ |STS BODY 89 B OU G H T IN BY FATHER N1303. W OR K E D ON
                                        |
                                        BY SUBJ EC T &                     . UNA BL E TO REVIVE
S3232                REX                N 10489 a i s STOOD B E H I N D BOT H N717 (BODY 89) & N649
                                         (BODY 64) AT THE F RO NT OF PEN 3 . SAW THEM IN THE CRUSH.
S3254                                               STS WITH O T H E R S S T R I P P E D & D O C U M E N T E D 11 B OD IE S
                                        IN P LAS TE R RM AT N/GENERAL. ABOVE B EL IE VE D TO BE ONE.
S 3257                                                ITS DEALT WT            S E V E R A L BODIES. N717 (BODY 89) &
                                        N732 (BODY 94), WENT TO GYM FROM N/GENERAL.
83238                                               GTS ON A RR IV AL SAW |                    It h e r l T HEN |       J&
                                                    P R EP A R E D BOD IE S                  OOK    BODY    89 HICKS    FOR ID
B3261                                               STS REMEMBER            D E A L IN G WITH N717 (BODY            89)  BU"
                                        C AN N O T R EM EMBER ANY D E T A I L S OF THE OTHER DECEASED.
5 3262                                              STS S A W ___           W ITH N717 (BODY 89). THE N HE AND
                                                    ] TOOK BODY          0 THE T E M P O RARY M O R T U A R Y .
S 3264                                              STS AT N/GENERAL, WIThI                       !□ & I          I HAD N717
                                         (BODY 89) IDENT TO HIM. LATER TAKEN TO 'THE GYM.
53263                                               I S I S NEAR 2 GIRI.S, 1 BLONDE, 1 D A R K E R , 1 B EING
                                        H ELD UP BY LAD, L OST SIGHT OF THEM. B OD I E S 64 & 89?
53266                HAND               N 10670 STS WAS IN PEN 3 WWHEN T EAMS CAM E ON P ITCH WAS
                                            M ASSIVE SURGE SAW N649                       N 717 IN PEN D I S T R E S S E D
53267                                                 RTc:- s TOOD D I R E C T L Y BE HI ND BOTH N 6 4 9 ( B 0 D Y 64) &
                                        N 7 17(BODY 8 9 ) IN PEN 3 , C R U SH ED & D I S S A P E A R E D I/F OF HIM
S 3289                                              STS AT N / G E N E R A L TRIED TO R EV I V E N73 4 (BODY 95),
                                        S EES N 717 (BODY 89). ALSO SEES ______ ,N9727 & OTHERS.
S3293                                                IST’S R E M E M B E R S N717 (BODY 89) B E IN G IN PLASTER
                                        ROOM. ALS O R E M E M B E R S N713 (BODY 88) A LSO THERE. DE SC BS
5 3 31 7                                         [ STS W ITH OT HE RS AT N / G E NE RA L IN P L A ST ER ROOM,
                                        S T R I P P E D * D O C U M E N T E D THE A B OV E N AMED D E C ’D.
53318                                               STS IN PLAS TE R R OOM AT THE N /GENERAL W HERE WITH
                                        O T H E R S HE S TR I P P E D & D O C U M E N T E D THE A B OV E NAMED.
53319                                               STS AT NGH S TR IP P E D B OD I E S INC S U B J E C T , R EC OR DE D
                                        P RO PER f'Y & CLOTHING. TOOK TO M OR T U A R Y THE N GYM.
83375                                                  STS ONE OF THE B OD I E S HE MOVED WAS BODY 89
                                        HICKS jiD’D FROM N E W S P A P E R . BODY TAKEN TO M OR T U A R Y
S3377                                               ] STS R ET UR N E D TO DUTY AT THE HOSPI TAL & A SS I ST E D
                                                      WIT!- I BODY 89 H I C KS RE ID BY N 1 30 3 ID NOT D ONE
H3390                                                  ST'S TOOK P H O T O L AB EL L E D & SE AL ED B L O O D SAMPLE.
                                        F R O M (BODIES 8 3, 2 1 , 8 9 & 12). TAKEN BY N 1980.
                                                                                                                        CONT
                                                                                                                 PAGE.         5



   N o m in a l no.  N717
   Surnam e      HICKS                                  '! i 11 e
   F o ren am es VIC TO R IA                 JANE

    Cross-references             continue
S3468                                                 S TS WHEN IN PEN 3 SAW N649 & N/17 IN THE PEN
                                       A PP E A R E D HAPPY. SUB R E C O G N I S E D FROM P H OT O IN PAPER
B35U0                                                 SfS FIRS' I' BODY SUB T RIED TO REV IV E WAS BODY 89
                                       V I CT O R I A H I CK S, DE SC HER C O N D I T I O N & T R E A T M E N T G IV EN
S 3580                                 |            |DR IN S/STAND, ONT O PITCH, G IVES 1ST AID,
                                       ASS I! rs wr H N 6 4 9 ,N 717 & N734, (BODIES 6 4 , 8 9 & 95).
S3580A                                            H R T fS; VIEWS V ID EO & P H O T O G R A P H S OF D EC EA S E D & IDS
                                       SELF WITH BODY 9 5 , B ODY 42 ,BOD Y 89 & BODY 64.
S360                                           STS SAW "IWO FE MA LE BO DI ES ON PITCH A SS IS T E D 'RYING
                                       TO R E VI V E N717 W ITH D O C T O R S SfS BODIES ARE H IC KS G IR LS
B3639A                                               ISTB H  HELPS
                                                               EL PS PUT B         O DY 89 IN AMBO. N1303 ASKS l-OR
                                                                                 BODY
                                       B ODY 64 TO GO TOO. PLAN __                           S HOWS P OS I T I O N B ODY 89.
S3875                                                 STS AS CLERK NGH PI. A CED WRIST B AND RE MAJAX NO
                                           C O M P L E T E D FORM FOR EACH 80DY. NO 20 ISSD RE B ODY 89„
S3877                                                  STS 0 1 C MAJOR DI SA ST ER R E GISTER a NGH C OM P LE T ED
                                        'R F ORMS WITH MAJAX NO                       FR RE GI ST ER BODY 89 ISSD NO 20
S3S78                                                 STB AS MEDICAL S E C R E T A R Y R EC OR DE D D E S C R I P T I V E
                                       D E T A I L S RE BODY 89 F R _______ WHO C O M P L E T E D POL FORMS.
£>475A            “IAYLOR              N 3 165 SIS a N OR TH E R N G E NE RA L SAW N 1303 WHO ASKED HIM
                                       TO LOOK FOR N717. SAW BODY IN PLASTER RM M A T C H E D DESC.
S565              BE NN ET T           N4H75> STS N717 WAS A C C O M P A N I E D TO HOSP BY FATHER N 1303
                                       & N 3 4 8 2 . H O S P I T A L C AS U A L T Y N O . £ 0 , POL M O R T U A R Y NO ,89.
S57!b             doorf:               G IVES LIST OF BO DI ES C E R T I F I E D DEAD AT N OR T H E R N
                                       G E N E R A L H OS PI TA L S U B J E C T INCLUDED
B575A             D OORE               N430H SIS E XA MI N E D NINE MALE BODIES & ONE F EM A L E BODY
                                       CERT DEATH ON ALL BODIES, FE MA LE BELD BODY 89 H IC KS
■Sii7f»H          DOORE                N 430H C L A R I F I E S T IMES IN P RE VI OU S STMNTS. STS L:KAMI NED
                                       B OD I E S IN PLASTER RM a NGH (INC BODY 89) & CERT DEATH.
S597              C R U T TE ND EN     SIS ON DUTY AT N O R T H E R N G E NE RA L HOSP TOOK P O S E S S I O N OF
                                       B ODY 89 H I C K S . D E A T H C E R T I F I E D BY N1943 USHER.
S597              C R U T TE ND EN     S IS BODY T AK EN 'TO GYM. LATER BODY ID BY N 1 3 1 U (M O T H E R )
                                       P R O P E R T Y FROM BODY H A N D E D TO N1310.
8597              C R UT T E N D E N   ST'S LATER BODY TAKEN TO THE MEDICO L EG AL C EN T R E & ID
                                       TO N 2323 WEIG OL D
B597A             C R UT T EN DE N     N 43 65 STS HICKS N 13 03 & H ICKS N13KJ 1D*D H I C K S N717
                                       (BODY 89) TO HER IN G Y M . BODY THEN T AK EN TO MORTUARY,,
S633              'IAYLOR              N 31 77 STS FOUND N717 (DODY 89) F RONT Or PEN 3, CARR IE D
                                       HER TO BARRIER B E T W E E N PEN S 2 & 3. A T T E M P T E D TO R EV I VE
S797              MC GU I NN ES S      N 548H STS TOOK N /1 7 (BODY 89) TO N OR TH ER N GEN HOSPITAL-
                                       WIT H IM1303 AND TRIED TO ASSIST WITH RECUSITATION.
S797A             M C GU I N N E S S   N 54 8? STS HEL.PED CARRY GIRL FROM PEN WITH N 2 6 1 5 ,GOT
                                       O X Y G E N FOR BOD Y 89 H I C K S , W I T H BODY 89 WAS N 1 3 0 3 (FATHER
8797 A            M C G U IN NE SS     N548H STS A C C O M P A N I E D BODY 89 HICKS TO H O S P I T A L IN
                                       A M B U L A N C E , A D M I N I S T E R I N G F IRST AID. D.O ,A AT H O SP I T A L
S797B             M C G U IN NE SS     N5482 SHOWN VIDEO MAPI & 7 B Y __________                                     IDENT:
                                       HIMSELF D E A LI NG WITH N717 (BODY 89) IN S E V E R A L PLACES.
S856              MADDOX               N159 STS N 649 (BODY 64) PASSED OUT PEN 3, P L AC E D P IT CH
                                       NEAR SISTER N717. N15 9 & N157 TRIED TO REVIVE.
S856              MADDOX               N"159 SIS N 1303 NEAR AS T RIED TO R EVIVE N649. AMBO TOOK
                                       N/17, NO ROOM FOR N649, TOOK TWDS GYM, NO A MBO THERE..
S858              G RE AV E S          N 157 STS SAW BODY 89 ON PITCH LAID BODY 64 NEAR N 1303
                                       (HERE A LSO B ODY 89 PL.ACED IN AMBO & TAKEN AWAY
                                                                                                                      CONT
                                                                                                       PAGE      6



   N o m :i. n a I n o . N 7 17
   Surnam e          HICKS                          T itle
   F o re n a m e s VIC TO R IA           JANE

     C r o ?.■ •references    c on ti n u e d : •-
S 881A             WHIT LAM        N27f:>6 VI EW ED M O R T U A R Y & C LO TH IN G PHOTOS. I D ’D BOD IE S
                                    69 & 89 & SELF. S U B MI TS P LANS RE B OD IE S - PKW1 & P K W 2 ,
svoo                                           ISTS SAW GIRL APPROX 1 8 Y R S , SLIM, BRA & J EANS
                                    L Y I N G ON FIELD. |              HE LP ED PUT HER IN AN AMBULANCE.
99 ID               FORREST         N8    STS     AFTER A NA L Y S I S NO ALCOHOL WAS Dlr.1 LZCTED IN THE
                                    B L O O D OF THE ABOVE NAMED.
S 9 9 -1            EDWA RD S       Nf»719 STS D ROVE AMBO W ITH N 717 <OODY 89), N 1 3 0 3 , N S4 82
                                    2 OTHER BODIES, N U R S E FROM NOTTINGHAM, FAIMS, 2 P C ’S.
Q£il_'1342                                      STB W HEN ON PITCH TRIED TO HELP GIRL (N 7 1 7 ) BUT
                                    MAN WITH HER R E F U S E D (N1303) SAW PHOTO & R E C O G N I S E D
M32 2               H ICKS         N 13 03 FATHER OF N649 & N717 S TS FL.lr.NLEY N1022 WAS THE
                                    S UP P OR TE R WHO T R IE D TO R E V IV E HIS D A U G H T E R S
D336                HOSPITALS      LIST OF ALL P E R SO N S T R E AT ED AT N OR TH ER N G F M E R A L , R OYAL
                                    HALLAM, R O YA L L I V E R P O O L , W AL TO N & MANOR H O S P I T A L S 08 TD




                                            END OF R EPORT
In c id e n t     ID S       251197          OP9 3 1             NOMINAL    RECORD P R I N T

   Nominal no.        IM649
   S u r n am e H IC KS                                          Title
   F'o r enames S ARAH                                 LOU 1SE

   Birthplace            TEESIDE
   DoB 1 0041970                   Age 27 To                    Sex I                   Ic
   Occupation            C H E M IS TR Y STUD EN T
   E mp lo y e r / S c h o o I name      1.1 VL'RPOOL U NI VE R S I T Y
   Height 5*6            to                B u il d SLIM
   Hair Colour                   AUBURN
   Hair Type

   Eyes       GREY
   Complexion  PALE

   Facial ha i r
   Glasses worn            Use
   Jewellery     S ILVER RING G OLD HEART S HA P E D RING                                    Accent

   Rec.injury,tattoos,marks,scars,peculiarities,abnormaiities




   Knows V ic t i m                              Nature of relationship
   At S cene                                     F i n g er pr in ts

   CRO number NO TRACE                                Local ref. no
   B l o o d Sample   U                            G roup <A B O )            Other
   S a l i v a Sample U                                 S ec reter U          Suspect           E lim Code

  C lo th in g
 B LUE JEANS, W HITE TEE SHIRT, BRA & PANTS,                               P OS SI BL Y A LEATHER JACKET
 LEAT HE R JA CK ET R ET UR NE D TO FATHER


   Other Free Text
 DECEASED
 P R O P E R T Y M I S S I N G - B ROWN DR M AR T I N SHOES S IZE 6,
 S 593 STS THE A BOVE WAS W E A R I N G A SILVER RING, GOLD HEART' SH AP ED RING, SW IT CH
 WATCH, SHE HAD A F O O T B A L L TICKET FOR l.EPPINGS LN. & HAD ON C L O T H I N G AS A BOVE >
 AL SO A B R O W N B ELT AND A BLACK AND GRE Y W O O L E N JUMPER.
 S317B: ATT PERSONAL. EFFECTS, M ONEY C HE Q U E BOOK, W A L L E T , CARDS BUS P AS S E S & ID
 A P P E A R E D TO BE INTACT.


        C r o s s - r e f e r e n c e s s-
A D D R ES S              HOME?
ADDRESS                   HOME
CA T EG O RY              NEAR TO               B R O K E N BARRIER PEN 3               C R O WD SU RG ES   INSIDE
C AT E G O R Y            ISOE'CEASEO           B OD Y 64 H I CK S IM649                D E CE AS ED
CA T EG O RY                                    P L AN S OF INSIDE GR OU ND
C AT E G O R Y            C AR RI ED TO         G Y M N A S I U M AT GROUND
C A TE G OR Y             LINK                  L 1VERPOOI. S U P P O R T E R S         S UP PO RT ER S
C AT E G O R Y            N G N 1/62            P H O T O G R A P H S RE GR OU ND
                                                                                                                     CONT
                                                                                                                            PAGE        2



   N o m in al no,   N649
   Sur n a me*   HICKS                                            T itle
   F o r e name s SARAII                                LOUISE

        C r o s s - r e -i e r e n c e s   co nti n u e d s -
C AT E G O R Y            P OS ITION             PEN 3 S TA ND IN G                          W EST S TAND
CATEGORY                  CARR) El) ON           A DV E R T 1S 1NG H OARD 1NGS
C AT E G O R Y            OUT GATE 3             G A TE S AT P E R I ME TE R F ENCE
C AT E G O R Y            1DENT FROM             P H O T O G R A P H S OF D EC EA SE D       D EC EASED
N 10489                   3 rooD 8Y              REX                               JE  FF R EY            R O B ER T
N 10670                   S TOOD BY?             H AND                             PAUL
                          STOOD BY?
                          STOOD BY?
                          LINK
                          LINK
N-1303                    IDENTIF IED            H ICKS                           TREVOR
N1310                     M OTH DAUG             H ICKS                           JENNIFER
                          RESUSI T'ATE
N13V                      H E AR T MASS          MADDOX                           FREDRICK
                          LINK?
                          ASSIS TE D
                          RE FE RS TO
N36-1                     LINK                   FORT UN E                        SHAUN                       M I C HA EL
                          LINK
                          LINK?
N53 8                     LINK                   BA RN BR OC K                    ANTI ■IONY
N 5597                    REF ER S TO                                             RUT I                       CHANTELLE
                          LINK
N6976                     POL. LINK              GLE                              BRIAN
N717                      SI ST                 H I CK S                          V IC T O R I A                  JANE
N7372                     PULL. OUT              COLTER                           S HA U N E                      A ND R E W
N821                      PULL OU r             MCCAFFREY                         PAUL
N9186                     OWN DOCTOR             JAMES                            E LI Z A B E T H
A 1027                                          DC I TOPE s D E C E A S E D S A RA H L OU I S E H ICKS B ODY NO 64
A6153                                            T /ST JEFF REX. IN PE N 3 NEAR BROKEN BARRIER & BEL IP1VLID
D91                       SUBJECT               2 7- 0 4 - 3 9 D OC U M E N T FOLDER B0DY64 SARAH L OU I S E H IC KS
S -1152                                                     STS SAW BODY OF YOUNG GIRL BOD Y 64 N64 9 H IC KS
                                                ON STEPS OF PEN THREE WAS O B V I OU SL Y DEAD BLU E IN FACE.
S I 2 0 IB                                      I        |STS ON PHO' “OS I                                                W IT H B ODY
                                                64 & O N f                              W I T H BODY 21. BOT H ON HOARDING.
S 128 UC Z                                                  C L A RI FI ES ’A T H O L O G I S T S C ON DU C T I N G P OS T M OR T E M ON
                                                B ODY 64 (N-1961) & BOD Y 82 (N1954).
8128313                                          STS AT MEDICO            F-GAL C EN TR E W HERE N4344 ID BO DY 64
                                                H I CK S TO SUBJ EC T WHO 'HEN ID BODY TO N 23 23 W E I G O L D
81451                                                       STS WENT WIT H [                   I IN C RUSH OS & PEN 3. DESCB
                                                GIR L N E X ’ fO HIM W HO HE STS DIEDs N 649 B ODY 64??
S145&                     TUDOR                  N3864 SIS HE WAS AFfOUT 10 I-T FROM THE F RONT OF PEN 3,
                                                 SAW N 64 9 (BODY 64) & N717 (BODY 89) A FE W FT IN FRONT.
SI 465                                                      STS N 64 9 (F10DY 64) & N717 (BODY 89) S T OO D ON HIS
                                                LEFT, N 7 17 P R E SS ED NEX T TO HIM f BOTH FLUSHED, S W EA T I N G
SI 465                                          |
                                                _______|STB POL IC E LET S OM E OUT OF G A T E ? AFTER GATE SHU
                                                D I DN T SEE N64 9 OR N71 7 AGAIN_____              THINKS. HE S T O OD ON THEM,,
S15 14 A                  MARSHAL                M S S 92 SHOWN VIDEO M A P / 7 BY ______ &                            IDENTS HIMS *F
                                                E N G A G E D WIT H N64 9 (BODY 64).
S -15-14A                 MARSHAL                N 5 5 9 2 SI'S R E M O V E D B649 (BODY 64) F R O M FRONT OF PENS
                                                P AS S E D OUT OF PER IM ET ER F E NC E TO AN U/K PC.
                                                                                                                                 CONT
                                                                                                                  PAGE       3



   N o m in al no.      N649
   Surnam e         MICKS                                T itle
   F o r e n a m e s SARAH                     .ouise
     C r055- r e f e r e n c e scontinueds-
SI 523CF            LAYTON          N201 VIEWS P H O T O / V I D E O E VI DE N C E RE BODY 64. P RE PA R E S A
                                    S C H E D U L E RE I D ’S MADE. P R O D U C E S P L AN S              M W J L / 8 6 MWJL/87.
S1!L>23CF            LAYTON         NH01          STS RE I D ’S OF BODY 64 IT IS NOT                       P O S S I B L E TO
                                    C O N F I R M 3 I D ’S ON PHOTOS TH1, TH2 & T H 3 .
SI596A                                           S HO WN PHOTOS & PHOTOS OF C LO TH IN G OF BODY 64 STS
                                    T H I S lb '« NOT THE BODY THAT HE MOVED.
S 16~>6                                       STS SAW N649 (BODY 64) & N717 (DODY 89) IN PEN 3
                                    & S POKE TO THEM B E F O R E START. LOST THEM IN SURGES.
S 1900                                           STS HE SAW N649 (BODY 64) LAY ING ON P I TC H NEAR
                                    TO N 7 1 7 (BODY 89). TRIED TO RE VI VE N717.
82101                FLENL.EY       N'1022 D&SC S EE I N G R OD YS 64 & 89 ON P I TC H SAW N13G3,
                                    N 1 5 7 ,N 159 W IT H S U B JE CT ALL TRYING TO REV IV E THE B O DI E S
Sr.'.163 A           GEE            N 6 9 7 6 ST S VI EW ED P HO T O S & ID BODY 64 HICKS AS B EING
                                    H EL P E D ON PITCH. M A RK S ON PLAN P OS I T I O N OF THE BODY
8 2186               PEARS          N 5597 STS S TOOD NEAR N717 & N649 A S N1303 DID ID IN
                                    GYM. N S597 THEN R ET U R N E D P R O P E R T Y .
8220                 FORTUNE        N361 STS WIT H N 10489 &                              IPEN 3 NEAR N649 & N 7 17.
                                    IN SURGES. ONE OF G IR LS IN TROUBLE C RO WD S H O U T E D TO PC
S237                                            i'T'S S A W 2 G I R L S CLEA RL Y \’t:LATFD fPEN 3, P US H E D IN
                                    C RUSH f P OS SI B L Y N 7 1 7 (BODY 89) & N 6 4 9 (BODY 64), TO F/LHS
                     MCCAFFRE       N821 S'1 S HELPED CAF-lRY BODY Of A GIRL OUT WIT H P OL I CE
                                    MAN. LATER SAW P HO TO OF GIRL & STS IT WA S H I C K S N649.
SH55A                MCCAT FRE      N821 DE SC BS P O S I T I O N OF N649 (BODY 64) PEN 3. HE LP ED
                                    BY PC "TO CARRY ONTO PITCH. ANOTHER PC TRIES TO REVIVE.
S 2763M              SLATER         N1961 STS DID POST MO RT EM ON BODY 64 H ICKS 160489
                                    C A US E OF D E AT H T R A U MA TI C A SP H Y X I A
S 2S84                                           DESC G OI NG ON P IT CH & DESC A BODY HE T RI ED TO
                                    R E V I V E NOT ID SAW B OD I E S 89 & 64 H ICKS & N1303
B3001B                                           V I E W E S V I D E O / P H O T O ’ P OS SI BL Y 1D EN TS N 6 8 1 (BODY 64
                                    & N 6 4 9 (B OD Y 77) . DOES PLA N RE E A C H ,
S30 30 A             COI..I..ER     N7372 ID FEMALE M OV ED F ROM PEN 3 AS N649 (BODY 64) OFF
                                    M O RT UA RY PHOTOS. PLAN S AC/2 SHC S P O S I T I O N M O VE D FROM.
8317                 HICKS          N 1303 STS WENT TO '1HE GAME WITT N 1 3 1 0 ,N64 9 (BODY 64) &
                                    N71 7 (BODY 8 9 ) .N1303 IDENTS N649 TO                                  I AT THE GYM.
S317                 HICKS          N1303 STS IDENTS N717 (BODY 89) TO Q                                  | AT THE GYM.
                                    N 1303 GOES IN A MB O WIT H N 649 (B0DY64) W ITH N5482.
S3175                                          ISTS PI CK ED UP N649 (BODY 64) FROM NEAR BR OK EN
                                    BARRIER. O B V I OU SL Y DEAD. F ACIAL INJURIES. D E C S ’S SAME.
S 317 A              HICKS          G IVES AN'l'ECEDANT DETA IL S ON D A U G H T E R S B 0D Y 6 4 & B0DY89
                                    L I ST S P RO PE RT Y R ET U R N E D . P RO PE RT Y O U T S T A N D I N G
S3171)               HICKS          N 1 30 3 STS TOGETHER Ml OH?? HE A T T E M P T E D TO R E S U S C I T A T E
                                    N 649 WHO HE LATER IDENTS AT THE G Y M »
S317C                HICKS          N 1303 STS S HO WN V I D E O / P H O T O ’ BY N201 &                           S HOWN
                                    F O L D E R S THAT RE LA TE TO N 649 (BODY 64) & N717 (BODY 89)
S323S                REX            N 10489 STS S TOOD BE HI ND BOTH N717 (BODY 89) & N649
                                    (BODY 64) AT 'THE F RONT OF PEN 3 . SAW THEM IN THE CRUSH.
S3S6t>                              _______ |STS NEAR 2 GIRLS, 1 B L O N D E ,                       D A R K E R , 1 B EI NG
                                    HELD UP BY LAD „              LOST      SIGHT      OF  THEM,   B OD I E S 64 & 89?
83266                HAND           N 10670        ST  S   WAS   IN   PEN     3   W WH EN  TEAMS   CAME      ON P I T C H WAS
                                    A M A S S I V E S U RG E SAW N649 & N/17 IN P EN D I S T R E S S E D
83267                                              STS S TOOD D )RECTLY B EH I ND BOTH N 6 4 9 (B OD Y 64) &
                                    N / 1 7 (BODY 8 9 ) IN PEN 3 , C R U S H E D & D I S S A P E A RE D I / F OF HIM
                                                                                                                            CONT
                                                                                                         PAGE         4



   No mi rial n o , N649
   Surname      TICKS                                     T i 1 1e
   F o rename    SARAH                       .o u i s e

     Cro ss- references        c on ti n u e d s -
S3P.80                                            ST 8 WAS HANDEL) A B LOOD SAMP             F RO M THE A B OV E BY
                                     N1961 AT THE ME DI CO CENTRE.
S334                                           STS TRY TO RESUS FEMALE, 19 - 2UYRS, SLIM, M OUSEY
                                     HAIR, JEANS, G R E E N / B R O W N P A T T ER NE D JUMPER , B ODY 64?
8 3 46 8                                             •ca WHEN IN PI£N 3 SAW N649 , N7 17 [N THE. PEN
                                     A P PE A R E D HAPPY. SUB R E C O G N I S E D FROM P HOTO IN PAPER
5350            BARNBROCK            N 538 STS CARR IE D B ODY 64 O NTO P ITCH 1R1FD TO R EV I VE
                                     U N A B L E S POKE TO N 1303 ID AS FATHER OF BOD Y 64
S3580                                             DR IN S/STAND, ONTO PITCH, GIVES 1ST AID,
                                     A S S I S T S WI TH IM649,N 7 17 & N734, (BODIES 64 ,89 & 95).
S3580A                               _______ | STS VIEWS V ID EO & P H O T O G R A P H S OF D E C E A S E D & IDS
                                     |
                                     SELF WIT H BODY 9 5 , B OD Y 4 2 , B ODY 89 & B ODY 64.
S 3 60                                       ISTS SAW 'TWO FI-MALE BOD IE S ON P ITCH AS SI S T E D T RY IN G
                                      I'O R E V I V E N717 WIT H D O C TO RS ST'S BOD IE S ARE H I C KS G IR LS
S 593           M OU NSEY            N 4 3 4 4 STS IN GYM WHEN N9 CERTS DEATH OF N 649 (BODY 64)
                                     N 1 30 3 IDENTS N649 TO N 4344
S593            M O U N SF Y         M 4 3 4 4 IDENTS N 649 (BODY 64) TO                     AT THE M ED I C O
                                     CENTRE.
3693            BULL                 SIS BET 1550 &                       •150489 IN THE G Y M N A S I U M AT
                                     GR OU ND P RO NO U N C E D L IF E E X T IN CT F ROM A BO VE N AM ED
S856            MADDOX               N 159 STS N 649 (BODY 64) PA SS ED OUT PEN 3, PL AC ED P ITCH
                                     NEAR SISTER N717. N1S 9 & N157 TRIED TO REVIVE.
S856            MADDOX               N 159 STS N 1303 NEAR AS TRIED TO RE VI VE N649. AMB O TOOK
                                     N 7 T 7 , NO ROO M FOR N 6 4 9 , TOOK TWDS GYM, NO A M8 0 THERE.
S858            GRE AVES             N157 STS TOOK BODY 64 FRO M P EN All TO R EV I V E LAID ON
                                     PITCH WITH BODY 69 N 13 03 THERE THEN TOOK BODY TO GYM
S858A           GR LA VO'S           N157 STS ID'S SELF ON PH OT OS N G N 1 / 6 2 I P E 4 / 2 5 & MC R1 /2 7
                                     AT FRONT OF H O A R D I N G C A R R Y I N G BODY (BODY 64).
8 910                                      STS AFTER A NA L Y S I S NO A L C OH OL WAS D E T E C T E D IN THE
                                     B L OO D OF THE A BOVE NAMED.
li 1814         OLE                  N 6 9 7 6 A TT E N D E D SIMIG HILL PSTN OF OWN A CC O R D & MADE
                                      I D E N TI FI CA TI ON S OF B O D I E S 48 & 6 4 „ S MENT & P L AN S OBTD.
Mc’039          TOPE                 N 1285 STS|             |HAS B EEN I D VD ON PH OT OS H E L P I N G BODIES
                                     64 (N 6 4 9 ) >% 21 (N520) . NOT BEEN SEE N BY V I DE O SECTION.
M3 P.2          Hi CHS               N1303 FATHER OF N649 & N 71 7 STS f LE NL EY N 1 0 2 2 WAS THE
                                     S UP PO RT ER WHO T R I E D TO R E V I V E HIS D A U G H T E R S
DH693                                |         |MARKS P OS IT I O N OF BODY 64 (N649) ON SKE TC H PLANS
                                     OF PEN 3 & PITCH.




                                              END OF- REPORT
* .........   j*




                      ++      TX   CONFIRMATION           REPORT   * *    AS    OF    £5    NOU   ’ 97   1 6 :5 7   PAGE.




                   DfiTF       TIME                   TO./FROM           MODE        M IN /SEC    PGS       STATUS
        01         1 l/£ f.    13: 54   9 0 1 2 1 6 2 6 4 1 6 0          G3 — S       0£"   16    04          OK
                                                      Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                      50 Windsor Road

              POLICE                                  Heeley
                                                      SHEFFIELD
             JUSTICE      with    COURAGE
                                                      S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                        2 5 ' l f   -41
To:
                                 U3 .    .P
For the attention of:         C S lA     fc s S T ^


Comments:




From:

Telephone N u m b e r : OUH

Number of Pages (including this page)                 L+
In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
In c id e n t    i 08       25119?   0P931               N O M IN A L RECORD P R I N T

  Nominal n o . N619
  Surnanie         W I LL I A M S                        Title
  F o r e n a m e s K E V IN                 DANIEL.

  birthplace              SO UT HPOR T
  DoB 2 7 0 5 1 9 7 3              Age  24 To              Be;-; M                Ic    1
  0 c c:u pat i o n         ST UD ENT
  E m p l o y e r / S c h o o l name   FOR MB Y H IGH SCHOOL.
  H eight 5 ’6            to 5 "&       B a i ld ME DI UM
  i-!ai r C olour           DK B RO WN
  Hair Type

  Eyes          G REY                  B ROWN
  Co m p1e xion   P ALE

  Facial ha i r
  G la ss e s w or n         Use
  Jewellery        GOLD C HAIN & P E N DA NT            (HORN OF LIFE).                Accent

  R e c. i n j u r y , t a t t o os , marks ,«icar4., pecul iar i.t ies ,abno ririal it iss




  Knows V i ct i m                      Nature of r el at ionship
  At Scene                              f ingerpr ints

  CRO number NO TRACE                         Local ref. no
  B l o o d S ample   U                   G r o up (ABO)             Other
  S'a 1 i v a Sam pie U                         S ec re te r U       Su sp ec t             L 3 im Code

   C l ot h in g
 BEIGE TROUSERS             F AWN S W EA T S H I R T WITH YELLOW & RED MOTIT ON LEFT BR EA S T POCKE'
 S HI RT & TRAINING S H O ES           T U R Q U O I S E A NORAK W IT H W H IT E S T R IP ES DOW N S L E EV E S &
 W H I T E S T RI P E DOWN F R ON T CHINO T RO US ER S |                  |B OXER S HO R T S
 NIKE ’TRAINERS
   Other Free Text
 DECEASED
 NBs NATURAL. F ATHER IE                                 (NO RECORD)                      N2237 IS HIS STEP-
 FA F H E R . (S O U R C E s D364 ON 105).
 A S 4 13 - TURQUOISE A NORAK F OU ND                   FATHER C O N T A C T E D DOES NOT WANT PROPERTY. »»
 SO P R O P E R T Y D ES T RO Y ED    I'UPPER W AR E L U N CH 80X WITH A US TR A L I A N S T I C K E R S ON?
 S A F E W A Y CA RR IE R BAG W ER E D E S T R OY ED DUE 10 HE AL TH H AZ A R D BY S Y O R K S H I R E POLICE.



       Cross- refere nc es ?-
A D D RE S S     HOME
C AT E G O R Y   ISDECEASED            BODY HI W I LL I A M S N619                D E CE A SE D
C A TE G OR Y    P OS IT IO N          PEN 3 S T AN D IN G                        W EST STAND
C A TE G OR Y    LINK                  G A T ES AT P E RI ME TE R F EN CE
                 A S S O CI A TE
N201             LINK                  I..AYTON                        MICHAEL
N2049            A S S O CI A TE       1 HOMF!SON                      M A R ”!IN                  CHRIST0PF1ER
N2237            IDENTIF IED           W IL L I A M S                  J AM ES                     S T E PH E N
                                                                                                                  CONT
                                                                                                    PAGE



  N o m in al no.      N619
  Surname         WILL. I AMS                       T i 1 1e
  F o re n a m e s K EVIN               DAN I EL.

       Cross- references cantinued:-
                 A S S O CI AT K
N4485            LINK            MART IN                             DEBRA
                 LINK
N563 ’1          A S S O CI AT E DUNCAN                              ANDREW
N6H2             A S S O CI AT E T H OM  PS ON                       S TU AR T               P AUL
N&625            LINK            CRAIGHXLL                           MICHAEL                 J OHN
                 A S S O CI AT E
A997                             DC I T OPE : D EC EA S E D KEVIN DANIEL W I L L I A M S BODY NO 51
D/8              SUBJECT         2/ -04— 69 D OC UMENT FOLDER 80DYS1 K EVIN D A N I E L W IL L I A M S
H 1280AW         WEIG OL D       N E 3 2 3 STS AT M ED I C O LEGAL CEN TR E N 4 4 8 5 DID JD Of N619
                                  (BODY 51) TO HIM. HE L.A'i'ER D ID CD TO N 1 9 6 1 .
S1441            DUN CAN         N5631 T R A V EL LE D TO GROUND ON T R AINS W ITH BODY 51
                                            rLEF T                 AT STN
                                                                       S T N ,LOST'         0/S GR OU N D
B -1441          DUN CAN         N 5 6 3 1 STB WEN' INTO PEN 4 THEN MOVED INTO PEN 3
                                 AFTER SHOR T TIME I..OSI" BODY 5 1 IN THE CR OW DS
S -144-1         DUNCAN          N5631 STS MET UP WITH                           ON P ITCH STS TOI...D BODY 53
                                 WAS DEAD THEN WENT HOME LATER FOUND OUT BODY 51 DIED
S 1523DP         LAYTON          N?.Q1 STS OFFICER IN C HA R G E OF VI SU AL E V I D E N C E V I EW S ID
                                 & P R O D U C E S S C H E D U L E S & E VI DE NC E RE BODY 51 W IL LI AM S
S1523DH          LAYTON          N2U1 ST'S )DENT OF N 6 1 9 (B 0D Y 51) BY N 8625 IS I N C O R R E C T .
                                 THE PC IS A CT UA LL Y N11919. PLAN MJC3 TO BE D I S R E G A R D E D
SI 595           GRIER           N 7946 STS HE SAW N5631 S T A N D I N G NEXT TO N61 9 (BODY 51)
                                 IN PEN 3. LATER 0/S SAW                          \&
S1816B           CRA1GH1U .      N8625 I D vD HIMSELF ON VIDEO & P HOTO D E A L I N G WIT H BODY
                                 51, W IL L I A M S N619. I NDICATES ON PLAN WHERE BODY WAS.
S1816C           CRA1GH1I..L     N 8 6 2 5 STS AMME ND S P R E V I O U S S T A T E M E N T STS DID NOT CARRY
                                 B ODY 51 ACCROSS J UST GAVE HIM F IRST AID AS STATED.
S2763K           SLATER          N 1961 DID PM ON WILL) AMS N619 (liODY 51) ON 160489 AT
                                 M E D I C O CENTRE , CO AU SE OF DEATH; TR AU MA TI C ASPHYXIA.
s?9i             W IL LI AM S                           i m L D ME DI CO I.EGAI. CL-NTRE 160489 & ID
                                 B ODY OF SON BODY 51 W I L L I A M S TO                            |.
B291A            W IL LI AM S    N223 / E! S N619 (BODY 51) WENT WITH N62H (BODY 53),
                                 N2049,                          &          I.
S291A            W1L.L.1 AMS     N2237 GIVES D E TA IL S OF C L O T H I N G WORN BY N619 (BODY 51 )
                                 ft S O M E ITEMS M I S S I N G -ANORAK,L U N C H 8 0 X .
S3160                                           5 T R A V EL LE D TO GAME WITH PAR" Y INC B OD Y 51
                                 W IL L I A M S P ARTED 0/S LATER HEARD OF HI S DEATH
S3280                                         S'TS WAS H AN D E D A DL GOD SA MP LE F ROM THE A BO VE BY
                                 N1961 AT THE M ED I C O CENTRE.
S3742A           HAYES           N11919 STS ON PHOTOS P R 5 / 3 2 / 3 3 / 3 4 . ID *S SELT AT THE
                                 FRONT OF H OARD WIT H BODY 51 WILL. IAMS ON IT.
S56A             CURPEN          N85 DOCTOR CUR PE N P R O N O U N C E D LIFE EXT1 MC T OF THE ABOVE
                                 N A M ED AT THE G Y M N A S I U M AT THE GROUND.
S62 ’1           M ARTIN         N4485 TOOK BODY 51 TO GYM UNA BL E TO R EV I V E N85 CERT
                                 D E A TH TOOK BODY TO M ED I C O CTRE W I TH                     |& N 6926
S 6H1A           MARTIN          N4485      S HO WN   VIDEO      VRM/2     Dy|________ \& N 10599.   S 0249 &
                                 0 30 5 SAW HERSELF D E A L I N G WITH N619 (BODY 51) -NOT SEEN
B6H '1B          MAR IIN         N 4 4 8 5 STS VI EW ED P H O T O G R A P H S & CAN IDENTIFY BODY 51
                                 W IL L I A M S IN TT1/31 T T 1 / 2 8 TT1/32 TT 1/ 30 D M 1 / 4 TT1/29
8621C            MARTIN          N 4 4 8 5 STS CARR IE S N 6 1 9 ( B 0 D Y 51) I ROM PITCH TO GYM,
                                 T R IE D TO RESUSCITATE, T AKES TO MEDICO, DOES PLAN.
                                                                                                        CONT
                                                                                                            PAGE



  Nominal no        N619
  S u r n am e WILLIAMS;                                 V i 1.1 e
  F orenames K EVIN                           DANIEL

        C ro s s - r e f e r e n c e s
                                  cant, i nued s-
SftOI                                   STS D IR EC T E D TO M EDICO I.EGAI CENTRE TO ASS IS T WITH
                                       B O D I E S WITH N69H1
S801                   I
                       ------- 1        G I VE S DETA IL S OF P O L I C E P R O C E D U R E AT ME DI CO LEGAI CTR
                                        3TS N 2237 ID BODY 51 WI LL I A M S TO SUBJ E C T
8907                                               SIS J OI NE D N 4 4 & 5 IN THE G Y M N A S I U M W IT H B OD Y 51
                                       WILLIAMS. STAYED WIT H BODY U N TI L 2 2 3 0 H R S
S910                                   ^ □ A N A L Y S E D B LOOD OF A BOVE NAMED FOR ALCOHOL. G IVES
                                       D E T AI LS OF A L C O H O L CONTENT.
M 192.6                  WILLIAMS       NP.237 S HO WN VISUAL. E V I D E N C E , C ON F I R M S IDEN T OF N619
                                        (BODY 51) MADE BY N2049,.
M2163                    B RUDFR        O R IG I N A L STATEMENT (S1222B) OF N131 ENCLOSED. TYPED
                                       V E R S I O N INC AS A D D E N D U M IN C OR ON ER S FILE RE BODY 51.
D1710                    BRUDER         D 1 7 1 U S H OW S DEREK BRUDER R E S U S C I T A T I N G A FAN H ELD AT
                                       F I RS T TO BE BODY 52 BELL NOW T H OU GH T TO BE 51 WILLIAM
D3698                    M ARTIN        P L A N OF PITCH S H O W J N G L O C A T I O N OF BOD Y 51 C O M P LE TE D
                                       BY N 4 4 8 5 MARTIN.




                                                END OF REPORT
         * *       TX   CONFIRMATION   REPORT   * *     AS    OF        1       DEC   ’ 97   1 4 :5 6   PAGE


                                                                    3       Y    P




     DATE           TIME           TO/FROM             MODE        M IN /SEC          PGS       STATUS
01   I E /     1    1 4 :5 3                    6583   G3 — S       0 £ "35           03        I III
           **       TX   CONFIRMATION   REPORT   **      AS OF            1 DEC   ’ 97   15:09     PAGE.0 1

                                                                      S   Y   P




      DATE           TIME           TO/FROM             MODE         M IN /SEC    PGS        STATUS




                                                        co co
0    1 1 2 /    1    1 4 :5 3                    6589       —   S     0 0 " 1 4   00         INC
02                   1 4 :5 3                    6589       —   SR    1 0 "0 5    1 4 /0 0   INC
                                                    Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                    50 Windsor Road

              POLICE                                Heeley
                                                   SHEFFIELD
             JUSTICE      with   COURAGE
                                                   S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                 J. I I


To:

For the attention of:

Comments:




From:

Telephone Number:              OVM*

Number of Pages (including this page)             l~|

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
                                                        Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                        Hillsborough Scrutiny

              POLICE                                    50 Windsor Road
                                                        Heeley
              JUSTICE     with      COURAGE
                                                        SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:

To:
                               w.m. P.
For the attention of:           C SiA f o s i t f
Comments:




                               ■f   A tJ c O w *



                               \ faU**
                                N<uvwC^(            16**, ^Aaj^ oU




From:                      £        ^     * - 3

Telephone Number:              OHVf 2 9”2 lo (f7

Number of Pages (including this page)

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
0 8 - ^ f c . ' 9 7 ( MON)    12:19                                         TEL ■ 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 1 3    3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION             REPORT   **




  TRANSMISSION
  TRANSACTION(S)               COMPLETED




    NO.      DATE/TIME               DESTINATION                  D URAT I O N    PCS             STATUS     MODE


    106      DEC.     8      11:58                 901216264160   0 * 2 1 ' 44*   035             OK         N ECM
     •
Incident          108     081297      OP9 3 1            DOCUMENT       RECORD P R I N T

                                                                                       S TA TE ME N T NUMBER         S991

                                                                                                                   S t a ti o n

S urname                  EDWA RD S

f-orenames                AN TH ON Y      JAMES

Age                                                              Date    of birth ____________

Ad dr es s


Occupation                A MB U L A N C E OF K ICUR BATF.MOOR

Teie phone

IC                        Height                                 Build

Hair     colour

Hair     type

Eyes                                                             C o m p 1e x io n

Facial         hair

G la s s e s              Use                                    Accent

Number         of Pages

Dated                     070 5 8 9                                                                 A J E D W A R D S S ig ne d


                1.           I ANTH ON Y JAMP;S E D W AR DS will              says     1 was    born on ________



                E!«          I work as an ambulance m an on day work.                               1 joined S YMAS         in

                            Se pt em be r       1988    (000988).        i started          part time and was

                             promoted           to day work      on 6th M ar ch        1989    (060389).          I had

                             previously been             in the am bu la nc e        service        in 1973     (0000/3)

                             in Liverpool           and had      received       q ualified status.              I had done

                             further          training w hich       lead to me being a dm i t t e d as a i-e I.iow

                             of the Am bu la nc e Service               Ins>t i t u t e .    This    is a q u a l i f i ca ti on

                             above      the normal         standard but         it is not a paramedics                course

                             although           it is an      i nt ro duction to       it.    1 left the service              in

                             1982      <000082)        and went     to S h e f f i e l d Po ly te ch ni c     to do social

                             studies.            1 wo rk ed    in adult      edu ca ti on until         1 rejoined the

                             s e r v ic e .
                                                                                                    PAGE          2
                                                                                                    599- 1

     On    Thursday and Friday               1 wo rk ed a shift            of 080 0      (0300)        hours

     to -1630 (1630)              hours.

     On S at u r d a y      I was    to work       from 090 0      (0900)        hours     to    1730

     (1730)         hours.    I was with                             who    is a q u al if ie d

     a m b u l a n c e m a n and was acting          as driver.

>.   The   first      I remember about             the H i l l s b o r o u g h    incident       is when

     we were        taking a patient           to the N or t h e r n General               Hospital.

     We heard         control       telling a crew from R ot h e r h a m to go to the

     gym at H i l l s b o r o u g h where          they w ould be met             by a station

     officer.             I thought    that    it w ould        be some form of a fight

     going     on. Our        radio was on the day frequency w hich                             ,t think       is

     channel         4„     We stayed on the           channel       all    the way        through

     the    day.      We    did    change    to ERC after.

6.   It was about           1310    (1510)    to    1515     (1515)      hours w hen we were                 on

     our way to the N or t h e r n General                  Hospital.            We a r r iv ed at

     N o r t h e r n General        about 5 minutes           later.

     There were            various m es sages        coming over the              radio       but     J. was

     c on c entrating         on the       patient     in the ambulance.

     We    took the         patient    into the        hospital       and it was           sometime

     before         1530    (1530)    hours when we got hack                  to the ambulance

     and s tarted to clean up.                  We then gave            the      call    to     control

     that we were            clear.        I made    the    call     on channel          4 Control

     then told us to go to H i l l s b o r o u g h gym entrance where we

     w ou ld    be met       by an amb ul an ce        officer.         We did not know which

     side the gym entrance was                     on and     1 was     going      to use        the

     radio      to try and find out where                   the entrance was.                   We went

     down      to    the traffic       island on Herries Road w h ic h                     is about

     one and a half mi 3 es away.

     Control         then gave a message             to all mobiles.                They      repeated

     that      it was       for all    mobiles       and    said that            they were       to
                                                                                       PAGG
                                                                                       9991

proceed to the gym entrance at H i l l s b o r o u g h as they had

n ot if i c a t i o n of some       fatalities.         1 think this was around

1330     (1330)      hours.        We a r r iv ed at    the ground at about

153?     (153?)      hours.

T here were         no    problems     in a p p r o ac hi ng    the ground until

we    reached the junction of Herri.es Road,                      S outh and

P e n i s to ne Road.        There were       two a mbulances          in front     of us

and a police             officer was       directing     us to park          behind them.

A short       time       later,    probably no more            than a minute we were

m oved    into      the entrance while           the next a mb ulance was              sent to

the    further       gate.        1 s a w ______________ (standing outside               the

first     entrance and            point    for us to go        into    it.    The   police

officer      shouted to us that              if we went        to the second        entrance

then we would be able                to get out        via the first         entrance,

         said no and that he wa nt ed us to go                     into the      first

entrance.           We did so.        We were met        by Mr.       HOPKINS    the

A s s i st an t Chief A mbulance Officer.                 Hr.    H I G GI NS was also

there.       H I G G I N S told us to drive            up behind an ambulance

w h ic h was a l r ea dy         parked and almost at the same                 time HO PK IN S

told us to go on to the field.                      At this       stage      there were

rows of       police w ith vans an d stretchers                   coming      out of the

entrance          on to    the    pitch.     It was     clear that there were              dead

bodies      on at        least    two of the     stretchers.           1 w ould say the

time was about             1533    (153:3)   hours.

We were       stopped       by a police       officer at the entrance               to the

corridor          to the    pitch.        The officer at the front              of the

a m b u l an ce    said that we        could not get through S p ec ta to rs were

shouting at us about a body on a stretcher.                               We stopped and

Hopkins       came up to the am bu la nc e and opened the door.                           I

said that          the    police    officer said that we              could not     go
                                                                                  PAGE
                                                                                  S991

t hrough and he replied that                 he wa nt ed us on the        pitch

imrnediate'J y .      He said that          there were       casualties at the         far

end of the ground and he needed                     us on the    pitch and that we

were    not to stop for anyone               until    we got    to the    far end of

the ground™         He told us to           put our two tones on and go

through.       We did as we were             told an d went      past    the

policemen.          It was    slow       progress    getting    on to the       pitch but

we   c ertainly did not get               stuck.     On the    pitch we saw five

to six boards         being     used as stretchers with bodies                  there on

being    carried by fans.                We drove    past them while       they were

sc reaming at us to stop.                  The St.   .John’s amb ul an ce was

leaving     the     pitch as        we    came through the entrance.              It

w aited until       we were out of the way before                 going off the

pitch.      We were     the only amb ul an ce          on the    pitch by this

stags.     We drove up to the               18 yard box       in front    of the west

stand.      1 here were       people       everywhere.        My driver was       looking

for an officer         but we       could not find one anywhere.                 There

were    fans   bashing on the a mbulance wanting                  us to stop and

help their friends.             We were a pp ro a c h e d      by a w om an and she

shou te d through the wi nd ow and said that she had

resuscitated a casualty.                   I got out       of the vehicle with a

bag,    mask and airways,            and went       to a body which was          lying    in

front    of the goal         in the       18 yard area.        Someone was       giving

m o ut h to m ou th    resuscitation.              1 noticed the       colour    of the

patient and was         doubtful          whether    the    patient had    in fact

been    revived.       All    the    time    there were       people    shouting at me

for oxygen and ail            il could      remember       shouting was    "one at a

time*.      I knelt     down over a male             casualty and someone

d e l i b e r a t e l y kicked me    in the    back and said       'what about my

daughter*      or    'what about          his daughter.'        1 continued to         look
                                                                                          PAGE           5
                                                                                          39 9 -1


after       the boy on the floor „             I decided that we needed to

move    him.     1 told the         people ar ou nd me            to pick him up and                .1

s houted to someone            to bring a girl             that    I had also           briefly

seen.        1 w ould say      it was    now about          1540    (1540)        hours.        1

looked for my driver and he had driven over                               to the other

side    of the goal          towards    the    corner       flag.

We    carried the bodies over             to the ambulance and                    I was       being

f o ll ow ed by people         carrying       other    bodies.           W hen    I got to the

a m bulance     I. saw that someone           had a l r ea dy opened the                 back

doors.        1 asked a police          officer       to stay with me              to    look

after me after          I was      kicked.      We    put the young              boy on the

left hand side and the girl                   on the       right hand side and

someone       else    put another       body on the floor                down the middle.

T h e n someone       tried to get another             person       into the

ambulance.           I shouted to the          policeman to take                 the    person

o f f a n d h e- did so.

When    1 turned       round again the ambulance                   was    packed with           peopl


and so       I a sked the      police    to    clear       the ambulance.               The    doors

were    closed but       i'. could hear        people       kicking       the      back doors

an d wanting attention.                In the a mbulance            there were           now three

bodies,       a nurse,       two   policemen,        two spectators,              my driver and

me.     One    of the spectators was             trying       to    revive        the young         boy


"Ihe nurse was         from Nottingham.              She    had been a spectator who

had v ol un te er ed to help during              the       chaos on the           pitch.

She was       using a bag and mask             correctly.           The    other spectator

was    holding       the head of the girl.                 I told                             to get

go 'ing «             put on the       lights a nd horns and drove                      off the

pitch.        I have    no    idea what       time    it was       by now.         i. assume

that the. man on the floor was                  dead.        1 tended to the girl

and showed how to do m o ut h to rnouth resus ci ta ti on while                                 the
                                                                                        PAGE
                                                                                        S991

sp ectator       did cardiac           compressions.          1 was      very upset      by

this     stage.           1 cannot     remember anything about getting                   out of

the g ro un d and           I do not know what            time    it was.       X remember

nothing        of the journey up to the N or t h e r n General                     Hospital.

We took the           three      bodies     into   casualty and          I a ss isted

the    doctor        for a few minutes.              We   then    loaded trolleys         back

on to the ambulance,                   I a s ke d the spectator           nurse    to   come

back with us and she agreed.                       I cannot       remember any

i nstructions as to what we were                      to do next.          We   drove    back

down to the ground and                  1 could      hear   c onversations         on the

radio     to do w it h H i l l s b o r o u g h     but    X was    not    really taking

them     in.

There were           no    problems     in the a pp ro ac h to the          ground,      with

police     cars everywhere,.                This time we went            through the

second entrance.                There were a         couple      of a m bu la nc es ahead

of us.         .C also      saw a West Y o rk sh ir e ambulance,                1 said to

                      that     I w o ul d   report    to an officer         to see what

wa n te d to be done.              I. went     to an a m bu la nc e      officer    in the

yard a l t h o u g h       1 do not know his name.                He said that

           was       to stay w ith his vehicle and that                    I was    to help

as m uch as          1 could.         1 went    back to the a m bu la nc e         to tell

         to stay w ith his vehicle                 but d is co v er e d that       he had

gone..     1 went          to the next a mb u la n ce and helped myself                  to

a first aid box.               Just   then a casualty on a tr ol le y was

brought        up.        He a p pe a r e d a s t h m at i c and semi-consci ou s,

i put him on the second ambulance.                          T hen the a tt e nd a nt      on

the s econd amb ul an ce                                  ar ri v ed w ith another

casualty.            Once     they were      loaded,      that a m bu la nc e     set off

to the hospital.

1 then met another                officer w ho m      1 did not know.             He told rue
                                                                           PAGE         7
                                                                           8991

casualties         out and    pointed toward'; the gym.          I did not

realise      before       this that    the   casualties were     in the gym.

I went      into the gym and met S t a t i o n Officer HIGGINS.               He

said that         1 was    to assist    priorities.     1 then helped with

trolleys         and directed a rr iving a mbulance men to priority

casualties.          f{ach time     1 loaded a priority onto a trolley

1 went     back     to the senior      officer     in the yard to tell        him

what    1 had done and asked for more               instructions.      He would

then tell me to go looking               for    priorities again.

At    one stage      1 offered to be a runner          because    there a pp ea re d

to be no         communication system          between the officers      at the

ground as the         radios were       not working.       Wi th in a short     space

of time we did not need trolleys                 and were onto     the walking

wounded.

By this      time    I fe)t e xh austed and explained to S t a t i o n Office


HI GG IN S that      1 had been kicked.

He    told me that        I had    to go to    casualty.     I did not want

to.     He said that         there was a vehicle       going to

Hal lamshi re Hospital            and said that     L s hould go w ith    it.

1 was at the H a l )amsh:i re for about HO minutes.                 _______________

then a rr iv ed with some           doctors who were needed at         casualty.

It was quite         by accident       that we met up at the Hallamshire.

The    control      officer on the       radio told us to have a drink

at the H a ’
           .ilamsh i r e »        We did so and we took two transfers

to King Edw ar d Hospital.             We finished at King Edwards at

about     1900     (1900)    and then control       told us that we were

fin is h e d .

We went      back to the station,            cleaned the ambulance and went

off s h .if t .

1 was     not aware        that there was any H il ls bo ro ug h    plan or of
                                                                                                        PAGE
                                                                                                        S 9 9 -j

                          the   role that the gym was           to   play   in it-      1 did not

                          realise    that    the   gym was     the   casualty   clearing        centre or the

                          te mp or ar y m or t u a r y until   1 was   told by one of the officers,

                          1 was aware of the major             incident     plan prior      to this.




                                                                                     A J E D W A R D S S IG N ED

 STATEMENT     TAKEN
               PLACEe

               TlMEs                   DATfc?      0705&9

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

 O F F I C E R S SIGNATURE?

END 01- R EP O RT
In c id e n t     I0 8      081 £ 9 7    O F9 3 "I            DOCUMENT        RECORD P R I N T

                                                                                         STATEMENT'     NUMBER      S991A

                                                                                                                   Stat ion

 burname                     EDWA RD S

 K o renames                 ANTH ON Y        JAMES

 Age                                                              Date        of birth

 Ad dr es s                  I3ATEMOOR A M B U L A N C E SIN
                             8 A TEMOOR RD, SHEFFIELD,              SOUTH Y O R K S H I R E

 Occupation                  A M B U L A N C E OFFICER B A TE MA N S T A T I O N

 Telephone

 1C                          He i qht                             IJu i 1 d

!■la i r c o 1o u r

 Ha:i r type

 Eyes                                                             Comp]ex ion

Facial          hair

 Calasses                    Use                                  Accent

Nu m be r of Pagei

 D a t ed                    H51089                                                                 A J E D W AR DS S ig ne d


                 F urther    to my       previous      statement     dated the         7th May      1989   (070589)       I

                 have     today been seen by Inspector LA YT ON of the West M id lands Police

                 in respect        of several         aspects    of the H i l l s b o r o u g h    Inquiry,

                 On    page four        of that      statement    1 referred to an               incident when      1 was

                 kicked by som eb od y as             I was    kneeling        down over a male         casualty.

                 I was a ct ua l ly k icked on my              left hand side          by my      rib cage,    but with

                 the     people    crowded ar ou nd me and wit h so muc h going on,                        I was    not

                 aware     of who       had a ct ua ll y done     it.

                 I also made        reference         to a comment w h ic h         I believed       I. had heard     in

                 r elation     to somebodies           daughter.

                 I w o u ld like to clarify that comment by saying that I cannot be sure

                 at all     if the       reference was made           to my daughter             or his daughter.

                 I have given the matter                some    thought and         I w o ul d    like to say that            I do

                 not w ish to make an official                  complaint         of assault       in relation to that
                                                                                                                     PAGE
                                                                                                                     8991A

              p a rtic u la r    in c id e n t,,

              It is not the first                  time    1 have    been a s s u a l t e d    in the   course   of my

              job.      I u n de rs ta nd the           reasons,    even     if I don't agree wit h them,              and

              in this       case     I feel        that,   that shouJd        be the end of the matter.

              In a ny event          the assault as such did not                   prevent me from continuing my

              work.       1 only went to hospital                   because     I was    told to and        1 only

              s u ff er ed a reddening              of the skin,       as a reuslt            of the kick.

              A Edwards




                                                                                                  A J E D W AR DS S IG NE D

STATEMENT        TAKEN
                 P LACE

                 TIME                          DA "IE

 W I T N E S S TO S I G N A TU R E

 OF F ICLIRS SI G NA TU R E                M LA YT ON       1NSP 9364

END OF REPORT
Incident          108       031 2 9 7 O P 931               N O MI NA L R EC O R D PRINT

   I^J^iiial no.    N201
   S u r name !..AYTON                                      Title     MR
   Fore name s ivlICHAEL

   B .irt h p Ia c e
   DoB                             Age 21    To 100           Sex M                  lc
   Occupation             POL D I 9364     V I DE O SECT IO N
   E m p i o y e r / S c h n o 1 name  W M ID LA N D S POLICE
   H eight               to             B u ild
   Ha i r Colour
   Hair f'ype

   Ey e s
   Complexion

   Facial hair
   Glasses worn                       Use
   Jewellery                                                                              Accent

   Rec.. injury, tattoos ,marks ,scars , pecu'l iarities ,abno rmal ities




   Knows V ic t i m                          Nature of relationship
   At Scene                                  F i n ge rp ri nt s

   CR O number                                    Local ref. no
   B l oo d Sample    U                       G r ou p CABO)               Ot he r
   S a l i v a Sample U                             S ec reter U           Suspect           Elim Code

   Cloth in g




   Other Free Text
 INF FR O M M9
 S 1 5 2 3 T E X P L A I N S DUT IE S & C O L L A T I O N OF VISUAL, E V I D E N C E RE BODY 02.         STATEMENT
 S U B M I T T E D FOR EACH BODY E X P L A I N S SAME P R O C E D U R E S .


       C r o s s - r e f erenr.es:-
ADDRESS                REFER TO
ADDRESS                E X B U SI NE SS     N E C H E L L S GRE PSTN, FOWLER ST, N EC H E L L S , B I R M I N G H A M
TELEPI lONF.'          E X B U S 242        021             3595 5 5 5
FELEP H ONE            EXPAGER              034 5           333111       0800692
C A TE GO RY           S 15 2 3 B G DR      BODY 83 G3LH00L.EY N 699          D EC EA SE D
C A TEGORY             S 15 23CH DO         BODY 82 B I'EELE N69 /            D E CE AS ED
CATEGORY               S I 5 2 3 AG DC      BODY 81 H OW A R D N694           D EC EA SE D
C A TE G O R Y         S1523CX DR           BODY 80 B E N S O N N688          D E CE AS ED
C A TE GO R Y          S152 3C A DR         B ODY 79 R O B ER TS N6&6         D E CEASED
CATEGORY               S 1523BE             BODY 76 T H O M P S O N N684      D EC E A S E D
C AT E G O R Y         B1523C1              BODY 77 WILD N6B1                 D EC EA SE D
C A TE G O R Y         S 1523Y DR           B ODY 76 A N DE R S O N N675      D EC E A S E D
                                                                                                                        CONT
                                                                                                       PAGE



   Norni n a J. no.  N201
   b u rn am e L AY TON                                         T itle     MR
   for eYiames iiICHAEL

       Cross- •references            con Ii nued s-
N713              LINK                    BENNETT                               BARRY     S ID N E Y
N719              LINK                    TH OM AS                              DAVID     LEONARD
N723              LINK                    H O RR O C K S                        ARTHUR
N732              LINK                    S PEARRITT                            A DAM     ED WA RD
                      gave    video
                      LINK
                      SHOW VIDEO
A438.3                                     1NSP L AY T O N TO SU PP LY A COPY OF M AP/7 TO                 SOLI
A 4'33 9                                  HP A R R A N G E FOR 14 VMS T AP ES OF M AP7 M RE3 T B2 /A P A R T 4
A 73&0                                    T/HT f ROM INS I.A V I O N RE S H O W I N G VI SU AL EVIDENCE TO
SI 323                SUBJECT             2 3 -0 5 -8 9         LAY TO N
SI323A                SUBJECT             ■ 1 8 .0 8 - 6 V L AY TO N
S1323AA               SUBJECT             1 1 -0 1 -9 0         LAY TO N
S 1523AB              SUBJECT              1 1. - . 0 - 1 - 9 0 LAYTON
S 1523AC              SUBJ EC T           1 2 -0 1 --9 0        LAY TO N
S I 3 2 3 AD          S UBJECT            0 9 - 0 1 -V O        L AY TO N
S1523AE               suej e c r          • 1 1 .0 1 - 9 0      LAY TON
B1523AI"              SUBJECT'            1 1 -0 1 -9 0         LAYTON
S 1323AG              SUBJECT-            0 8 -0 1 - 9 0        L AY T O N
8 -1323 AH            SUBJECT             0 8 -0 1 - 9 0        I..AYTON
S I 3 2 3 AI          SUBJECT             1U-U1 - 9 0 LAY TO N
S1323AJ               SUBJECT             0 8 - 0 1 —9 0        L AY!ON
S 1323AK              SUB J EC r          - 1 0 - 0 1 .9 0      L AY T O N
S1323AL               SUBJECT              1 0 - 0 -1-90        L AYTON
S132 3 A M            SUBJECT             ■1 0 -0 -1 -9 0       LAY ION
fa*1323AN             SUBJECT              •1 0 -0 1 -9 0       I.A YTON
S 1323AO              SUBJECT-            0 8 -0 1 -9 0         LAY TO N
S1323AP               SUBJECT             O S -0 1 -9 0         LA YT ON
S 1323AQ              SUBJECT-            0 9 -0 -1 -9 0        LAYTON
S1523AR               SUBJECT             0 9 -0 -1 -9 0        LAYTON
S I 5 2 3 AS          S UBJECT            0 9 -0 1 - 9 0        LAY TO N
S I 3 2 3 AT          SUBJECT             0 9 - 0 I -9 0        L AY TO N
S 1323AU              S U B J EC r        0 8 -0 1 - 9 0        LAY T O N
S1323AV               SUBJECT             0 7 -0 1 -9 0         I A YTON
S 1523AW              SUBJEC r            0 7 -0 1 - 9 0        LAY TON
S 1323AX              SUBJECT             0 7 - 0 1 - 9 ( ' i LAYT O N
S 1523AY              S UBJECT            1 2 -0 1 -9 0         LA YT ON
SI 323 A 2.           SUBJ EC T            1 2 - 0 1 —9 0       I..AYTON
S 13238               SUBJECT             1 8 -0 8 -8 9         LA YT ON
S132 3 B A            SUBJECT              •1 2 -0 1 -9 0    LAYTON
S1523BB               S U B J EC r        1 7 -0 1 -9 0      LAYTON
S1323BC               BUBJECT              1 7 - 0 1 --9 0   LAYTON
S1523BD               SUBJECT              1 7 - 0 1 - 9 0 LAYTON
S132 3 B E            SUBJ EC T            •1 7 -0 1 -9 0    L A Y 'l ON
S1523SF               SUBJECT-             19—0 1 —90 L AY TO N
S1323BG               SUBJECT              •1 9 -0 1 -9 0  LAYTON
S15238H               SUBJECT-             1 9 -0 1 -9 0   LA YT ON
S"IS23B'.l            SUBJECT'             •1 9 -0 1 -9 0  LAY TO N
S1523BJ               S U B JEC r          •1 9 -0 1 -9 0  LA YT ON
S1523BK               SUBJECT-             1 9 - 0 1 - 9 0 LAYTON
S1323BL               SUBJECT              19-01-90 LAYTON
                                                                                                          CQNT
                                                                                                                                          PAGE       -16


      N o m in a l n o .          NHOI
      S u r narn e          L. A YT ON                                 Title        MR
      f o r e n . - i m e s M I C H AEL..

      C ro s s -re fe re n c e s            c o n t i nueds-
M '1173              LAYTON                       E N G S TO BE MADE. W I T H B B C RF F O O T A G E A V A X L A D L E OF P E N S
                                                  3 & 4 E M P T Y P R I O R TO GA ME A N D A F T E R I N C I D E N T . _________
M 117b                      LAYTON                R E Q U E S T FROM S ) 0 FOR B L O W - U P S E C T I O N S OF T A P E                             |<E
                                                  MAN S E E N <S~sTc A    a m
                                                                            NDn Ii'm
                                                                                  NG  r-; O N     S O M E T H IN G I N PEN 3 .
Ml 176                      LAYTON                 V ID E O TAPE I                   JlAa N
                                                                                          n E D I T E D V E R S I O N OF M A P / 1- i H A S
                                                  P R E £ P A R E D .S C H E D U L E ! S U P P L I E D TO ACC J O N E S .
m i   no?                   N IC H O L S O N      DR N I C H O L S O N R E Q U E S T S A N E X T R A C O P Y OF P H O T O A L B U M P R '1
                                                  A U T H O R I S A T I O N RE (3D FOR A C T I O N B Y I N S L A Y T O N .
M l HD8                     L. A Y T O N           CS P E M B E R T O N H A S R EQU E ST KD S Y O R K S H I R E P O L I C E BE
                                                  S U P P L I E D W I T H T H E I R 3 V H S T A P E S OF L A S T Y E A R S G A M E .
M 1244                      LAYTON                 TAPE I                IC O P I ED T W I C E A T BB C P E B B L E M I L L .             1 C O P Y TO
                                                                                    ( B B C ) & £ N D TO I                            I    <ITV)
M136 £                      LAYTON                 ENQ T O B E M AD E AT C A L Y X P H O T O S E R V I C E S , P H O T O G R A P H E R
                                                  A T T E N D E D G A M E , A S C E R T A I N A V A I L A B I L I TY N E G S / P R I N T ' S .
M 1363                      LAYTON                 P H O T O G R A P H E R FROM A S S S P O R T S P H O T O G R A P H Y WAS A T M A T C H ,
                                                  A S C E R T A I N A V A I L A B I L I T Y OF P R I N T S / N E G A T I V E S .
Ml 37 4                     LAYTON                 LAYTON STS T H A T Q                                            WOULD L I K E H I S S L I D E S
                                                  R E T U R N E D . H E A L S O H A S SOME MORE R E L E V A N T P I C T U R E S .
Ml 473                      LAYTON                N 2 0 1 S T S 'TH AT I                        Z Z Z D WAS S U P P L I E D W I T H 9 C O P I E S
                                                  OF P A M P H L E T S H O W I N G L O C A T I O N S OF D E C D I D ’ D TO D A T E .
M1 6 9 7                    LAYTON                 N 2 0 1 S T S HR A ‘/ F IN E R N 1 9 H H H O AD N 1 9 R 7 & W A L T O N N 6 V 3 V H A V E
                                                  NOW B E E N SHOWN T H E V I D E O S & P H O T O G R A P H S .
Ml 739                      S P E A R R IT T       N K U 1 S T S a) P R E S N E T T H E R E : I S NO V I S U A L E V I D E N C E OF N73P.
                                                   <B O D Y 9 4 ) , N34':> T O V I E W V (D E O S I N A T T E M P T T O T R A C E .
Ml 740                      JONES                 N H O I S T S A T P R E S E N T T H E R E I S N O V I S U A L E V I D E N C E TO
                                                  P L A C E N 6 4 6 (DECD) I N P E N .                               I TO B E SHOWN V I D E O S .
Ml 737                      LAYTON                F  O L L O W I N G   A    M E E  T      W I T H   S U P T  T A Y L O R . HE A U T H O R IS E D
                                                  S H O W I N G V I D E O / P H O T O T O R E L A T I V E S OF i?.8 L I S T E D DE C *D .
Ml 761                      L.AYT ON               1 H A V E C O M P L E T E D A S T A T E M E N T FOR I N C L U S I O N IN BO DY
                                                  F O L D E R R E L A T I N G ‘TO COX ( B O D Y 1 9 ) .
M 17 6!i?                   F.AYT ON              SHOWS P H O T O S TO MR L E S L I E J O N E S I N AN E F F O R T TO 1 D E N T
                                                   (BODY 6 3 ) JO N E S . STATEM ENT O B T A IN E D .
Ml 766                      lA Y T O N            N862.!:> H A S B E E N 'SDENT B Y S T A T E M E N T A S H A V I N G A S S I S T E D
                                                  W I T H D E C E A S E D P E R S O N S CN THE P E N A R E A .
Ml 768                      L. A Y T O N           N 7 3 6 V H A S B E E N J D E N T ) F 1E D B Y S T A T E M E N T A S H A V I N G
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H THE D EC EA SED .
M 1769                       L. A Y T O N         N 7 4 H 7 HAS BEEN IDENTIFIED BY STATEM EN T                             AS   HAV3NG
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED PERSONS.
M1 7 7 0                     LAYTON               N 7 3 2 S FI A S B E E N I D E N T I F I E D B Y S T A T E M E N T       AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T ED W IT H D E C EA SED P E R S O N S .
M1771                        LAYTON                            H A S B E E N 1D E N T 1 H E D B Y S T A T E M E N T        AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED P E R S O N S „
M177H                        I, A Y T O N                    I HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY S T A T E M E N T           AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED PERSONS.
Ml 77 3                      LAYTON               N 6 9 5 4 HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY STATEMENT                      AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED PERSONS.
Ml 774                       1..A Y T O N         N 8 6 6 0 H A S B E E N I D E N T I F I E D ITY S T A T E M E N T        AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED PERSO NS,
Ml 775                       LAYTON               N 7 0 8 6 HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY STATEM EN T                    AS   F 'lA V IN G
                                                  A S S IS T E D DECEASED PER SON S.
Ml 776                       LAYTON               N 7 0 1 6 HAS BE EN I D E N T I F I E D BY STATEMENT"                    AS   H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T E D D E C E A S E D ON TH E P I T C H .
                                                                                                                                               CON!
                                                                                                                                                PAGE        17

      V
    Nomi n a l       no,       N201
    S urnam e         LAYTQIM                                          T i t If-     MR
    F o re n a m e     M IC H A E L

     C ro s s - re fe rp n rp s           c o n t. i n u e d s -
111777              LAYTON                          N 6 9 6 6 H A S B E E N I D E N T I F E D B Y S'l A I L M E N T A S H A V I N G
                                                   A S S I S T E D W I T H D E C E A S E D ON T H E P I T C H .
M1778                      LAYTON                  N 7 3 3 7 H A S B E E N I D E N T I F J ED B Y S T A T E M E N T A S H A V I N G
                                                   A S S IS T E D W IT H DECEASED PERSONS.
M1779                      LAYTON                  N 2 7 9 6 HAS BE EN I D E N T I F I E D BY S T A T E M E N T AS H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T E D I N C A R R Y I N G D E C E A S E D FROM P I T C H ON H O A R D I N G S . ,
Ml 780                     LAYTON                   N 7 7 3 4 HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY S T A 1 E M E N T AS A S S I S T I N G
                                                  D E C E A S E D ON T H E P I T C H ,
M1781                      LAYTON                  N 9 8 2 6 HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY STA TEM EN T AS A S S I S T I N G
                                                  W I T H DEC * D I N P E N 4 & ON T H E P I T C H .
M l 78?.                   LAYTON                  N 2 7 9 3 H A S B E E N J D E N T 1 f- I E D B Y S T A T E M E N T A S A S S I S T I N G
                                                  W I T H D E C E A S E D ON H O A R D I N G S ON T H E P I T C H .
Ml 783                     LAYTON                  N 3 3 6 8 HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY STA TEM EN T AS H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T E D W I T H D E A D , P O S S I B L Y N 3 3 3 OR N 5 9 9 ( B O D I E S 2 9 , 4 1
Ml 784                     L A Y ' I ON             P C 2 8 7 3 W H l T t / L A M 1 DENT" B Y ST AT E M F .N T A S H A V I N G A S S I S T E D
                                                    I N C A R R Y I N G A N UM BE R OF DEC * D A C C R O S S P I T C H .
M 1783                     LAYTON                  PS S W l f f , HAS BEEN I D E N T I F I E D BY S T A T E M E N T AS H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T E D W I T'H DEC E A S E D .
Ml 786                     LAYTON                  P C 2 5 9 2 S H 1 M W E L L , HAS BEEN ID E N T IF IE D BY STATEMENT" AS
                                                  H A V I N G A S S I S T E D WCTH D E C E A S E D . D E S C ’ S ON E I N D E T A I L .
Ml 787                     LAYTON                  N 7 3 4 U HAS BEEN ID E N T BY STATEM ENT AS H A V IN G A S S IS T E D
                                                  W I T H C A R R Y I N G D E C E A S E D A C R O S S THE P I T C H .
Ml 788                     LAYTON                  N 8 6 2 7 HAS BEEN 1DENT BY STATEM ENT AS H A V IN G A S S IS T E D
                                                  W I T H D E C E A S E D ON P I T C H & P E N A R E A .
M 1789                     LAYTON                  N 9 2 9 0 HAS BEEN 1D E N T IF E D BY S T A TEM EN T AS H A V IN G
                                                  A S S I S T E D W I T H D E C E A S E D P E R S O N S I N THE P E N & ON P I T C H .
Ml 799                     lA Y T O N              P R O P O S E D R U N N I N G OR DER & W O R K LO A D FOR V I D E O S E C T I O N
                                                  D U R IN G NEXT 3 WEEKS.
M '1 8 0 3                 LAYTON                   S U P T T A Y L O R D E T A I L S ON HOW R E Q U E S T S FOR V I D E O / P H O T O S
                                                  A R E T O B E D E A L T W I T H B Y THE V I D E O S E C T I O N >% P S S T O K E S .
M191U                      LAYTON                   N H O I S T S W H IL S T S P E A K IN G TO D E V O N S ID E N 1 1 3 1 1 , HUSBAND
                                                  R A I S E D S E V E R A L . Q U E S T I O N S C O N C E R N I N G H I S SON ( B O D Y 1 7 )
M 1923                     L A Y ' I ON            N 2 H 1 S T S C AN A C T I O N B E R A I S E D FOR I                                       I T O B E SHOWN
                                                  V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RE D O I N G P L A N & L O C A T I N G N 3 2 0 ( B O D Y 2 1 )
Ml 940                     LAYTON                  kt Ml.p• Wn -11 1A1S
                                                                      U/K
                                                                        1 >S
                                                                           l-/ r- n p 1A1C
                                                                               1         W T
                                                                                           t IOV •N
                                                                                                  I *1 TO
                                                                                                       t W BE
                                                                                                           W IM C
                                                                                                                »< <. P   F1 A1 1T R ) TO
                                                                                                                      * **■             w SF
                                                                                                                                          ***r1~ !••     1 RE
                                                  V I E W I N G V I S U A L E V I D E N C E FOR N 6 3 B ( 8 0 0 Y 8 0 ) .
Ml 94 a                    LAYTON                   N 2 0 1 S T S N 4 1 4 5 R E - S E E N , H A S M AD E A F U R T H E R S T A T E M E N T
                                                 & C O M P L E T E D A P L A N RE (B O D Y 3 6 ) N 5 7 5 .
M '1 9 4 3                 LAYTON                NPO-1 K " i S O F F E R E D TO SHOW V I S U A L . E V I D E N C E TO I            I AT'
                                                 F I R S T D E C L I N E D , B U T NOW S H E W I S H E S T O S E E V I D E O .
Ml 985                     ! .AY'1 ON            N H O I ENCLO SES V I S U A L E V ID E N C E STMENTS HE B O D IE S 3 6 2 6
                                                 3 2 61 2 3 9 2 4 4 15 17 6 9 6 5 3 13 6 3 19 9 12 3 4 2 4 9 3 3
M1993                      LAYTON                N 2 0 1 FWDS S T M N T 8 RE V I S U A L , E V I D E N C E RE B O D I E S 7 0 7 5 3 8
                                                 4 2 2 8 6 5 0 2 1 3 1 6 0 3 7 2 0 8 8 1 2 7 2 3 8 5 11 1 8 1 6 1 4 .
M '1 9 9 4                 LAYTON                N P 0 1 H A S S U B M I T T E D 8 M E N T S R E V 1 S U A K E V I D E N C E FOR
                                                 B O D Y 7 2 , B O D Y 6 6 , B O D Y 5 3 , BO D Y 1 0 , & B O D Y 7 6 .
Ml 995                     1. A Y T O N          N 2 0 1 S T S S T A T E M E N T S A T T A C H E D RE B O D IE S 4 7 , 2 8 , 3 8 .
                                                 S C H E D U L E S OF A B O V E B O D I E S H A N D E D TO DC I T O P E D I R E C T .
Ml 997                     LAYTON                M E S S A G E W I T H F OU R S T A T E M E N T S A T T A C H E D FROM N 2 0 1 , FOR
                                                 3 G L O V E R , P 3 R A D Y , P T O O T L E & P R THOMPSON ( D E C ’ D ) .
M 2002                     LAYTON                N 2 0 1 H A S M AD E S T A T E M E N T S RE V I S U A K E V I D E N C E OF K E S T E R
                                                 B A L L ., BARRY B E N N E T T T & K E I T H MCGRATH „
                                                                                                                                                      CONT
                                                                                                                             PAGE     'IS


   Nomin al no,        IM201
   Surn a m e     LAYTON                                  I.i1 1 e      mr
   For e n a m e s MI CHAEL

      Cr of>s-refe r ences        c a n t An u e d s -
MH007            LAYTON                   WH01 STATEMENTS            M AD E   IN   R EB PEC "I   OF   H O R N , H AR R I S O N ,
                                      G 1 LH O O L.E Y , C O L E I M S , HEW I T S O N , HO WAR 0 & HAR R I S O N .
MH009              LAYTON             N H O I S T B H A S COMPL F.7E.D S T A T E M F J M T 8 I N R E S P E C T OF T H E
                                      A B O V E D E C ’ O , A N D C O M P L E T E D S C H E D U L E S FOR E A C H »
MH010              LAYTON             IMHOI S T B F A M I L Y OF BO D Y 7 4 W I S H TO ME E T N 4 S f i 1 WHO
                                      TOOK B O D Y FROM P E N . _________________________ f O A R R A N G E M E E T I IMG
MR( i 11           LAYTON             IMHO1 S T S S P O K E N 1 0 B Y                                        FOR F A M I L Y N 6 0 3
                                       ( B O D Y 4 3 ) . NO C O N T A C T TO B E M AD E E X C E P T V I A _________
MH01 7             LAYTON             IMHO’1 L.AYTOIM S T S 7 S T A T E M E N T S RE V I S U A L E V I D E N C E SHOWN
                                      R E B O D I E S 7 9 , 4 5 , 41, 2 9 , 71, 6 4 & 8 9 A L L A T T A C H E D ,
MH036              LAYTON             N H 0 1 L A Y T O N S T S 7 SMEIMTS OB'TD R E V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RE
                                      B O D I E S 0 7 , 3 3 , 4 3 , 2 4 , 6 8 , 9 3 , & 6 7 A L L ATTA CH ED .,
MH040              1. A Y T O N       IMHOI S U B M I T T E D S T A T E M E N T S IN R E S P E C T OF B O D Y 7 7 & BO D Y
                                      90.       S 13H3C I & S 1 5 H 3 C J R EFER .
MH041              LAYTON             IMH01 S T A T E M E N T S U B M I T T E D I N R E S P E C T OF B O D Y 8£r S T E E L E .
                                      S13H3CH REFERS.
MH044              LAYTON             IMH01 H A S C O M P L E T E D S T A T M E N T S R E N 5 3 8 , N 6 U 9 , IM73H & N 7 3 4
                                      ( B O D Y S 3 0 , 4 6 , 9 4 .4 9 3 ) . S 1 5 H 3 C K , C L , CM & O N R E F E R .
MH053              LAYTON             N H O I S T S N i l 6 9 0 HAP, MADE S T A T E M E N T , S 3 7 0 3 A A N D TWO
                                      D O C U M EN TS, D 3 6 3 4 & 0 3 6 5 3 RE ( B O D I E S H 9 & 6 9 ) .
MHOS 4             LAYTON             M H O 1 S T S N 1 1 6 8 9 H A S M AD E S T A T E M E N T S 3 7 0 7 A R E F E R S RE
                                      N 3 3 5 (BODY 2 9 ) .
MH0S3              LAYTON             IMH01 S U B M I T T E D S T A T E M E N T S R E V I S U A L E V I D E N C E OF BO DY
                                      4 0 M C D O N N E L L & B O D Y 7 3 CARL. ( L E .
MH06H              LAYTON             N H O I A S V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RF. B O D Y 3 7 I N C O M P L E T E ' , R E G U E S 'l
                                      ACT'CON TO SEE. HE!-AT (VMS OF (AIM G L O V E R - A 8 3 5 0 R E F E R S
MH064              LAYTON             N H O I S T S H A S M AD E S T A T E M E N T S ' R E B O D Y 1 3 W A F E R , B O D Y 8 6
                                      J O N E S & B O D Y 11 H A R R I S O N .
MH065              LAYTON             N H U 1 S U B M I T T E D S T A T E M E N T S I N R E L A T I O N TO B O D Y O S , BO DY
                                      5 0 , BODY 6 1 & BODY H 4 .                  S 1 .3 2 3 C T TO S 1 3 H 3 C W .
MH.066             LAYTON             IMH01 S U M B 1 7 T E D F U R T H E R S T A T E M E N T S R E V I S U A L E V I D E N C E .
                                      BODY 2 9 , BODY 9 1 , BODY 6 9 , BODY 8 1 & BODY 0 1 D A T E 1 4 0 H 9 0 .
MH067              LAYTON             N H O I STATEMENT" S U B M I T T E D RE D A V I D BE NSO N BODY 8 0
MH068              LAYTON             N H O I S T A T E M E N T S U B M IT T E D RE C O L I N AS H C R O F T BODY 0 3 .
MH083              LAYTON             N H O I S U B M IT T E D S T A T E M E N T S RE BODY 6 0 T R A Y N O R ,B O D Y 6 2
                                      G L O V E R & B O D Y 7H K E L L Y . S 1 3 2 3 D G , S 1 3 2 3 D F & S 1 3 2 3 D E R E F S
MH089              LAYTON             I N S L A Y T O N S U B M I T T E D S T A T E M E N T R E B O D Y '51 W I L L I A M S
                                      S1323D H REFERS.
MH094              LAYTON             N H O I S U B M IT T E D S T A T E M E N T RE BODY 3 7 GLOVER ( S 1 5 H 3 D I )
M 209 5            LAYTON             N 2 0 1 S T S S U B M I T FED S T A T E M E N T R E B O D Y 2 6 M C A L L I S T E R .
                                      ( S15H3DJ   )
MH100              LAYTON             N HO 1 PRODUCES         A D D IT IO N A L      STATEMENT        RE   P H IL IP    STEELE
                                       (BO D Y 8 2 )
M2101              LAYTON             N H O I S U 8 M I f' T E D S T A T E M E N T R E V I S U A L OF E V I D E N C E OF
                                      S T E P H E N O N E IL L BODY 8 7            (S 13H 3D L REFERS)
M 21 12            LAYTON             N 2 0 1 S U B M E TTE D FU RTH ER S T A T E M E N T S RE THOMPSON BODY 4 9
                                      & HORN B O D Y 5 9 .          ( 8 1 3 H 3 D M , S 15H 3D IM .)
M 213 8            LAYTON             IMH01 S I ' S H A S M AD E F U R T H E R STATMEIM T S 1 3 2 3 D P I N R E S P E C T
                                      OF V I S I T TO T H E CARL. I I.E. F A M I L Y .
M 215 2            L A Y TON          IM201 S U B M I T T E D S T A T E M E N T S 1 5 2 3 D 0 R E E V I D E N C E TO B E
                                      G I V E N ON F I R S T D A Y .
M2161              LAYTON             N201 S U B M IT T E D S T A T E M E N T ( S 1 5 2 3 D R ) RE A D D I T TONAL
                                      PLANS     PRODUCED        AT      IN Q U E S T 'S .
                                                                                                                                   CONT
                                                                                                                                    PAGE          19


     Nominal       no        NEC) 1
     S urnam e        LAYTON                                            T i 1 1e   HR
     F o r e n a m e s M IC H A E L

      C ro s s -re fe re n c e s             cont i nueds-
I1H 164              LAYTON                        N R D 1 S T S WAS A S K E D B Y                                S O L S FOR C O P Y OF
                                                   V I D E O OF I N Q U E S T , R E Q U E S T D E N I E D ,
M266                     LAYTON                    L I S T OF V I D E O T A P E S H A N D E D OVER TO I N S P L A Y T O N FROM
                                                   DS MCSLOY S YO R LS SO CO .
MH85                     LAYTON                    • 1 3 4 5 H 0 0 4 & V i iN S L A Y T O N WAS H A N D E D M A S T E R A U U ) 0 T A P E RY
                                                   I N S P S P E N C E R s Y O R K S , T H E N H A N D E D TO                > 0 . T R A F F IC
MH93                     LEYTON                    FROM D C S U P T F O S T E R : 0 1 L E Y T O N TO M A K E E N Q S R E P R E S S
                                                   P H O T O G R A P H E R S A N D A N Y P H O T O S "THEY TOOK
M30&                     I, A Y T O N              N H O I R C V D FROM 1 N S P S P E N C E R S / Y O R K S P O L I C E , N U M ER O U S
                                                   N E G A T I V E S W H I C H WERE H A N D E D TO I                        |1 4 4 Q H D 0 4 8 9
M310                     I .A Y T O N              N H G 1 R C V D FROM M A C K R E L L IM31 4 4 V I D E O T A P E S P O L REF N O ' S
                                                   R J H 1 - R J H 1 4 . T A P E S H A N D E D TO I                 I 14H0HRS £ 0 0 4 8 9 „
M313                     LAYTON                    S U P P L I E D C O P Y OF E A C H S C H E D U L E FOR V I D E O T A P E S I N
                                                   P O S S E S S I O N OF W M EDS P O L I C E . V I E W E D A N D P R E C I S E D .
M705                     LAYTON                    IMH01 S T S IM H 34 3 W A N TS H E A D C O U N T T H R O U G H T U R N S T I L E S A ~ G
                                                   P E N 3 & 4 B E F O R E 1 5 0 0 H R S , A P P R O V A L TO E N L A R G E V I D E O REG
M81S                     LAYTON                    O B T A I N F I L M F O O T A E FR T V AM F O L L O W I N G A P P R O V A L FROM I
                                                 |                                 pO IM T RO LL ER OF NEWS & C U R R E N T A F F A I R S „
M89f>                    LAYTON                    T O S U P P L Y DR N I C H O L S O N H E A L T H & S A F E T Y , S H E T F I E L D W I T H
                                                   BLOW UP S E C T I O N W S T A N D & C O P I E S OF P H O T O S P E N 3 & 4 ,
M896                     LAYTON                    IMHOI T O SHOW P H O T O D . A . C . H / 7 TO I . P O O L CREWS TO T R Y AND
                                                   I D E N T I F Y I M P O R T A N T W I T N E S S FROM P E N 3 .
M9                       LEYTON                    S T S H A S R E C E I V E D T H E 9 4 P H O T O G R A P H S T A K E N OF THE. D E C E A
                                                   SEO P E R S O N S .
M93.H                    DOYLE                     MR D O Y L E , S O L I C I T O R , SWFC T O V I E W F O O T A G E H E T B 2 A 4 .
                                                   A U T H O R I T Y G I V E N B Y ACC J O N E S FOR I N S L A Y T O N TO A R R A N G E
D1H70                    V ID E O       &    VI    C O P Y S C H E D U L E Of V I D E O R E C O R D I N G OF! I A I N E D B Y 1 N S P
                                                   L A Y TON
D 136                   V IS U A L          EVl    S C H E D U L E OF    V ID E O TAPES       FROM D1 L A Y T O N ,
01362                   B B C TV                   V ID E O TAPES        O B T A I N E D OF   198 8 SEMI F IN A L       IN   P O S S E S S IO N
                                                   OF I IMS L A Y T O N .
03917                                              L E T T E R FROM S O L I C I T O R S R E 8 0 D Y 3 4 C R I T I C I S I N G WMP &
                                                   E V I D E N C E OF N H O I A T P R E L I M I N A R Y I N Q U E S T . R E P L Y 1 6 1 0 9 0 .




                                                            END    OF    REPORT
                                                                                                                              pagH    ^ ^ H



   Nominal rio. N201
   Surname        LAYTON                                              Tj11e      MR
   for e n a m e s MICHAEL

       C ra s s - r e f e re n te s     c o n t i n u e d s-
M 2094                  SUBJECT                2 3 -0 2 -9 0      LAYTON
M2093                   SUBJECT                2 2 —0 2 - - 9 0   L .A Y T O N
M 2100                  SUBJECT                0 2 - 0 3 —9 0     LAYTON
ME 1 0 1                SUBJECT                04" 0 3 - 9 0      LAYTON
M2112                   SUBJEC r               0 7 -0 3 -9 0      LAYTON
M 2138                  SUBJECT                2 8 -0 3 -9 0      L A Y T ON
M 2132                  SUBJECT                1 2 -0 4 -9 0      L A Y TON
M2161                   SUBJECT                0 8 -0 3 --9 0     LAYTON
M 2164                  SUBJECT                0 8 - 0 3 —9 0     L A Y TON
MH66                    SUBJECT                3 0 - 0 4 —8 9     LAYTON
M235                    SUBJECT                2 0 -0 4 -8 9      L A Y TON
M293                    SUBJECT                3 0 -0 4 -8 9      LEYTON
M308                    SUBJECT                2 0 - 0 4 - 8 9 LAYTON
M310                    SUBJECT                2 0 - 0 4 - 8 9 1. A Y T O N
M313                    SUBJECT                0 4 - 0 3 - 8 9 LAYTON
M703                    SUBJECT                0 8 - 0 3 - 8 9 L AYTON
MS 1 3                  SUBJECT                0 9 - 0 3 - 8 9 LAYTON
M893                    SUBJECT                • 1 0 - 0 3 - 8 9 LAYTON
M896                    SUBJECT                1 0 - 0 5 - 8 9 LAYTON
M9                      SUBJECT                2 3 - 0 4 - 8 9 LEYTON
A3249                                          R E S U L TS T H E R E I S NO A M A T E U R V I D E O . P E R S O N R E F E R E O TO I N
                                               ECHO I S L                         WHO H A S A L L R E A D Y S U P P L I E D P H O T O S .
S I 038                                                   J S T S SHOWN V I D E O MAP/ I & P H O T O " 8 Y N 2 0 1 &
                                                I D E M ! S N 5 4 9 ( DODY 2 7 ) ON V I D E O A T 1 4 , 3        3 3 . 1 8 DATA BABE
S1134A                                         _______ ] s r s SHOWN PH O COS OF D EC D            B Y   IM201   &   N i l 8 UNABLE
                                               TO I D S E L F WJTH B O D Y 2 1 . M A R K S         P L A N  WHERL       LAST SEEN
S 1 19                 SPENCER                 N 1 3 3 1 S I ' S ON 2 0 0 4 8 9 H E H A N D E D & I D * D     TO   N 2 0 1 A A U D IO
                                               T A P E M A R K E D NO SO & MECi N O ' S 1              p 2.  A T   H A M MERTON R D .
S 1a s A               HOWARD                  N 1 3 5 4 S T S SHOWN P H O T O * B Y      N 2 0 1  WHERE     S H E   I D E N T S BOTH
                                               N 4 3 8 ( BO D Y 0 1 ) & N 6 9 4 < B 0 D Y 8 1 ) ON S A M E .
S 1368                 H A R R IS O N          N 1 6 3 2 SHOWN V I D E O / P H O TO’ B Y IM201 &                          ID E N T S N 481
                                                ( R O P Y 1 1 ) A L I V E IN P E N 3 , L A T E R ON > ITCH ON H O A R D ! N G .
S I 48                                         _______ S T S SHOWN V I D E O M A P / 9 & P H O T O " B Y N 2 0 1           & I      L HE
                                                I D E N T S N 7 0 2 <BODY 85) & N 6 6 9 ( B 0 D Y 7 3 ) A L S O E Z
S131A                                                     S T S SHOWN P H O T O S OF GROUND B Y N 2 0 . S T S ON I__________
                                               i% C Z          IXDS S E L L A T H O A R D I N G W I T H D E C D I D ’ P A S B ODY 5 3
81523                  LAYTON                  N201 a     c- r   “OOK P O S S E S S I O N OF TWO V I D E O T A P E S "R O M
                                               A T T H E B B C , PU T I N S E C U R E C A B I N E T A T NECHF.’L L S GKtT P S T N
S1323A                 LAYTON                  N 2 0 1 S T S T H E I D E N T S M AD E B Y N 2 3 2 ? B Y P H O i ' O '   SMR1 / 1 2 8 &
                                               S M R 1 / 1 3 1 OF N 6 4 6 ( D O D Y 6 3 ) ARE WRONG, H E I S M I S T A K E N .
S1523AA                L A Y TON               N 2 0 1 S T S V IE W S M A T E R I A L RE BODY 5 3 & P R E P A R E S S C H E D U LE
                                               RL: I D ' S M A D E . P L A N M W J L / 7 3 & 7 6 SHOW L O C A T I O N OF B O D Y .
S1323A8                LAYTON                  IMH01 S T S O F F I C E R I N C H A R G E OF V I S U A L E V I D E N C E V I E W S I D
                                               & PRODUCES S C H E D U L E S MAPS & E V ID E N C E RE BODY 6 6 FOX
S 1 3 2 3 AC           LAYTON                  N 2 0 1 S T S V IE W S M A T E R IA L RE 8 0 D Y 7 2 & PR E P A R E S SCHGDULE
                                               R E I D ' S M A D E . P L A N M W J L / 9 3 SHOWS L O C A T I O N Of D E C E A S E D .
S1323AD                LAYTON                  N 2 0 1 S T S V I E W E D AL.L P H O T O / V I D E O E V I D E N C E R E B O D Y 7 0 &
                                               P R E P A R E S SCHED ULE : R E I D ' S M A D E . P R O D U C E S P L A N M W J L . / 4 4 .
S1323AE                LAYTON                  N 2 0 1 V I E W E S V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RE N 6 7 4 C 3 0 D Y 7 5 ) AND DOES
                                               S C H E D U L E R E I P E N T ON S A M E . DOE! 5 P L A N M W J L / 1 1 8 .
S1523AF                LAYTON                  N H O I S T S V IE W E D A L L P H O T O /V ID E O E V ID E N C E RE BODY 0 4 &
                                               P R E P A R E S SC H E D U LE R t I D ' S M AD E. PRODUCES P L A N M W J L / 6 .
                                                                                                                                  CO N T
Incident,       108        08 1 2 9 7   O P 931            ACTION R E C O R D      PRINT

     ^                                                                  A C T IO N   N UM BE R   A4383
A C T IO N   RESUME    s                    IN S P   LAYTON   TO   SUPPLY      A   COPY    OF    M A P /7   TO   MR D O Y L E   SOL

  '.I M SI' L A Y T O N TO S U P P L Y A C O P Y OF M A P / 7 TO MR D O Y L E S O L I C I T O R S A C T I N G FOR
 S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y FC ON I N S T R U C T I O N S OF ACC J O N E S . R E F E R E N C E N UM BE R W I L L       8E
 M A P /7 /D .
R A I S E D BY OPERATORS                   6918                    DATEs    2 7 -O S -8 9              T IM E s   1101
2 7 -0 3 -8 9     1101    O P 8 9 1 8 R A I S E D FROM M 1 3 H 7
2 9 - 0 3 —8 9    0901    0 P 4 9 0 9 A L L O C A T E D TO   IN B P LEYTON
3 1 - 0 3 —8 9    1036   OP3 7 4 9    COMPLETED
0 3 -0 6 -8 9     0906    OP 1 0 4 7 R E S U L T E D
DOCUMENTS TAKENs
R E S U L T S C O P Y MAP 7 / D S U P P L I E D A B I N S T R U C T E D
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                    P C 9 0 3 H BROWN
£ 6 -0 6 -8 9     1440    OP 1 3 3 1 F I L E D
Incident            108          08 1 2 9 7      O P 931               AC TION R E C O R D P RINT

                                                                                                                A C T I O N N UM BE R A 4 5 5 9
A C T I!ON R E S U M E     :                       HP      ARRANGE      FOR    14   VHS     T APES        OF    M AP7 MRE3 T B S / A PA R T

R A IS E D   BY     OPERATORS                      1U44                       DATE:        c '9 - D !::>■-89              T IM E :    0838

  HP   ARRANGE           FOR     14    VHS    TAPES        OF   MAP7    MRE3    T B 2 /A    PA R I"   4        TO   BE   MADE    BEFORE
  300589.          FOR    TH E    TREASURY         DEPT.
 PLEASE           ALLOCATE        TO    IN S P   LAYTON

£ '9 “ 0t»-fS 9   0838        O f'1 0 4 4 R A I S E D FROM M l 3 6 4
H 9-~05-~89      0853         OP4 9 0 9   A L L O C A T E D TO   £NSP L E Y T O N
H 9~ U :3~89      1013        0P5749      COMPLETED
2 9 -0 5 -8 9     1824        OP3 6 9 8   R 6.S U L.iE D
DOCUMENTS         T A K E N s
T H I R T E E N C O P I E S OF E A C H T A P E D E L I V E R E D TO S H E E T 1EI..D B Y                                  ON    £90589
O N E C O P Y OF E A C H R E T A I N E D B Y D / C / S U P T F O S T E R
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                        iN S P LAYTON
31 --0 5 -8 9     1849        OP 1 5 3 1  F IL E D
Incident        108        08 1 2 9 7 O P 931               AC T I O N R E C O R D P RINT


A C T IO N   RESUME    s                  T /S T    FROM    IN S    LAYTON    RE   SH OW IN G   V IS U A L   E V ID E N C E   TO    IA N

 T / S T FROM I M S L A Y T O N R E S H O W I N G V I S U A L . E V I D E N C E TO I A N J O H N S O N .
 IN S 3 3 4 7 J O H N S O N I D ’S H I M S E L F O N A NUMBER OF P H O T O S D E A L I N G W I T H            DECD     BUT     IX
  I S N O T AP P A R ANT' WHO HE       ACTUALLY       DEALT        W IT H .
R A IS E D BY OPERATORS                  7537                       DATEs      2 8 -1 0 -8 9            T IM E s       0955
2 8 -1 0 -8 9   0955       0P7537      R A IS E D   FROM    S3347

3 0 -1 0 -8 9    0931       OP5 7 4 9  ALLOCATED       TO    IN S    LAYTON
0 9 -1 1 -8 9    1 1 4 5 OP5 7 4 ?    COMPLETED
0 9 -1 1 -8 9    1 5 3 3 OP 1 2 3 7   RESULTED
DOCUMENTS TAKENs                 S1523C
R E S U LT : STATEMENT O B T A IN E D .
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                     IN S    LAYTON
1 1 - 1 1 '~ a 9 1 - 1 2 8 OP 5 8 0 5 F IL E D
Incident             IDa      051297 0P931                     N O M I N A L RE C O R D PRINT

           na 1      no.     N 11159
   S u rna m e      SAWER3                                     T itle      MR
   F o r e n a m e s MA f'THEW

   B i r t It p l a c e
   DoB                               Age          To                 Sex    M             1c
   O c c u p a tio n    POL       IN S 3 451
   E m p lo y e r/S c h o o l     name     W M ID LA N D S   P O L IC E
   H e ig h t           to                   B u ild
   H a ir C o lo u r
   H a ir     Type



   Com pi ex io n

   f a c i a 1 ha i r
   G la s s e s w o rn                 Use
   J e w e lle ry                                                                     Accent

   R e c .in ju r y ,ta tto o s ,m a r k s ,s c a r s ,p e c u lia r itie s ,a b n o r m a litie s




   Knows V ic t im                            N a tu re o f r e la t io n s h ip
   A t Scene                                  F in g e rp rin ts

   CRO n u m b e r                                  Local re f.       no
   B lo o d S a m p le        U                 G r o u p (ABO )             O th e r
   S a l i v a S a m p le     U                       B e c re te r U        Bus pec t            E lim   Code


   C l.o t h i n g




  O th e r F re e          Text
 FROM A 7 0 2 8 .




    C r o s s - r e f e r e n c e s !•
ADDRESS                E X B U S IN E S S    M E D IC O L E G A L C E N T R E , WATERY S T , U P P E R T H O R P E , S H E F F I E L D
TELEPHONE              E X B U S IN E S S    021               3595555
TELEPHONE              B U S IN E S S        0742              731546
TELEPHONE              B U S IN E S S        0742              731611
TELEPHONE              E XPAGER              0345              333111                 0800676
CATEGORY               L I NK                P O L IC E L I A I S O N O F F IC E R S
CATEGORY               R E F E R S TO        S O C IA L S E R V IC E S                      S H E F F IE L D C IT Y C O U N C IL
CATEGORY               R E F E R S TO        S H E F F Li i L O M A J O R P E A C E T I M E E MERGENCY PROCEDURES
                       L IN K
                       R E F E R S TO
                       L IN K
                       L IN K
                                                                                                                               CONT
                                                                                                                                   P AGE          2


    Nomina]. n o , N 11159
    S a r n a m e SA W E R S                                       Title         MR
    Fore name s MA TTHEW

       C ro s s -re fe re n c e ?     c o n tin u e d !
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
N 17 7 S'             L IN K                 S I V A L O G A N A T I IAN               S O M A BU N DR U M
                      REFERS        TO
                      REFERS        TO
N6151                 L IN K                 PURCELL                              W IL L IA M
N8354                 REFERS        TO       EDMUNDSON                            MALCOLM
A7225                                        I N S P S A W Y E R S TO P R O V I D E C O P Y OF S T A T E M E N T S 3 4 6 1 T O S / Y
A 752.7                                      HP 5 I N S S A W Y E R S V I E W 0 . S L 1 2 7 9 & I N V E S T I.GAT E P E R S O N A L L Y .
A7530                                        I N S S A W Y E R S TO H A V E D I S C R E E T E N Q S M AD E R E R E S U L T SHOWN
A7596                                        O B T A I N O R I G I N A L R E C O L L E C T I O N S FROM P C 2 6 1 8 H O U L T S Y P .
A8361                                        I N S S A W E R S ; O B T A I N B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E OF C O L I N S E F T Q N ,
A&572                                        I N S SAWERSs                        C O N T A C T T H E R E L A T I V E S OF B O D Y 4 2 .
R 102                 sueJEOT                2 0 - 1 1 - 8 9 S A W E RS
M18S9                 SUBJECT                1 2 - - 1 0 - 8 9 S A W E RS
A7530                                        RESULT s                   WASa S t C K D I D NOT WORK M A T C H , N 5 5 1 8 I N
                                             S E R I A L . 6 3 , 8 3 3 3 7 R E F E R S , NO J O H N S O N I N S E R I A L 3 OR 6 2 ,
A8561                                        R E S U L T S C O P Y OF B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E O B T A I N E D , A T T A C H E D
                                            TO BODY F I L L 6 1 .
A8572                                       R E S U L T S I N F O R M E D OF A L L D E T A I L S A S A B O V E .
S1123B                PURCELL               N 6 1 5 1 S T S H A N D E D C O P Y OF T R A N S C R I P T TO N 1 1 1 3 9 & I D ' S
                                            A S R E F W P / 1 ( D 3 4 3 7 ) H A S R E T A I N E D OWN C O P Y OF S A M E
S2755E                S 1VALOGANA           N 1 9 7 9 STS A S K E D B Y N 1 1 1 5 9 &                      TO C L A R I F Y P H R A S E S
                                             IN 1ST SI        ME NT'  R E  P O S T MO RTEM   BO   D
                                                                                                  DYY    0 6 . C L A R IF IE S         THESE,
S3206U                                      _________ IR E ­ SHOWN V I S U A L E V I D E N C E RE        DEC   9 D   B Y   N  1 1 1 5  9 .
                                            C L A R IF IE S ID E N T S . 1) N 6 4 3 (8 0 D Y 6 1 )       .   &   P O S S   ( B O D  Y    8 8 ),
El 3 6 3 3                                  C Z ^ Z D S T S SHOWN A C O P Y OF A C A L I B R A T I O N                 C E R  T I F I C A  T E
                                            B Y N 1 1 1 5 9 I D * D A S AN O R I G I N A L H A N D E D TO            E A S TWOODS
S3800                                                     S T S V I E W E D F I L M R EF M A P 9 / E W I T H N 1 1 1 5 9 & I D ' D
                                            S E C T I O N S OF T H E F I L M A S B E I N G      I I S OWN R E C O R D I N G S .
S360UA                                                    S T B H A S B E E N SHOWN V I D E O B        Y N i l 1 5 9 OF H I S
                                                                                                     IJY
                                             F IL M IN G    IN     L /L N   RE    PC    SCOTT      & G IV E S   O P IN IO N S .
R 102                 SAWF.RS                REP OR T' FROM IIMSP S A W E R S TO D SU T A Y L O R RE L O C A L
                                             A U T H O R IT Y RESPONSE ( S H E F F IE L D P E A C E T IM E PLA N )
Ml 859                SA WERS                N i l 1 5 9 S T S HE H A S C A N C E L L E D T H E I N S T A L L A T I O N OF A
                                             H O L M E S L I N E ON S E C O N D F L O O R 3 F U R N I V A L . H S E , S H E F F I E L D ,
M 2150                W E IG O LD            F U R T H E R S M E N T FROM DC W E I G O L D RE C L A R I I C A T I O N OF
                                             C O N T I N U I T Y OF D E C E A S E D ,




                                                      END     OF     REPORT
Incident        108          061R97   0P9M1             ACTION R E C O R D P RINT

    ^                                                           A 70S 8                 ACTION NUMBER A'/'dr''5
AC T I O N RE S U M E    s              IN S P   S A W Y P R S TO P R O V I D E COP Y OK S T A T E M E N T 8 3 4 6 1 TO 8 / Y

 1'NSP S A W Y E R S TO P R O V I D E C OPY OF S T A T E M E N T S3461 TO S / Y PO L I C E FOR           THEIR ATTN
 RCi T H E C R I M E .
                     L HAS ST A T E D AT THE M A T C H HE HA D H I S P O C K E T S P I C K E D & £.150 STOLEN,
  HE H A S NOT R E P O R T E D THIS T O THE W / Y P O L I C E „ BUT" H A S INCLUDED SAME IN HIS SMENT
R A I S E D OY OPERATOR;                     481b               DATEs     05-10-89            1 IME:   1S02
05-10-8?          ISOS       O P 4 8 15 R A I S E D FROM A 7028
05-10-89          17P0       O P 4909 A L L O C A T E D TO INS SAWY E R S
■16-10-89         1034      0P 5 7 4 9 C O M P L E T E D
17- 10-89         1619       0 P350S R E S U L T E D
D O C U M E N T S TAKEN:
STATEMENT H A N D E D TO PC G R E E N W A Y SYP INCIDENT ROOM 101089
I H E R E B Y A C K N O W L E D G E RECEIPT
KENNETH GREENWAY
OFFICERS RECORDED                                          PS C RAIG
S S - 10-89       0 84 6     OP 1531 F ILED
Incident         108      081P.97 O P ¥31                  ACTION R E C O R D PRINT

                                                                                              A C T I O N N U M B E R A ? 527
ACT I O N R E S U M E                     HP 8 INS SAWY E R S VCEW QSL.1279                   INVESTIGATE P E R S O N A L L Y ,

  HP: INS S A W Y E R S VIEW G S L 1 2 7 9 & I N V E S T I G A T E P E R S O N A L L Y *
  INS S A W Y E R S VIEW G8L1E79, 013 & 14 & C ARRY OUT D I S C R E T E E N Q U I R I E S RE P A R K I N G
  A R R A N G E M E N T S AT H I L L S B O R O U G H PARK & IF A L L E G A T I O N R A I S E D IN Q U E S T I O N N A I R E
  COULD BE P A R K S P O L I C E M A N OR O T H E R UN I F O R M E D O F F I C I A L L E G I T I M A T E L Y C O L L E C T I N G
  P A R K I N G I'EE & ISSUING R E C E I P T . PL E A S E TREAT AS P R I O R I T Y IN VIEW OF MATURE OF
  THE A L L O C A T I O N „
R A I S E D 13Y OPERATORS                      1237                DATE;           10-89               TIME           1501
2 5 -1 0 -8 9       1501    OP 1237        RA I S E D FROM QSL.12/9
DC I L A NCASTER
2 5 -1 0 -8 9       1504    OP1237         A C T I O N UPDATE -• AC T I O N CODE CHAN G E D FROM SHEF14F1
2 5 -1 0 -8 9       1541    OP4 9 0 9      A L L O C A T E D TO INS S A W Y E R S
14_ -|i-89          Q744    O P 4909       COMPLETED
1 3 -1 1 -8 9      0832     OP5 8 0 5      RESULTED
D O C U M E N T S TAKENs         S3S87
E N Q U I R I E S H AVE BEEN MADE INTO THIS MAT TER AND IT HAS BEEN E S T A B L I S H E D THAT THE
P E R S O N S T A K I N G 'THE M ONEY AND ISSUCNG R E C E I P T S WER E IN ACTUAL. FAC T S H E F F I E L D
CITY C O U N C I L * PARKS POL I C E * WHO WEAR A U N I F O R M NOT DISSI M I L A R TO THAT OF
SYP O F F I C E R S & USE MOTORCYCLES. A S T A T E M E N T HAS WEE N O B T A I N E D FRO M I                         ____
                           1 ASS IT. DIR. O P E R A T I O N S 01' THE R E C R E A T I O N & AM E N I T I E S DEPT
C O V E R I N G THIS AND C L A R I F Y I N G THE MATTER.
OFFICERS RECORDED                                              INS S A W Y E R S
1 7 -1 1 -8 9       1201    OP 1 5 3 1    F ILED
Incident         108       081297 OP 93 "I                    AC TION R E C O R D PRINT

                                                                                                    A C T I O N N UM BE R A 7 3 3 0
A C T IO N   RESUME                          INS S A W Y E R S TO H A V E      D IS C R E E T   E N G S MADE R E R E S U L T SHOWN

   INS S A W Y E R S TO H A V E D I S C R E E T E N G S M AD E RE R E S U L T SHOWN ON A C T I O N 4i>0^>
  T H E A C T I O N R E S U L T SHOWS T H A T P S 2 7 7 7 J O H N S O N D I D NOT" WORK T H E M A T C H WHEN I N
  F ACT H E D I D & H A S MADE S M E N T 3 3 3 7
  T H E A C T I O N R E S U L T SHOWS I                                I A S W O R K I N G T H E M A T C H A L T H O U G H ON
  N O M I N A L C AR D (r              D H E H A S N O T S U B M I TT ED A W R 1 T TEN R E C O L L E C T I O N
  I F I____________ ]'D 1 D WORK TH E M A T C H O B T A W R I T T E N R E C O L L E C T I O N & P A R T I C U L A R L Y
  C L A R I F Y W H I C H S E R I A L . H E WAS I N & WHERE H E WAS P O S T E D ,
  A N O T H E R A M B I G U I T Y ON T H E R E S U L T OF A C T I O N 4 5 0 b I S T H A T THAT A C T I O N R E Q U E S T S
  A L I S T ’ OF O F F I C E R S I N S E R I A L 6 3 ( S I X T Y T H R E E ) WHERE AS THE A C T I O N R E P L Y
  R E F E R S TO A L I S T OF OFT 1 C E R S I N S t - R I A L               2 ( S I X T Y TWO)
  P S J O H N S O N I S I N F A C T SHOWN I N S E R I A L T H R E E ,
  FROM I N S S A W E R S s S T I L L B E I N G C L A R I F I E D , V E R Y CONF US I N G F I C TU R I,;.,HOP 1 NG T 0
  H A V E IT S O R T E D B Y M I D D L E OF F E B R U A R Y .
R A I S E D BY OPERATORS                          2863                     DATE c        2 6 —1 0 —8 9            T I M E ”,  0931
2 6 -1 0 -8 9     0931        OP2 8 6 3      R A IS E D
DC I L A N C A S T E R
26-1C 1--89       1002        0P4909          A L L O C A T E D TO I N S S A W Y E R S
IE -0 2 -9 0      1043        OP4 9 0 9      A C T I O N U P D A T E - A C T I O N ’T E X T A D D E D
FROM I N S S A W E RS           S T I L L B E I N G C L A R I F I E D , V E R Y C O N F U S I N G P 1 C T U R E , HOP I N G TO
H A V E I T S O R T E D 8 Y M I D D L E OF F E B R U A R Y ,
19--0 5 - 9 0     0855        OP4 9 0 9       COMPLETED
1 9 -0 .3 --9 0   0946        0P4813         RESULTED
DOCUMENTS TAKEN 5
                   D I D N O T WORK T H E M A T C H 1 5 0 4 8 9 „ H E WAS ON L E A V E , H E WAS SUPF
HAVE BEEN L / C S E R IA L 6 3 .
P S J O H N S O N "TOOK C H A R G E OF S E R I A L . 6 3 , NO J O H N S O N I N S E R I A L 3 OR 6 2 .
P S J O H N S O N R E P O R T ' / R E C O L L E C T I ON S 3 3 3 7 TO WMP 2 1 0 8 8 9 .
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                            DS M CC O M R IE
19 0 5 -9 0       1359        OP 1 3 3 1     F IL E D
Incident           IDS         081297 Ql’931                    AC T I O N RE C O R D P RINT

                                                                                                        AC T I O N    N UM BE R   A7396
A C T IO N    RESUME       :                  O B T A IN   O R IG IN A L   R E C O L L E C T I O N S FROI'1 P C 2 6 1 8      HOULT   SYP.

R A IS E D    BY   O P E R A T O R .”         1237                     DATb's           0 1 -1 1 -8 9                TIME:        1109

 O B T A IN     O R I G I N A L R E C O L L E C T I O N S FROM P C 2 & 1 8 H O U L T S Y P .
 PC2618         H O U L T , WE ST BAR P S T N , H A S 1 D * D H I M S E L F D E A L I N G           WJTH BO D Y 3 2          BELL    & HAS
 M AD E A       S T A T E M E N T R E G A R D I N G T H I S . WE H A V E N O R E C O R D OF         H IS   O R IG IN A L
  R E C O L L E C T IONS, P L E A S E O B T A I N T H E M F ROM S Y P .

0 1 -1 1 -8 9           1109      OP 1237    R A I S E D FROM M l 8 9 4
0 1 -1 1 -8 9            1129     0P4909     A L L O C A T E D TO I N S S A W Y E R S
2 7 -1 1 -8 9           1132      OP3 7 4 9  COMPLETED
2 8 -1 1 -8 9            1430     OP 3 8 0 3 R ES UI TED
DOCUMENTS TA K E N                     S3338A
R L- C 0 1. . L E C T I O N 0 B T A 1 N ED & I S A T I T AC ! E D .
OF F I C E R S R EC OR D ED                                      P S C RAIG
2 9 -1 1 -8 9           1723      0P3439     F 1LED
Incident          108        O S 1297     0P931                   AC T I O N R E C O R D P R I N T

     ^                                                                             A C T IO N   N UM BE R   A8361
A C T IO N   RESUME'     :                    INS S A W E R S ;      O B T A IN    B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E OF   C O L IN   SEFTON,

  ) N S S A W E R S : OE.fl A I N B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E    OF      C O L IN   SET T O N * B O D Y   61,     FOR INQUEST .
R A I S E D BY OPERATORS                    8918                           D A T E ."    0 3 -0 4 -9 0              T IM E : 1403
0 3 -0 4 -9 0    1403       0 P 8 9 1 8 R A IS E D
DC I T O P E
0 4 .-0 4 -9 0  0847     0P4909           ALLOCATED          10     IN S    SAWYERS
1 4— 0 3 — 90   1427      0P4909          COMPLETED
1 3 -0 3 90     1436      OP 4 8 1 3      RESULTED
DOCUMENTS TAKEN 5
COPY B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E      OBAYINF.D,       ATI A C H E D TO BO D Y F I L E           NO 61.
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                           IN S     SAWYERS
1 6 - 0 5 '-9 0 1101      OP 3 4 3 9      F IL E D
Incident          IOS           0 81297 OP 931                    ACT ION REC O R D PR IN f

                                                                                                          A C T I O N NUMBER A 8 3 7 S
A C T IO N   RESUME        2                     IM S    SAWERSs                        CONTACT         TH E R E L A T I V E S OF 8 0 D Y   42.

 IM S S A W E R S 5                    C O N T A C T T H E R E L A T I V E S OF B O D Y 4 2 , P A U L H E W I T S O N .
 IN F O R M T H E M OF T I M E & D A T E L I S T E D FOR I N Q U E S T & A S C E R T A I N I F           THEY NOW R E Q U I R E
 O V E R N IG H T A C C O M O D A T IO N I N S H E H ' I E L D . N B . TH E A C C O M O D A T IO N A V A I L A B L E I S A T W IN
  ROOM FOR        TWO P E R S O N S O N L Y .
R A I S E D BY    OPERATORS                   8916                       DATE:          0 5 -0 4 -9 0              T IM E :      0918
0 3 -0 4 -9 0     0918    OP8 9 1 8    R A IS E D

Q< . > - 0 4 - 9 0  1040   OP5 7 4 9     ALLOCATED           TO    IN S    S A W E US
1 4 -0 3 -9 0      142/   OP4 9 0 9     COMPLETED
1 ^-0 5 -9 0       1436   0P4815        RESULTED
DOCUMENTS T AK EN s
I N F O R M E D Ql: A L L D E T A I L S A S AIJOVF: „
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                           IN S    SAWERS
30-   ’O b - 9 0 1 6 0 1       OP 1 3 3 1   I 1 LIS- D
Incident            IOB      O b 1297 O P 931                       NOMI N A L R E C O R D PR INI

   I 'J I i na 1    no.     N 5 7 19
   S u r name       EDWARDS'                                        V i 1,1 e
   F o r e n a m e s ANTHONY                          JAMES

   B irth p la c e
   Don 0bD919^J>                   Age           A-f- T o             Sex M                      Ic
   O c c u p a tio n       AMBULANCE           O F F I C E R BATEMOOW S T A T I O N
   E m p l o y e r / S c h o o l name          S Y O R K S H IR E AMBULANC
   H e ig h t              to                   8 u i I. d
   H a ir C o lo u r
   H a ir    Type

   ily e s
   C o m p I. e    i on

   F a c ia l h a ir
   G la s s e s w o rn                   Use
   J e w e 11 e r y                                                                                   Accent

     e c . in ju r y , t a t t o o s , m a r k s , s c a r s , p e c u lia r it ie 5 , a b n o r m a lit ie s




   ((n ow s V i c t i m                          N a tu re o f r e ) a Iio n p h ip
   A t Scene                                     F in g e r pr i n ts

   CKO n u m b e r                                     Local re f.       no
   B l o o d Sam p 1 e       U                     G r o u p (A B O )             O t he r
   S a l i v a S a m p le    U                           S e c re te r U          S u * pe c t             E lim    Code


   C 1 o t h i ng




   O th e r F re e T e x t
 S 9 9 1 STS K IC K E D IN             FjAGK    W H IL E   T R E A T IN G   CASUALTY,      STS        TO   H AL.LA M S H IR E   FOR
 TREATMENT.
 S 9 9 1 A STB K IC K E D        LEFT     S ID E     R IB S   &   SUFFERED      R E D D E N IN G      OF   S K IN   AS   A   R E S U LT..



    C ro s s - re fe re n c e s ! -
ADDRESS             B U S IN E S S              UATEMOOR A M B U L A N C E S , BATEMOOR R D , B A T E M O O R ,                   SI IE FF I E L D
CATEGORY            S 991                       BODY 8 9 H IC K S N 7 1 7                        DECEASED
CATEGORY            N E G A l1 V E              V 1 D b 0 & V I S U A L RE O T H ER
CATEGORY            L IN K                      VIE W ED V IS U A L E V ID E N C E
CATEGORY            R E F E R S TO              S T JOHNS AMBULANCE                              AMBULANCE S E R V IC E
CATEGORY            A S S IS T E D a            G Y M N A S I U M A T (".ROUND
CATEGORY            L IN K                      IN J U R E D PERSONS
CATEGORY            I'RE A FED                  ROYAI... H A L . L A M S H 1 R E H O S P I T A L H O S P I T A L S
CATEGORY            R E F E R S TO              DECEASED
CATEGORY            S U B J E C T OF            BE H A V IO U R OFFENCES                         OFFENCES
CATEGORY            R E F E R S TO              C O M M U N I C A T I O N S A T GROUND
CATEGORY            S U B J E C T ' OF          ASSAULr                                          OF F E N C E S
                                                                                                                                            CONT
                                                                                                                                   PAGE


   Nominal no.        NL>719
   Surxi&me       EDWARDS                                         Title
   For e n a m e s ANTH O N Y                       JAME S

         C r o s s 1• r e f e r e n c e s co nt in u e d s -
CATEGORY                    NF A                 A D V E R S E COMMENTS RE P O L I C E R E C O G N I T I O N
CATEGORY                    TOOK D E A D         N O R T H E R N GENERAL H O S P IT A L               H O S P IT A L S
C A I'EGORY                 L IN K               SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E A M B ULANCE                  A M BU LAN C E SE R V I C E
CATEGORY                    SAW A T NGH          WEST Y O R K S H IR E A M BU LAN C E                 A M BU LAN C E SE R V I C E
N1303                       R E F E R S TO       H IC K S                                TREVOR
IMF01                       L IN K               L .A Y 't O N                           M IC H A E L
N4 753                      R E F E R S TO       H O P K IN S                            ALAN
N5482                       L IN K               MCGU1NNESS                              PET ER                        JOHN
N5667                       R E F E R S TO       H IG G IN S                             P A T R IC K
                            R E F E R S TO
                            PARTNER            [
                            R E F E R S TO
N717                        AMBO L I N K         H IC K S                                 V IC T O R IA                JANE
A3844                                            O B T A I N A M B U L A N C E O F F I C E R S Q U E S T S FROM F O L L O W ! N G 5
A698S                                            I N T E R V I E W A M B U L A N C E O F F I C E R A N T H O N Y ED W A R D S R E 1 N J U R I E
A6987                                            DC I T O P E TO V I E W S 9 9 1 & C O N S I D E R S H O W I N G A N T H O N Y EDWAR
3 9 9 -1                    SUBJECT              0 7 - 0 5 - 8 9 EDWAR DS
S991A                       SUBJECT              2 5 - 1 0 - 8 9 ED W AR DS
A6985                                            R E S U L T S N!:>71 9 S E E N 2 3 1 0 * 9 . D O E S N O T W I S H T O M A K E A
                                                 F O R M A L C O M P L A I N T OF A S S A U L T . TO D / S U P T BF .E CHY FOR I N F O
A6987                                            R E S U L T S U N A B L E T O M A K E I D W I T H A N Y C E R T A I N T Y . NO S T M N T
                                                 O B T D . P O S S I B L E HE TOOK B O D Y 8 6 TO NGH A S W E L L A S 8 9 .
SI 007                                                          S T S CREWED W I T H N 3 / 1 9 & TOOK SO ME I N J U R E D TO T H E
                                                 N / G E N E R A L & TO R / H A L L A M S I I I R E „ A L S O 3 D O C T O R S T O R . . H . H .
SI 023                                         |              | S T B D I R E C T E D B Y C O N T R O L TO GO B A C K TO TH E GROU ND
                                                 R E I- U R T H E R I N J ’ D . T H E N A S S I S T S N I T / 1 9 W I T H I N J * D .
S991                        EDWAR DS             N S / 1 9 D I R E C T E D O N T O P I T C H W I T H A M 8 0 ON A R R I V A L . TOOK
                                                 3 B O D I E S T O NGH I N C B O D Y 8 9 ( N 7 1 7 ) & 2 O T H E R S .
399 -iA                     ED W AR DS           N 3 7 1 9 S T S R E I N C I D E N T WHERE WAS K I C K E D I N L E F T S I D E NR
                                                 R I B S W H 3 L 8 T G I V I N G 1ST A I D ? D O S E N T W I S H TO C O M P L A I N
D434                        AMBULANCE            L I S T OF A M B U L A N C E P E R S O N N E L FROM S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E
                                                 ) N V O L V F D 1 N T HE H IL . L S B O R O U G H I N C I D E N T




                                                      END    OF    REPORT
Incident          IDS        061297 O P 931                      AC TION R E C O R D PRI NT

                                                                   A3237                               A C T I O N NUMBER A 3 8 4 4
A C T IO N   RESUME                            O B T A IN   AMBULANCE O F F IC E R S         Q U E S T S FROM F O L L O W I N G s

 O B T A IN AMBULANCE          O F F 1 C E R S Q U E S T S FROM F O L L O W I N G S
 HAVE A L L ALREADY            MAD E W R I       TEN R E C O L L E C f I O N S . ( A L L   FROM   S   Y O R K S H IR E )
                               UEN'I L E Y a l' N
                              L O N G L E Y 3 TN
                                     ROTHERHAM STN
                      F A IR F IE L D
                      MAI..TT.5Y S T N
                           __________ | B A R N S L E Y       TN
                           , M ID DLE:W OO D S T N
                                 I MALT8Y            STN
                            HOYLAND STN
                      PARKWAY STN
  JOHN     .ACK:    PARKWAY STN
                           r DONCASTER STN
  A N THONY J A M L S ED W AR DS ? STIM NOT M E N T I O N E D
 I                            L PARKWAY S T N
                   }    HOYLAND STN
                                    ROTHERHAM
                                                 S T N NOT M E N T IO N E D
                             ..ONGL E Y S T N
                        PARKWAY S I N
                        □,    ROTHERHAM STN
                        I D , B E N TLE Y STN
                                   [ BATEMOOR S T N .
                                       L P A R K W A Y Ei T N »
                                    |, M A L T B Y ■3 I N
                                 |, M I D D L E W O O D S T N
                      HOYLAND STN
                               I D AT EM O O R        iT N
                      BATEMOOR £           TN
                     r M O O R G A 1E S T N
                                              I, M A L TB Y STN
                   ________|„ LONGLL-Y                 TN
                      ], D O NCASTER STN
                      1 M I D D L E W O O D BIN
                       PARK W A Y STIM
                         I LONG L E T STN
                                            I HOYLAND        TIM
                                      L PARKWAY STN
                            BA R N S LE Y STN
                              | DONCASTER
                                 DONCASTER         iTN
                                           M ID DLLW O O D S TN
                              ..ONGLEY S T N
                                     L D ATEM OO R S T N
                               MALTBY STN
R A I S E D BY O P E R A TOR :                  1960                   DATE        17-03-89                      TIME      1719
17-03-89            1719       OP 1 9 6 0  R A I S E D  FROM   A 3 2 5 7
•17-03-89            1 ?£4     0P4909      C H A N G E D TO F OR A L L O C A T I O N
•18-05-89           •1748      OP4 9 0 9   A L L O C A TED TO
23-0^ -89            12 2 0    OP4 9 0 9   COMPLETED
26-03-89            0938       OP3 3 0 2   RESULTED
D O C U M E N T S T AK EN !;
R E C O L L E C T I O N S O B T A I N E D & FO R W A R D E D TO N E C H E L L S .
O F F I CER S R EC OR D ED                                     D C ! ROSS
page:
A3344
Incident          108        08 1 2 9 7 O P 931                 ACT JON R E C O R D PRINT

                                                                                                      A C T I O N NUMBER A 6 9 8 5
A C T IO N   RESUME      s                    IN T E R V IE W   AMBULANCE        O F F IC E R   A N T H O N Y E D W AR DS R E I N J U R I E

     •.I N T E R V IE W A M B U L A N C E 0 F T 1 C E R A N T H O N Y ED W AR DS RE IN J U R I E S - * S U S T A I N E D A T M A T C H .
    I N S 9 9 1 ED W A R D S ST'S HE WAS T R E A T I N G A C A S U A L T Y ( D E C E A S E D ? ) ON P I TCH WHEN
    S O M E O N E D E L 1 B E R A T L . Y K I C K E D H I M I N T H E B A C K & S A I D " W H A T A B O U T MY D A U G H T E R " OR
    “ WHAT A B O U T H I S D A U G H T E R " ( T R E V O R H I C K S OR S O M E B O D Y H E L P I N G H I M ? )
    S 9 9 1 PAGE 4 R E F E R S .
    F I R S T L Y E S T A B L I S H IF E D W AR DS W I S H E S TO C O M P L A I N A B O U T B E I N G A S S A U L T E D & T H E
    I N J U R I E S HE S U S T A IN E D ..
    « « T H IS            A C T I O N I S TO B E Q U E U E D P E N D I N G A D E C I S I O N RE C R I M I N A L E N Q U I R I E S B Y
   W EST M I D L A N D S P O L I C E ON T H E I N S T R U C T I O N S OF D E T S U P T T A Y L O R . TO B E P L A C E D I N
   QUEUE 1 7 P R I O R I T Y S .
    A L S O S E E A C T I O N RE S H O W I N G V I DEO / 1'*H OT O& R AP H I C E V I D E N C E TO ED W AR DS T O E S T A B L I S H
    I D OF B O D I E S H E D E A L T W I T H , I N P A R T I C U L A R TO E S T A B L I S H T HAT H E D I D D E A L W I T H
   V I C "TOR I A K I C K S ( B OD Y 8 9 ) .
   * * * # * * * * S E E AC T I O N 6 9 S 7 W H I C H R E F E R S TO S A M E P E R S O N B E F O R E A L L O C A T I N C a * * * * * * * * *
R A IS E D BY OPERATORS                               9636                DATE 5         11 - 0 9 - - 8 9         T IM E :         1225
 1 1 —0 9 - - 8 9           223      OP9 6 3 6 R A IS E D IR O M S 9 9 1
 1 -| - 0 9 - - S 9        3 -1 6    O P 4 9 0 9 C H A N G E D TO FOR A L L O C A T I O N 1 P R I O R I T Y    2
e'7 - 0 9 • 8 9             637      OP4 9 0 9 A C T IO N UPDATE - A C T IO N l E X T ADDED
•S--S- 8 - * * * * # S E > A C T I O N 6 9 8 7 W H I C H R E F E R S TO S A M E P E R S O N B E F O R E A L L O C A T I N G * * * # * #
1 6 - 1 0 —8 9    1 6 1 2 OP4 9 0 9        AI..L O C A T E D TO DCS F O S T E R
2 8 -1 0 -8 9     1 3 5 7 OP4 9 0 9        COMPLETED
2 8 -1 0 -8 9     1 5 5 2 OP6 1 3 7        RESULTED
DOCUMENTS T A K E N 2                 S991A
MR ED W A R D S WAS S E E N B Y I N S P E C T O R L A Y T O N ON T H E 2 5 1 0 8 9 .
H E D O E S N O T W I S H TO M A K E A F O R M A L C O M P L A I N T OF A S S A U L T .
S I A T E M E N l A "I T 'A C H E D .
O F F IC E R S RECORDED                                         IN S LAYTON
0 7 -1 1 -8 9     1 0 4 3 OP3 4 3 9        F IL E D
Incident         108       0 81297 0P931                   AC T I O N RE C O R D PRINT

                                                                                           AC T I O N NUMBER A6987
ACTION     RES U M E   :                  DC I T O P E    TO VIEW S 9 9 1      & C O N SIDER S H O W I N G A N T H O N Y EDWAR

  DC1 TOPE TO VIEW 8991 & CONSIDER S H O W I N G A N T H O N Y EDWA R D S VIDEOS/ F A C I A L PHOTOS
  OF D E C E A S E D / P H O T O S OF C L O T H I N G OF D E C E A S E D IN ORDER TO IDENTIFY D-IE BO D C E S HE
  DEALT WIT H & ”1R A N S P O R T E D ON H I S A MB U L A N C E T O N O R T H E R N G E N E R A L . ONE IS THOUGHT
  TO BE V I C T O R I A H C C K 3 (80DY 89). HE ALSO T A L K S A B O U T A Y OUNG BOY W H O HE T R E A T E D
  ON THE P ITCH & THEN PUT IN AMBULANCE, S O M E O N E EL SE PUT ANOTHER BOY IN 'IHE
  M I D D L E OF THE A M B U L A N C E FLOOR, M A K I N G THREE B O D I E S A L T O G E T H E R IN THE A M B U L A N C E
  CA N HE E S T A B L I S H FOR C E R T A I N THAT THE FEMALE WAS V I C T O R I A N I C K S & CAN HE ID
   THE OTHER TWO, A S S U M I N G THEM BOTH TO BE DEAD.
  < < < < < < W H E N D E A L I N G WITH THIS AC T I O N PI EASE REFER A LSO TO A6985 W HICH REFERS TO
  A P O S S I B L E C R I M I N A L AC T I O N (ASSAU LT ON THE A M B U L A N C E OFF ICER ) » » » »
  <<<<<<<<1. WHE N D E A L I N G W I T H THIS ACTION P L E A S E SEE THE OODY TEAM FOR
  C O M P R E H E N S I V E INFO R E G A R D I N G THE BODY.
  S. FOR INFO OF ACT I O N ALLOCATORS THIS A C T I O N IS TO B E PLACED IN QUEUE
  2 W H E R E SIMILAR A C T I O N S TO SEE AMBUS.ANCE PERSONNEL. WILL B E PLA C E D A L T O G E T H E R &
  P E N D E D FOR A DECIS I O N FROM DET SUPT TAYLOR IF & WHEN TO GO A HEAD „ » » » » » »
RAI S E D BY OPERATORS                             9636              DATEa       11 0 9 - 8 9      TIME?   1344
■11..0 9 - 8 9      1344       O P 9636     RA I S E D FROM S991
11-09-89              1347 0P 9 6 3 6       ACTION UP D A T E - L I N K E D A C T I O N S ADDED
11-09-89              1349 0P 9 6 3 6       ACTION UPDATE - ACTION TEXT ADDED
< < < < < < W H E N DEAL I N G W ITH T H I S ACTION PLEASE REFER AL.SO TO A6985 W H I C H REF E R S TO
A P O S S I B L E C R I M I N A L . AC T I O N (ASSAULT ON THE A M B U L A N C E OF !■ I C E R )» » » »
11-09-89              1 5 1 / O P 4909 C H A N G E D TO FOR A L L O C A T I O N 1      PRIORITY 2
P.?— 0 9 - 8 9        1034 OP 9636          A C T I O N UP DAI E. •- AC T I O N TEXT ADDED
<<<<<<<<1. WHEN D E A L I N G WIT H THIS ACTION P L E A S E SEE THE BODY TEAM FOR
CO M P R E H E N S I V E INFO R E G A R D I N G THE BODY.
2. FOR INFO OF ACTION ALLOCATORS THIS ACTION £S T O BE P L A C E D IN QUEUE
2 W H E R E SIMILAR ACTI O N S TO SEE A M B U L A N C E P E R S O N N E L WILL. BE P L A C E D A L T O G E T H E R &
P E N D E D FOR A D E C I S I O N FROM DET SUPT TAYLOR IF & WHEN T O GO A H E A D . » » » » » »
2 7 - •09--89        1633     OP4 9 0 9    C H A N G E D TO FOR A L L O C A T I O N 2
0 2 -•1 0 -8 9       1021     OP4 9 0 9    C H A N G E D TO FOR A L L O C A T I O N 2 P R I O R I T Y 4
 1 1 - • 1 0 ..8 9   1123     OP4 9 0 9    A L L O C A T E D 1TO 1 NS I .AY"! ON
2 7 -■1 0 -8 9       1217     0P3749       C OM PLETE))
2 8 --1 0 -8 9       1224     0P6137       RESULTED
DOCUMENTS T A K E N s
S E E N ON T H E 2 3 1 P 8 9 B Y INSPECTOR L A Y T O N . H E WAS U N A B L E TO M A K E A N Y V I S U A L
I D E N T I F I C A T I O N S W I T H A N Y D E G R E E OF CERTAINTY._____________________________________________

O N L Y A L I M I ' T E D AM OUNT OF M A T E R I A L . WAS SHO WN.
NO S T A T E M E N T WAS T A K E N , A L T H O U G H T H E R E I S A P O S S I B I L I T Y   THAT   HE C O N V E Y E D BODY
8 6 T O THE NORTHERN GE NE RA L. H O S P I T A L           A S W E L L A S B O DY    89.
O F F I C E R S RECORDED                                   I N S i-A Y T ON
0 1 -1 1 -8 9    1217  OP 1 5 3 1 F IL E D
       **   TX   C O N F IRMATION   REP OR T   **    AS   OF    IB   DEC   ’ 37   16:30   PAGE

                                                                S Y P



     DATE    TIME              TO/FROM              MODE       MIN/SEC PGS          STATUS
01   i£ / 16 16:2£ 3 0 1£ 16 £'6 4 16 0             G3— S       07"45  15            OK
                                                             Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                             50 Windsor Road


              POLICE                                         Heeley
                                                             SHEFFIELD
                                                             S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile T ransmission

Date:                                 iio S e e e m b e j         7

To:                                              rntcLJLartdLo fo& x
For the attention of:                c s a fosnrc

Comments:                 A/oauW                               Sf>

                            MA x u £ k u & & o o /« £

                            T J o tf+ i   uoo   O **> c k
                            8& A t* H+tcK&r&PP
                                          R A m s o g ’tsi

                             @M(*LOAf& f0ui£U -




From:

Telephone Number:                         O H M -


Number of Pages (including this page)                           / 5~

 In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
 South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
 Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
Incident           108        161297 0P931                          NOMI N A L RECORD PRINT

   N o ^ P n a i. n o . IMS6 8 6
   S u r name       GROOME                                          "I' i 1 I e   MR
   F o r e n a m e s MAXWELL                             DERYCK                          CHARLES

   Cl i i“ t h p 1 a c e                        ____
   D o B I___________ I             Age         |____ | T o                  8e    lvi            I c
   O c c u p a t i on      POL. P C 4 4 - 6
   E m p l o y e r / S c h o o l name         H AM EiV i ON   RD    PSTN
   H e ig h t              to                  G u ild
   i-la ir C o lo u r
   H a ir Type

   Eyes
   C o m p le x io n

   I' a c i a 1 h a i r
   G la s s e s w o rn                    Use
   J e w e lle ry                                                                                       Accent

   R ec. i n j u r y , t a t t oos , m arks , s c a r s , p e c u . lia r it ie s , a b n o rm a l i t ie s




   Knows V ie t i m                               N a t u r e o f r e 1a t i o n s h i p
   A t Scene                                      F i ng e r p r i n t s

   CRO n u m b e r                                      Local re f.       no      NMPOLE
   8 1 o o d S a m p I. e    U                      G r o u p (ABO )                O th e r
   S a l i v a S a m p le    U                            Se c r et e r U           S up p e c'            E 1 i m Co de


   C lo th in g




        Gr o s s - re fe re n c e s s -
TELEPHONE              8 U S IN E S S           074-2             761211
CATE-'.GORY             VIEW ED                 C L O T H I N G Of- D E C E A S E D               DECEASED
CATEGORY               M D C G /1               P L A N S O f I N S I D E GROUND
CATEGORY                S2S39A                  B O D Y 1 3 WAFER N 4 8 S                         DECEASED
CATEGORY               R E F E R S TO           L I V E R P O O L S U P P O R TERS                SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO          D IS O R D E R
CATEGORY               VIEW ED                  P H O T O G R A P H S R E GROUND
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO          C OM M U N 1 CA' l 1 ONS A T GROUND
CATEGORY               POL L IN K               P O L IC E A T P E R IM E T E R FENCE             P O S I T I O N OF P O L I C E
CATEGORY                ATTENDFD                SOUTH STAND SEATED                                S T A N D S A'l GROUND
CA TEGORY              R E F E R S TO           F A CUP S E M I F I N A L 1 9 8 8                 SEMI F IN A L S
C A'T FIGORY            L IN K                  P O L IC E O F F IC E R S S E R IA L 1            P O L I C E O F F I C E R S ON   DUTY   3
CATEGORY               USED                     A D V E R f ISIf-4G: H O A R D I N G S
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO          M O V E M E N T / R E Q U E S T S OF N 1 1 1 0
CATEGORY               B R IE F E D             POL O F F IC E R S & D UC KEN F1ELD
CATEGORY                W ITNE SS ED            F A N S OVER P E R I M E T E R F E N C E
                                                                                                                                          com
    N o m in a l no .      N c.& o 6
    S urnam e        GROOME                                         1i t 1e      MR
    F o r e n a m e s MA X W E L L                   DERYCK                           CHARLES

        C r o s ?i   r e f e re n te s    c >nt i n u e d s -
C A TEGORY                 A [T E N D E D      d e b r ie f   after      IN C ID E N T            B R I E F I IMG5
CATEGORY                   R E F E R S TO       SEMI F IN A L S
CATEGORY                 ST O O D   a        S P 1 O N KOP                                     STANDS           AT    GRO UND
IM1 0 6 9 4              L IN K              GREEN                                    ROY
N £->84                  L IN K              BEAL                                     D A V ID                          JOHN
im&:>8:>                 L IN K              D A R LIN G                              PETER                             C O L IN
N2587                    L IN K              CALVERT                                  C L IV E                          W IL L IA M
N2676                    L 1NK               CHAPMAN                                  PET ER
NH689                    L IN K              H E L L 1WELL                            HEDLEY
N2691                    L IN K              HOLMES                                   ANTI-SONY                         PAUL
                         L IN K
IM4700                   L IN K              MOI..E                                   B R IA N              LEONARD
N6260                    L IN K              SUMNE R                                  D A V ID
A2039                                        SUPT      TAYLOR        i RE     S E R I A L 1 - FULL. L I S T F O L L O W S I N S T R U C T
A7075                                        I N S I ..AY TON s SHOW          P C 4 4 6 GROOME V IS U A L EVIDENCE.
B22S9                    SUBJECT             0 4 - 0 5 - 8 9 GROOME
S2259A                   SUBJECT             0 3 - 1 0 - - 8 9 GROOME
D3079                    SUBJECT             0 8 - 1 0 - - 8 9 MAP OF P I T C H - SHOWS P O S I T I O N L30DY 1 3 WAFER
S22S9                    GROOME              N 2 6 8 6 S T S P O S T E D P E R I M E T E R T R A C K HOP E N D R E N O T T S F A N S
                                             R E M A I N E D T H A T E N D T H R U O U T TO P R E V E N T D I S O R D E R E T C
S2239A                   GROOME              N 2 6 8 6 S T S SHOWN P H O T O ” B Y I'_________ I' & I______                       ], H E I D E N T S
                                             S E L F C A R R Y I N G N 4 8 8 C B 0 D Y 1 3 ) ON H O A R D I N G                   DOES P L A N .
S3413                    G R EE N            N 1 0 6 9 4 STS N2584 HELPED IN E JE C T IN G                                        ] & S A ID N 2 6 8 6
                                             N 2 6 9 1 & N 1 0 6 9 4 WERE O N L Y O F F I C E R S C O N T R O L I N G S P I O N KOP
S411C                                                      S T S SAW P H O T O S & I D ’ S S E L F W I T H B O D Y 1 3 W A F E R „
                                             REF           -------------------------------------|LDS N 1 1 0 3 7 & I M 2 6 8 6 A S S I S T I N G A L S O
S874                     HOLMES              N 2 6 9 1 S T S N H 6 8 6 P O S T E D G A T E 2 ON P E R I M E T E R T R A C K A T
                                             S P I O N KOP E N D . B O T H E S C O R T E D L P O O L F A N S T H R U S P I O N KOP
D3077                    GROOME              D 3 0 7 9 I S MAP OF P I T C H S H O W I N G P O S I T I O N OF B O D Y 1 3
                                             W ATER DY GROOME N 2 6 & 6 .




                                                       E ND    OF    REPORT
1 n c i d e ist      1OS          161 297 OP 931                       NOMINAL       RE C O R D PRI NT

   N o ^ ^ n a i. n o .    N2612
   S u rna m e      W H IT E                                           T i 1 1e    MR
   f o r e n a m e s HARRY

   B irth p la c e
   DoB                                   Age           To                    Sex     M               Ic
   O c c u p a tio n         POL      IM S
   E in f ■ 1 o y e r / S c h o o 1   name     HAMMERTON          RD    PSTN
   H a ig h t                 to                8 u i 1d
   H a ir C o lo u r
   H a ir Type

   Eyes
   C o ifi p 1 & x i o n

   F a c i a 1 ha i r
   G1 a s s e s w o r n                      Use
   J e w e lle ry                                                                                Accent

   R e c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s , m a r k s , s c a r s , p e c u l i a r i t i e s , a b n o r m a li t i es




   Knows V ic t im                                  N a tu re o f r e la t io n s h ip
   A t Scene                                        f in g e r pr i n t s

   CRO n u m b e r                                        1. o c a l r e f . no    DP Ph-
   B lo o d S a m p le      U                         G r o u p (A B O )              O t he r
   S a 1 i v a. S a m p 1 e U                                S e c re te r U          Sus pe ct                E lirn   Code

   C lo th in g




   O t h e r F r e e T ext,
 S E E A L S O S I O ON i 0 3 .




      C r oss-- r e f e r e n c e s ! - -
CATEGORY               ATTENDED                    PO L.. IC E ROOM N EA R G Y M N A S I U M
CA ITEGOR Y           W ITN E S S E D              G A T E C CROWD EN I'RY                           CROWD      SURGES     O U T S ID E
CATEGORY               NI-" A                      IMF A C O M P L A I N T S
CATEGORY              W IT N E S S E D             GATE 8
CATEGORY               ATTENDED                    G Y M N A S I U M AT GROUND
CATEGORY              W ITN E SS ED                U N A U THOR I S E D A C C E S S
CATEGORY               R E F E R S TO              G E N U IN E T IC K E T S
CATEGORY              POL L IN K                   P E N S 1 <4 2 S T A N D I N G                    WEST S T A N D
CATEGORY               POL. L I N K                P E N S 3 -- 7 S T A N D I N G                    WEST S T A N D
CATEGORY              POL L I N K                  PEN 3 S T A N D IN G                              WE ST S T A N D
CATEGORY               POL L I N K                 PEN 4 S T A N D IN G                              WEST S T A N D
CATEGORY               I N CHARGE                  P O L IC E O F F IC E R S S E R IA L . 14         P O L IC E O F F IC E R S   ON D U T Y
                                                                                                                                              CONT
                                                                                                                       PAGE


   Nominal no.        N&612
   Surname       WHIT E                                   Title       MR
   F o re nam e s HARRY

    L r a s s■•re fe re n c e s     co n t i n u e ds -
CATEGORY           USED                   AD V E R I" I S I N G H O A R D I N G S
CATEGORY            NFA                    A D V E R S E C O M M E N T S RE P O L I C E R E C O G N I T I O N
CATEGORY            B R IE F E D          P O L O F F I C E R S ft D U C K E N F I E L D
CATEGORY            L IN K                 GAT ES
CATEGORY            H AD K E Y S           IN T E R N A L GATE PEN 4
CATE-GORY           H AD K E Y S           I N T E R N A L G A T E l>EN 3
CATEGORY            ENTERED               CONCOURSE                                         WEST S T A N D
CATEGORY            B R IE F E D           P O L IC E OFFICERS S E R IA L             1 !:> P O L IC E O FFICERS'ON DUTY      3
CATEGORY            8 R I El- E l )       S T E W A R D S A T GROUND                        E M P L O Y E E S A T SWFC
CATEGORY            R E F E R S TO         T U R N S ' ! ' I L..EB
N10510              L IN K                DOWSON                                  P E TER
                     ID E N T IC A L ?     U N)D EN T                             MAL.C
N 11482             L IN K                COLTON                                  MAR T I N                     RONALD
N2600               I. I N K               CREASER                                ROBERT                        WALLACE."
N2617               LINK                  PURDY                                   ROBERT-                       M
N 2 6 2 rl          L IN K                 DEL AN EY                              GRAH AM
N2692               L IN K                STREET                                  ERNEST                        JAM ES
IMP 7 1 2           R E F E R S TO         FA1RCLOUGH                             SANDRA
NH719               L IN K                C RAWFORD                               WILLIAM                       CAMERON
N2723               L IN K                 SMALLMAN                               K E V IN                      ANTHONY
N2725               L IN K                BUTLER                                  D A V ID
N2727               L IN K                 W ILD                                  K E IT H
M 2728              L IN K                W A S H IN G TO N                       R                             M
N2731               L INK                  BURNS                                  ROBERT
N2733               B R I E F E D BY      A IT K IN                               ALEXANDER
N 2 741             B R I E F E D BY       FORD                                   BARRY                         GE ORGE
N2746               L IN K                BES1                                    ANDREW
N 2768              L IN K                MORGAN                                  JOHN
                    L IN K
N2969               L IN K             C A R D WEI,                        STEPHEN                      C R A IG
                    L IN K
                    L INK
N3367               R E F E R S TO     NESB                                JOHN                        AR T'HUR
N3411               B R I E F E D BY   M AR S                              IA N
N427S               LINK               B E N N E TT                        JOHN                        JOSEPH
N4555               LINK               SORSBY                              BARRY
NS496               L IN K             ROTCHELI                            P E TER                     JAM ES
N!'>!">8V           LINK               NORBURN                             ALBERT                      ARTHUR
N392S               L IN K             MAR TIN                             BEVERLEY
N6071               I. INK             SEWELL                              S I EVEN                     ROBERT
N6637               LINK               THOMAS                              BEVERLEY
N7839               L IN K             BOOTH                               JOHN                    A R T HUR
IM 83 0             L IN K             B A IN                              MALCOLM
A2005                                  SUPT TAYLOR         s RE IN S P E C T O R W H IT E * F "»
A7418                                  DC I T O P E T O    C O N S I D E R SHOW V I D E O I N S P W H I T E R E      B O D IE S   I
82223               SUBJECT            1 0 - 0 6 - 8 9 W H IT E
A7418                                  R E S U L T S N F A D O E S N O T A S S I S T W I T H C O N T I N U I T Y OF DECD.
S 107 8             SM AL .LMA N       N 2 7 2 3 S T S B R I E F E D B Y N261fc I N L E P P I N G S I N T E R R A C E T O L D
                                       D U T I E S WERE S E A R C H I N G L.POOL F A N S ONCE T H R U T / S T I L E S
                    GRANT              N272.0 STS            A T T E N D E D B R I E F I N G G I V E N BY IMS W H I T E , G I V E N
                                       I N S T R U C T I O N S RE S E A R C H I N G OF F A N S & E M E R G E N C Y P R O C E E D .
                                                                                                                           CON T
                                                                                                                               PAGE            3

         w
    Momi ria i n o .      N2612
    S u r name       WHITE-                                     T i 1 1e    MR
    F o r e n a m e s HARRY

      C r o s s - r e -Fe r e n c e &   c o n t i n u e d ; ■■ •
S 1 147                 THOMAS                  I M 6 6 3 7 S T S P O S T E D T O S E R I A L 1 4 U ND E R COMMAND OF N 2 6 1 2
                                                S E R I A L D E P L O Y E D I / S GROU ND A T TV S T I L E S A - G S E A R C H I N G
a 1156                  MORGAN                  N 2 7 6 8 S T S SAW N H 6 1 H W I T H A N O T H E R U / K OFf- I C E R E S C O R T I N G
                                                P R I S O N E R TO P O L I C E R O O M ,
S1-156                  MORGAN                  N 2 7 6 8 S T S N P 6 1 2 N 2 6 1 7 N 2 6 2 2 PULI.. F A N S U ND E R R A I L I N G TO
                                                E A S E PR E SSU R E A T G A T E S , F A N S P E R S I S T S U R G IN G FORWARD.
S1H77                  BURNS                    N 2 7 3 1 S T S N 2 7 1 9 I N C H A R G E S E R I A L 1 4 . B O T H 1 4 & 1 5 WERE
                                                B R I E F E D B Y N 2 6 1 2 WHO S A I D OR DER WAS WRONG R E T / S T I L E S
8 1 3 54 -             CRAW FOR D               N 2 7 1 9 S T S N 2 6 1 ? WAS I N C H A R G E OF H I S S E R I A L 1 4 & 1 3 .
                                                B R I E F E D B Y N 2 6 1 2 3 1 1 0 Q . D I D N ' T S E E H I M BT W N 1 4 3 0 - 1 5 3 0 .
S I 357                R 1 CM                   N 1 9 3 ON D U T Y S E R I A L 1 5 W I T H B U R N S 2 7 3 1 & W O R K I N G W I T H
                                                CRA W F OR D N 2 7 1 9 & W H I T E N 2 6 1 2 WHO WERE I N CHARGE. S E R 1 4
S I 357                R IC H                   IM261H B R I E F E D T H E S E R IA L . & A F T E R I N C I D E N T A T T E N D E D
                                                D E B R I E F IN N S T A N D W I T H N 1 9 3 & C A L V E R T N 2 5 8 7
S I 377                SQRSBY                   N 4 5 5 5 S T S HE PUT A F I L T E R I / F           OF T / S T I L E B & A L L O W E D
                           .
                                                T I C K E T HOLDERS THRU GATE C AFTER N 2 6 1 2 CHECKED T IC K E T S
S18Q6                  SEWELL                   N 6 0 7 1 S T S N 2 6 1 2 P O S T E D L t P P I N G S LN TfRRACFS, A L W A Y S
                                                P O S T E D TO T H I S P O S I T I O N & I S V E R Y E X P E R I E N C E D .
S184D                   CREASER                 N 2 6 0 0 S T S N 2 6 1 2 U ND ER H I S COMMAND & R E S P O N S I B L E FOR
                                                P O L I C I N G LEPP L'NG S L N T / S T I L E S & CONCOURSE A R E A .
s ia 6 c '             ROTCHELL..               M 5 4 9 6 S T S H E L P E D N 2 6 1 2 C A R R Y F A N OUT OF A R E A NO B R E A T H
                                                B U T H AD P U L S E , S L A P P E D B A C K & F A N S S T A R T S B R E A T H I N G
S 1928                  !:•U1 LKR               N 2 7 2 5 S T S I N S E R IA L .     14 U ND E R N 2 7 1 9 H AD M A I N B R I E F I N G &
                                                THEN B R I E F E D B Y N 2 6 1 2 , P O S T E D T / S T I L E S A--G W I T H N 6 6 3 7
S 2 1S 3                N ORBU RN               N 5 5 8 9 S T S SAW F A N S E N V E R A S G A T E C O P E N D E D TO E J E C T
                                                2 0 0 MORE E N T E R E D WHEN I I " O P E N E D A G A I N N 2 6 1 2 A T GATE C.
S2220                  W A SHING TO N           N 2 7 2 8 S T S A TT E N D E D PRE MATCH B R I E F I N G I N S E R I A L 14
                                                N 2 7 1 9 & N 2 6 1 2 I N C H A R G E I N E R A R OF T / S T I L E S W S T A N D .
82223                  WH 1 T E                 N 2 6 1 2 STS LOOKED A F T E R K E Y S TO P E N G A T E S & G A T E S A B &
                                                C H E C K S P E N S E T C P R I O R & D U R I N G A S S I S T S B O D Y S I N GYM
S2406A                 WADSWORTH                N 5 5 9 3 S T S ON I N S T R U C T I O N S OF N 2 6 1 2 , WHO WAS C H E C K I N G
                                                T I C K E T ' S OF F A N S THRU G A T E C , S T A Y E D I N T H A T A R E A .
82580                  STREET                   M 2 6 9 2 ST'S W H I L S T W O R K I N G W I T H I N J U R E D 1 O L D B Y N 2 6 1 ?
                                                T O J O I N CORDO N NR TO S S T A N D & P L A Y E R S TUNNEL
S2774                  BO OT H                  N 7 8 3 9 S T S N 2 6 1 2 & N 2 7 4 5 E N T E R E D P O R T A G A R I N W I T H AN
                                                I N J U R E D F A N , SAW G A T E A B O U N C I N G THEN O P EN F A N S I N .
S3276                  BROWN                    N 1 0 7 6 3 AT A P P R O X 1 4 5 0 H R S WITH N 1 0 7 6 6 , AT G A T E A , SAW
                                                F A N S C R U S H E D 0 / S , N 2 6 1 2 A S K E D S T E W A R D S TO O P E N ; R E F U S E D
S3453                   DOWSON                  N 1 0 5 1 0 S I S SAW N 2 6 1 2 E N - - R O U T E TO W E ST ST A N D AND H AD A
                                                C O N V E R S A T I O N R E T H E O P E N I N G OF G A T E A .
S3618                   COLTON                  N 1 1 4 8 2 S T S WENT I N T O GROU ND WAS I N S T R U C T E D B Y N E 6 1 2 TO
                                                FOR M CORDON IN FRONT OF N S T A N D D I D SO F A N S WERE A N G R Y
S443                    DA IN                   N 8 5 0 S T S A P P R O X 1 4 3 0 SAW N P . 6 1 2 WHO S A I D TO C L O S E G A T E
                                                C & NOT O P E N U N L E S S FOR P O L G A V E S E C U R E D W I T H B O L T S
84-44                                                      | S T S C O L L E C T E D B I B & AT 1 1 2 8 H R S ALL.. S T E W A R D S WE ST
                       U --------- 1            STAND G IV E N 5 M IN B R I E F I N G BY N 2 6 1 2 . N 2 6 1 2 BLAC K BEARD
S4-4 8                  CARDWELL.               N 2 9 6 9 & GROUND 1 1 1 5 H R S E N T E R V I A G A T E C SAW 2 S T E W A R D S
                                                ON G A T E A T T E N D E D S E A T W S T A N D FOR B R I E F I N G FROM N 2 & 1 2
S453                                                         |S T S A T T E N D E D SWFC 1 1 1 0 H R S 1 5 0 4 8 9 A S S E M B L E D W I T H
                       u -------------1         O T H E R S T E W A R D S W S T A N D H AD B R I E F I N G OFF N 2 6 1 2
S454                                                          ST'S WENT S E A T E D A R E A W S T A N D TO C O L L E C T S T E W A R D S
                       4 --------------1        C L O A K FEW M I N S L A T E R WAS B R I E F E D BY N 2 6 1 2 RE P L A N S
                                                                                                                                      CG NT
                                                                                     PAGE    4


  N om ina1 no.  N 2 6 12
  Surname    WHITE                        Title    MR
  Forenames MARRY

      C ro s - r< •fsrence? conti nueds-
S493               MARSH        N3411 STS ARRIVED 3 GROUND 111h ATTENDED BRIEFING FIELD
                                BY N2612      WHO SPOKE OF FORGED TICKETS E T C .a) POST 1200
S56!r>A            BENNETT      N4275 STS SAW N2612 3 T/STILES KEPT IJUSY WITH FANS
                                COMING THRU HELD UP BY FANS ENTERING WITH WRONG TICKET
S578A              MCMANUS      N2721 (SERIAL 14) STS AT BRIEFING AT I..EPP INGS LN
                                TERRACE GIVEN BY INS WHITE RE EMERGENCY P R O CE E D U R E S .
97-15              NHSG1T       N3367 SAW N1037ft N261H ON PER TRACK HELPING SPECTATORS
                                CLIMB OUT OF PEN 4.
5839               BUR'f ON     m r / 3 0 sts SERIAL 14, N2719 N2612 IN CHARGE, POSTED A-G
                                T/STILES, OPEN 1130, SEARCHING LIVERPOOL FANS.
5840               FORD         N2741 STS AFTER BRIEFING N STAND 1000 WENT TO LEPP1NGS
                                LN TERRACES & WAS BRIEFED AGAIN BY N2612 RE POSTINGS
Sft42              MARTIN       N5923 STS WAS BRIEFED AT N STAND BY N2612. RE DUTIES
                                INSIDE GROUND AT W STAND T/STILES.
S844               LLEWELL YN   NP.736 STS AF'ltR FIRST BRIEFING ATTENDED MORE DETAILED
                                BRIEFING WITH INS WHITE N2612 IN LEPPINGS LN TERRACES.
8845               BRANSTON     N2724 STS N261E 01C SERIAL 14 & ORDERED SERIAL TO
                                SEARCH ENTERING FANS EVEN IF ALREADY BEEN SEARCHED
5646               WILD         N27H7 STS BRIEFED BY N2612 AFTER MAIN U R 1 E F 1 N G ,POSTED
                                SNACK BAR, RE SECURITY, ROBBERY THERE AT 1988 MATCH.
5647               AITKIN       N2733 STS BRIEFED 101b N STAND,IN SERIAL 13 WITH N2731
                                FURTHER BRIEFING 1113 WITH SERIAL 14 BY N2612 RE D U T Y ■
S»!.>0             PEARSON      N5933 STS WAS GIVEN MORE DETAILED BRIEFING 1015 HRS IN
                                WEST STAND WITH SERIAL 15 & 14 BY INS WHITE N2.V12.
SB66               WRIGHT       N2745 TOOK S E M 1-CONCIOUS 11YR OI..D LAD TO PORTACABIN IN
                                CONCOURSE,USED AS PROPERTY STORE. ,L.EF f LAD WITH N2612.
S917               SHEARWOOD    N2713 STS WHILST A’ S STAND ENTRANCE ORDERED BY N2612
                                TO S i'AY ON STAIRS, 7 STEWARDS ON DUTY AT ENTRANCE.




                                   END OF REPORT
Incident        108    161297 OP931            NOMINAL RECORD PRINT

  N o^^ia I no.  N7 '116
  Surname    WOODCOCK                          Title
  forenames JOHN                      HOWARD

  Birthplace
  Dolf                Age      To          Sex M                    Ic
  Occupat ion   POL PCH359
  limp Ioyer/School name   S YORKSHIRE POLICE
  Height        to          Build
  Ha;r Colour
  Hair Type

  Lyes
  C o m p Ie x i a n

  Facial hair
  Glasses worn               Use
  Jew?}lery                                                              Accent

  Rec, injury? tattoos ,marks „scars, pecu 1 iar ities, a b n o rma 1 ities




  Knows Victim                     Mature of relationship
  At Scene                         F ingerprints

  CRO n urnher                        Local r ef . no NMPOl.E
  Blood Sample  U                   Group (A80)         Othe r
  Saliva Sample U                      Secreter U       Sus pe c'           L 1 im C o d e

  C 1o thi ng




  Other Free Text
 INFO FROM 0199




      Cross     references;•••
STREET             PATROLLED      LLPPINGS LN, HILLSBOROUGH,        SHEFFIELD
CATEGORY          REFERS TO      INJURED PERSONS
CATEGORY          LINK           POLICE OFF ICERS SERIAL     31     POLICE OFF ICF-RS ON DUTY 3
CATEGORY          ATTENDED       PRE MATCH BRIEFING                 BRIEFINGS
CATEGORY          WITNESSED      ALCOHOL OF'F ENCR.S/D 1SORDER      OFFENCES
CATEGORY          IN CORDON      STERILE AREA
CATEGORY          ATTENDED       DEBRIEF AFTER INCIDENT             BRIEFINGS
N2615             SPOKE TO       SYKES                    GORDON
IMJ?63E           LINK           MILLETT                  GRAHAM
N7103             LINK           PEARSON                  G
N/104             LINK           BLACKHAM
I       I          LINK
                                                                                             CONT
                                                                                               PAGE


  Nominal no.       N 7 "116
  8 u rnatn e WO GDC OC K                        i1,1e
  Fo re nam e s J OHN                 HOWARD

       0 ro r-.s ■ref erpn c e ? co n t i n u e d s
N7107                LINK              WADE
N7110                LINK              KEN "I                     D A V 1D           NEIL
N 7 111              I.INK             LANGLEY
N7112                LINK              RAYDQUI..D                    'TER            DENNI!
N 7 1 13             LINK              SMI FH
A4248                                  DC I ROSS? RE SERIAL 31 FULL LI81 01- OFFICERS TO FOLLOW
S2238                SUBJECT            10-06-89 1    WOODCOCK
£>2211               PEARSON           N7103 STS WAS IN SLR            W)TH N *S     7113 7 1 1 1 7110
                                       /•116 7107 7112 7104 & N2632 WAS INS IN CHARGEn
S2238                WOODCOOIIX        N7116 STS S YORKS HOI. :iN SERIAL 31        /LN ISLAND W EN 'I "10
                                       GROUND 1300 HRS STOOD IN CORDON c••>11-R1LE AREA .
   i233                                             TS POSTED SERIAL 31 UNDF :K SUPERVISION OF N7103
                                       DOUBLED UP WITH N7116 TO PATROL . HALIFAX RD NR ISLAND




                                        END OF REPORT
Incident        IDS     161277 OP931                    NOMINAL RECORD PRINT

  N o nflrna 1 no.     N 2 74 7
  Surname        HUCKSTER!--'                           T 11 1e   MR
  f o r e name <5 8 RI AN                   RO B ER ’

  B :Lr t h p lace
  DoB                      Age                               Bex M      Ic
  Occupation       POL P C 1 15
  Employer/School name                  IACKENTHORPE PSTN
  Height           to                   B u i.I.d
  Hair Colour
  Hair Type

  Eyes
  Complexion

  Facial hair
  Glasses worn                    Use
  Jewellery                                                               Accent

  Rec »injury, tattoos ,marks ,scars ,pecul iarities ,abnormal ities




  Knows Victim                           Nature of relationship
  At Beene                               F i ngerprints

  CRO number                                 Local ref. no DPPE
  Blood Sample  U                         Gr oup (A S O )    Ot he r
  Saliva Sample U                             Secreier U     Suspect           Elim Code

  C 1o thi ng




ADDRESS            ON DUTY              HACKF.NTHORPE P S T N , OCCUPATION LN, HACKL'NTHORPE, SHEFF1
CATEGORY           LINK                 POLICE OFFICERS SERIAL 16 POLICE OFFICERS ON DUTY 3
CATEGORY           WITNESSED            GATE C CROWD ENTRY              CROWD SURGES OUTSIDE
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            MAIN BLUE STEEL GATES O/S       CROWD SURGES OUTSIDE
CATEGORY           REf-ERB 10           MOUNTED POLICE.                 POLICE FORCES
CATEGORY           BRIEFING a           NORTH STAND AT GROUND           STANDS AT GROUND
CATEGORY           ASSISTED             DECEASE-D
CATEGORY           WITNESSED            UNAUTHOR ISED ACCESS
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            PERSONS ARRES'l fcD
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            COMMUNICAT tONS AT GROUND
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            PEN 3 STANDING                  WEST STAND
CATEGORY           POSTED TO            POLICE OUTSIDE KATES            POSITION OF POLICE
CATEGORY           WITNESSED            POLICE AT PER 1METER FENCE      POSITION OF P O L 3CE
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            STERILE AREA
CATEGORY           REFERS TO            INTERNAL GAVE' PEN 3
CATEGORY           ENTERED              CONCOURSE                       WEST STAND
                                                                                                CONT
    •
                                                                                     PAGE


  Nominal no,    N2747
  Surname    HUCKSTEPP                     T i1 1e   MR
  F orename s BRIAN               ROBERT

      C ross-•references continuedf-
CATEGORY         060689      WITNESSES FOR INQUCRY
CATEGORY         policed     TURNSTILES
NH617            LINK        PURDY                    ROBERT           M
N2743            I.INK       PAYNE                    STEPHEN          JOHN
MS 745           LINK        WRIGHT                   GRAHAM
N27SO            LINK        TAYLOR                   ALISTAIR         JOHN
A>2069                       SUP 1" TAYLOR ; RE SERIAL 16 -- FULL LIST OF OFFICERS FOL
S863             SUBJECT     07-DS-89 HUCKST EP
SS63A            SUBJECT     25.05.89 HUCKSTEPP
D3363            SUBJECT     15-11-89 TRANSCRIPT J I .N2747 HUCKSTEPP
S'863            HUCKSTEPP   N2747 STS 0/S T/STILES FORCED INSIDE DUE TO CRUSH SAW
                             GATE C OPEN TWICE fOH KANS. HELPED HASS DEAD OUT PENS
8863 A           HUCKSTEPP   N 2 7 4 7 MADE SMENT ID TO S863 OTHER THAN LAST PARAGRAPH
                             WHICH HAS BEEN OMITTED INDEXING & ACTIONS ON 1ST SMENT
S864              TAYLOR     N2730 STS POSTED TO SERIAL 16 0/3 L.EPPINGS LN T/STILE
                             A WI TH N2747.
Ml 138           POLICE OFF  MESSAGE STS THAT S863 HAS BEEN OB I'D FROM PC H U C K S T K P P .
M 1297                       LIST OF POLICE OFFICERS WHO HAVE SUBMITTED THERE
                             RECOI .LECTIONS OF THE INCIDENT. SUBJECT INCLUDED
D3363            HUCKSTEPP   TRANSCRIPT JI N2747 HUCKSTEPP COMMENCED 060689




                                   END OF REPORT
Incident      108      161S97 0P931            NOMINAL RECORD PRINT

  No^fcal n o „ N7286
  Bur name  RAMSDEN                            T it 1e   MR
  For enames ALAN                     ANDREW

  tfi rt h p lace
  DoB                   Age      To              Sex M               Ic.
  Occupation      POL FC2347
  L.mployer/ School name     S Y0RI<8H 11\E P0L 1CE
  Height          to          Build
  Hair Colour
  Hair Type

  Eyes
  Complexion

  Facial hair
  Glasses worn              Use
  JeweJlery                                                            Accent

  R e c . injury,tattoos,m a r k s ,s cars ,peculiar it i e s ,afanorrnalit ies




  Knows Victim                     Nature of relat ionshi p
  At Scene                         Fingerprints

  CRO number                            Local ref , no NMPQI.E
  8 1 o o d S a m p 1e U            G r o u p (AB 0)     Other
  Saliva Sample U                         Ele c rete r U Suspect           fc'lim Code

  Clothing




  Other Free Text
 INFO FROM D 199




ADDRESS           PATROLLED       WAD8LEY BRIDGE RS'VN, HALIT AX RD„ WADS LEY BRIDGE, SHEI-T
CATEGORY          BRIEFING 3      NORTH STAND AT GROUND        STANDS AT GROUND
CATEGORY          POLICED         1..1VEEP OOL SUP P OR TER S  SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY          LINK            ADVERSE COMMENTS             RECOGNI H O N
CATEGORY          LINK            POLICE OFFICERS SERIAL 37    POLICE OFFICERS ON DUTY 3
CATEGORY          WITNESSED       UNAU TlIORISED ACCESS
CATEGORY          CRITICISES      COMMUNICATIONS AT GROUND
CATEGORY          POLICED          TRAINS                      TRANSPORTATION
CATEGORY          SAW OPEN        GATE A
CATEGORY          NFA             ADVERSE COMMENTS RE POLICE RECOGNITCON
CATEGORY          LINK            MOVEMENT/REQU&S1S OF N1109
CA TEGORY         REFERS TO       PA/TANNOY SYSTEM AT GROUND COMMUNICATIONS AT GROUND
                                                                                       CONT
                                                                                                                                          PAGE   2


   Nominal no,  N7286
   Surname  RAMSDEN                                                      Title       MR
   Forenames ALAN                                            ANDREW

        Cross-references                    continueds-
C A T r 'G O R V _______ B T A T F M l - N r _____T N . I U R I - n   POI TCP   OF F T C FR R______ S O U T H   Y O R K S H IR E   P O L IC E




                                                               END Of REPOR T'
j Tici dent,     108   16"!297 0P9:-M                 NOMINAL RECORD PRINT
      m
  Normmal no,         N8U&4
  Bu r name      POWELL.                              Tit 1e
  F o r e nam e s RAYMOND                 LLOYD

  I-!i r t h p lace
  i»oR                  Age      To               Sex M                      Ic
  0 c cu pa t io n POL PC2302
  Employer/School name      EC'CLT SF )FIL.D PSTN
  Height            to        Build
  l-iair Colour
  Hair Type

  Lyes
  C o m p i e x io n

  K a c ia ) ha i r
  Glasses worn                Use
  Jewellery                                                                       Accent

  Rec. i nj u r y ,tattoos ,marks ,scars , pe cul iar ities ,abnormal it ies




  Knows Victiru                      Na t u.r e o f r e>1a I i o n s h i p
  At Scene                           F ingerpr ints

  CRO nuruber                           L.ocaJ ref. no NMPOLE
  Blood Sample         U              Group (ABO)        Othe r
  B a 1 iva Barn p 1 e U                 Becreter U      Bus pe ct                   fc'lim Code

  C 1othing




  0 1hier I-ree 1 ext
 INFO FROM D 199      CTD DUTIES OUTSIDE GROUND •- FOOT PATROL, MIDDLE WOOD RD.




    Cross       references:-
STREET             PA‘lROLLED       MIDDLEWOOD RD, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD
CATEGORY           LINK             VIEWED VISUAL EVIDENCE
CATEGORY           PL CLOTHES       POIJCE OFFICERS ON DUTY 3 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POL
CATEGORY           ASSISTED         GYMNASIUM AT GROUND
CATEGORY           BRIEFED AT       NORTH STAND AT GROUND        STANDS AT GROUND
CATEGORY           REFERS TO        L IVERPOOL SUPPORTERS        SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY           ASSISTED         DECEASED
CATEGORY           ATTENDED         PRE MATCH BRIEFING           BRIEF1NGS
CATEGORY           WITNESSED        BEHAVHOUR OFFENCES           OFFENCES
CATEGORY           USED             ADVERT CSING HOARDINGS
N8039              LINK             SCATF-E                ALAN             J AMES
NS066              LINK             OBRIEN                 CHRISTOPHER      ANTHONY
                                                                                                   CON"!
                                                                                     PAGE


  N o itii na 1 no n N8064
  Q
  Siu.r naivie P GWP1LI.                    T 1 tie
  F orenames RAYMOND               ..LOYD

     Or o s s i"efere n ce s continued r,'
N3084             REFERS TO      MOULDING                    PH CLIP          MICHAEL
A 4701                           DC 1 ROSS "(0 I..IAI SI". WITH S YORKS POL & OBT FROM BET..ow
A7&43                            DC I TOPE TO CONSIDER SHOWING PC2302 POWELL VISUAL EV ID
Sc?823            BUB J EC "I    30-04- 89 POWELL
32209             OBRIEN         N8066 STS IN PLAIN CLOTHES WENT BRIEFING FIELD BY IM1108
                                 ON FOOT PATROL WITH N8064 RE STREET CRIME ETC
S2825             POWELL         N8064 SfS AT BRIEFING N STAND ASSIGNED PLAIN CLOTHES
                                 M1DDIEWOOD RD WITH N8U66 RE THEFTS „ SUPERVISOR N 8 0 3 9 .
SHS25             POWELL         N8064   DESCBS SCENE AT" G Y M » CARRIES BODIES FROM PITCH
                                 TO GYM. LATER HELPS SEARCH/ID BODIES WITH UNIFORM POL




                                   END OF REPORT'
                                                        Discipline & Complaints Department
              So u th Yorksh ire
                                                        Hillsborough Scrutiny

              POLICE                                    50 Windsor Road
                                                        Heeley
             JUSTICE      with   COURAGE
                                                        SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX. 0114 296 3113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                                 ^                     \ <k ei r]

To:                                   U * A\ . P.

For the attention of:

Comments:




From:
                                  1                              *       1
Telephone Number:                         ouv*

Number of Pages (including this page)               2
In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
0 9 - 0 ^ ^ 97 ( TUE)     12^51                                   T E L : 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13    3 113      P. 0 0 1




  ** C O N F I R M A T I O N REPORT   **




 T R A N S MI S S I O N
 T RA NS AC T ION(S)      C O MPLETED



   NO.    DATE/TIME            DESTINATION                  DURATION PCS                STATUS      MODE

   114    DEC.     9 12=38                   901 216264160 0* 12’ 56*   022             OK          N ECM
Incident       108      U91H9/ 0P931                 NOMINAL RECORD PRINT

  N n a J. no . N 131
  Surname    GRUDER                                  Title
  Fore name s 0EREK                     WI L.L.IAM

  0 i rt h place
  DoR | __________       Age         To                  Sex M       lc
  Occupation      POL. PC7808 F DIVISION
  Employer/School name       HALEWOOD FS'I'N
  l-leight       to           Bui J.d
  Hair Colour
  l-lair Type

  E„yes
  Comp J.ex ion

  f a c .1a ) ha i r
  Glasses worn               Use
  Jewellery                                                               Accent

  Rec . inj u ry ,ta ttoos ,marks ,s cars ,pecul iar i't ies ,abnormal it ies




  Know* Victim                      Nature of relationship
  At Scene                          Y inger pr i nt <s

  CRO number                           Local ref. no NMPOLE
  Blood Sample           U           Group <A 8 0 )    Other
  S a 1 iv a S a rnp 1 e U              Secreter U     Sus pec t             E 1im Code

  Clothing




  <)t h e r Free 1 e x t
 FROM D6




     C ross-references!-
ADDRESS        CUSTOMER            GATEWAY S U P E R M A R K E T x HAL. IFAX HD, WADSLEY BRIDGE
TELEPHONE      BUS4316             05 "I       7096010
CATEGORY       81H2H A FJ          BODY 51 WILLIAMS N619                   DECEASED
CA itGORY      REFERS TO           PRESS & PHOTOGRAPHERS                   MEDIA RE GROUND
CATEGORY       REFERS TO           SI JOHNS AMBULANCE                      AMBULANCE SERVICE
CATEGORY       POSIriON            NORTH STAND AT GROUND                   STANDS AT GROUND
CA'lEGORY      LINK                LIVERPOOL. SUPPORT l-IRS                SUPPORTERS
CA TEGORY      S1ZS2               APPRECIATION OF POLICE                  RECOGNITION
CATEGORY       LINK                ADVERSE COMMENTS                        RECOGNITION
CATEGORY       LINK                POLICE OFFICERS OFF DUTY                MERSEYSIDE  POLICE
CATEGORY       WITNESSED           UNAU'I HOR ISED ACCESS
CATEGORY       REFERS fO           POSITION OF POLICE
                                                                                                  CONT
                                                                                     PAGE

    •
  Nomi nal no.   N131
  Surname    BRUDER                            Title
  Fore name s DEREK               W.CL.LI AH

        Cross •-references conti nued s
CATEGORY           SI 222       BRAVERY ACTS                     RECOGNITION
CATEGORY           LINK         TRAFFIC ROADWORKS                TRAFFIC PROBLEMS
CATEGORY           REFERS TO    GATE A
CATE-GORY          REFERS TO    ADVER T'1S 1IMG HOAR DINGS
CATEGORY           NF A         ADVERSE COHHENTS RE POLICE RECOGNITION
CATEGORY           VIEWED       PHOTOGRAPHS OF DECEASED          DECEASED
CATEGORY           WITNESSED    FANS OVER PER IMETER FENCE
CATfeGORY          LINK         GAVE FIRST AID
CATEGORY           WITNESSED    SPION KOP DISORDER
A6044                            U) & ESTABLISH RESULT OF DETENT JON OF YOUTH WHO RAN ON
A6567                           PC 7808 13RUDER TO BE SHOWN PHOTOGRAPHS OF BODY 51.
S 1'd'fi/1         SUBJECT      V.2.05-89 IfRUDER
S122HA             SUBJECT      17--M8-89 BRUDER
S 1HEPR            SUBJECT      03™05-90 BRUDER
R25                SUBJEC f     17-04-39 8 RUDER
GSL574             SUBJECT      22-05--&9 BRUDER
HI 393             SUBJECT      01-“06— 89 BRUDER
MH163              SUBJECT      14-05-90 BRUDER
MJ252              SUBJECT      27 •04-89 BRUDER
D 17 "10           SUBJECT      03-06-89 COPY ARTICLE FOR TIMES 170489 - BRUDER N131
SI HE2             BRUDER       IM131 WITNESSED ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION. TRIED TO REVIVE
                                BELL N621 (BODY 5?) . STS POLICE NOT CO-ORDINATED.,
S1222A             BRUDER       N131 STS SHOWN PHOTO* OF D E C •D BY 1       1& l      L SEEN
                                GIVING FIRST AID TO U/K B O D Y „DOES NOT IDENT (BODY 51).
S 12228            8RUDER       1M131 MAKES FURTHER STA TEMNET FOR THE CORONER RE HIS
                                DEALINGS WITH BODY 51,                     FEELING PUL Sir .
R25                BRUDER       150489   ATTENDED   MATCH  OFF  DUTY. AVAILABILITY DATES
                                SUB MIT TED,.
(SSL.574           □RUDER       IM131 STS TOO MANY FANS FOR NUMBER OF SEATS. RESUS FAN.
                                MADE 31222 (ALREADY INDEXED) SO <iSL NOT INDEXED,
M13V3              BRUDER       on VLLS DETB OF PHOTO IN THE TIMES DATED 170489, SHOWS
                                BRUDER IM"131, RESUS.i TATING A YOUNG FAN.
M2163              BRUDER       ORIGINAL STATEMENT (S1222B) OF IM131 ENCLOSED. TYPED
                                VERSION INC AS ADDENDUM IN CORONERS FILE RE BODY 51.
M25H               BRUDER       OFF DUTY PC ASSISTED IN FIRST AID TO A MAN WHO DIED
                                WHILST HE WAS ADMCNISTERING FIRST AID. HEROIC ACTION.
D171U              BRUDER       COPY OF TIMES 170489, SHOWS OFF DUTY POLICE OFFICER
                                BRUDER N"I3"I , RESUS I TAT ING A YOUNG FAN.
D6                 POL ICE OF F LIST' OF MERSEYSIDE POLICE OFFICERS OFF DUTY SHOWS
                                ■SUBJECT




                                   END OF HI-;PORI
Incident         IOS        091H97 OP931           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER    S1?SH

                                                                                              Station

Su r nam e                   BRUDER

r o renames                  DEREK    WILLIAM

Age                                                        Date of birth

A d d re s a                 MERSEYSIDE POLICE, »K' DIVISION,
                             HALEWOOD P S T N , L IV E R P O O L „

Occupation                   POL PC7808 F DIVISION

Telephone

 1C                          Height                        Build

Hair    colour

Hair type

Lye s                                                      Complexion

Facial         hai r

Glasses                      Use                           Accent

Number of Pages IS

Dated                        2704S9                                               D W   BRUDER Signed


                I am a serving Police Officer with Merseyside Police,, on Saturday 15th

                April       1989 (130489)   1 was off duty and went to support Liverpool          in

                the match against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Ground.

                I went to the game ?n my own car with my friend

                                                 i-le had bought our tickets for seats        in the

                North Stand for £14.00,          from Liverpool     football   club supporters   club 1

                thi n k .

                We drove to the ground via HuddersfieId where 1 dropped my sister off

                at Polytechnic and then carried on to Hillsborough.                 On the way to the

                ground there was a short delay at the Manchester                Interchange on the

                M6£ with roadworks.

                After we arrived at Sheffield 1 went with                               to the Gateway

                store on the continuation of Halifax Road.                 This being were we parked

                the car at about        1.10pm   (1310).     At the Gateway store there were
                                                                                 PAGE         Z
                                                                                 S 1£'2P

between £00-300 Liverpool fans.              We stayed with them and were allowed

into the store in smal)         numbers to buy drinks.                and 1 bought

four cans of lager between us and then went outside and sat on a

grass verge together with the other 200 300 fans and we drank two cans

each.    The group of fan's was well behaved and I d i d n ’t see any

drunkeness.       We were supervised by a Merseyside and South Yorkshire

Police Officer who were sat on two horses outside the Comet

Superstore.

Whilst    I. was sat on this verge everyone was happy and amenable and at

one point I saw a uniform Superintendent and Chief Inspector WALK                      past

us.    Between    1.4!:>prn and P.pn:    ( 134H)(1400)   the two mounted police

officers     came over and told          us it   was getting on and time to make        our

way to the* ground.        The whole crowd moved on without any problems at

all.    I remember   it was the Merseyside Officer who actually spoke to

the crowd.

We wa.3k.ed to the ground and when we got into Leppings Lane itself                    it

was packed with people even half a mile from the ground itself.

Because of the crowd my friend asked a policeman for directions to

the ground,      he was manning a junction either two or three              roads up

from the ground off Leppings             Lane.    He then directed us to go back        the

way we had come and round to             the Spion Kop end.     I didn't think that

was right but followed his directions and walked back the way we had

come and to the Spion Kop.              This was about 2.20pm     (1420).

We then went to the Spion Kop but three quarters of the way round on

Penistone Road I realised we were going totally the wrong way and we

walked back.

The time was getting on now and the walk                 round was long because a lot

of the connecting       roads between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road were

blocked by Police.         Because of the time I approached a police officer

on one of the barriers and he allowed us to take this short                   cut when I
                                                                         PAGE            3
                                                                         51 HE'?.

explained what, had happened and showed him my police warrant, card.                We

arrived back at, Leppings Lane at, E 3 0 pm (1430).     W h en _______ and 1

arrived back at the turnstiles there were no queues whatsoever and a

large mass of people all trying to get through the turnstiles and into

the ground.     It had reached the point of every man for themselves           in

order to get, to the turnstiles.

I made for and entered the far left hand side turnstile of turnstiles

1--16.    fhere was no police officer by my turnstile.      Over to my far

right I saw a number of police officers on horses.         1 could not see

any police officers on foot but could not, say whether this was

because there were none or they were blocked from my view by the

crowd.

Outside the ground my friend had both our tickets and to try and stay

together   I had hold of his jeans.   However,    the pushing of the

people was that much that, we were pushed apart and separated.

Once we were apart, J. decided tn make for the turnstile on my own.

         had got in before me and once I reached the turnstile he handed

my ticket out to me and I was allowed inside.         I handed my ticket into

the turnstile operator and retained the stub of the ticket.

I had difficulty in finding the entry point only by the misdirection

of the police officer,    but once I got back into Leppings Lane,        I found

the turnstile but had difficulties getting       in because of the sheer

number of people.    At the time of my entry I saw no gates open other

than the turnstiles.     I did not see any of the gates open.

As I was trying to get to the turnstiles     I saw about five or six

teenagers climb over a concertina gate immediately to the left of the

turnstiles.    After the first five or six went over I saw a number of

others climb to the top of this gate but then drop back into the crowd

outside as if there was someone in authority on the inside telling

them to get back.
                                                                             PAGE
                                                                             S 1 clZ'il

Once          and I had got into the ground 1 saw a police sergeant and

four constables immediately behind the concertina gate where 1 had

seen the teenagers     climb over.   I approached        the sergeant and said

something along the lines of ” 1 am a Police Officer from Merseyside,

theres a huge crowd outside and t h e y ’re pushing to get in,           can you do

something about it or get something don e? ” .           At this time,    I was with

         but, I did not, produce my warrant    card or formally identify

myself.     He made no reply to me and by this time it was close to

kick off time so I left, it at 'that.

Once inside the ground I saw no direction signs to my seat in the

North stand and had difficulty in finding it, because the sections of

seating were given letters of the alphabet,            however,   the letters did

not follow alphabetical     order ie A8KDGCM,     though 1 c an ’t, remember the

exact, order.

I entered the North Stand through a tunnel,            there was no crowd within

this tunnel and no problems at all.       I saw no Police within the

tunnel and only a few stewards right, at the beginning.

Once inside the ground I saw no alcohol         being drunk at, all.

1 took my seat along with            just as the two teams         came out onto

the pitch.      This was about 2.37 pm (1457).         Once through the

tunne)    and up the stairs,   1 went to the section of my seats where two

stewards directed us to our particular seats.             These were   right by the

entrance to this section of seating.          People    continued to enter after

me and after about ten minutes between ten and twenty people arrived

at this entrance and di d n ’t, appear to have tickets for this stand.                    I

actually saw two people holding tickets which were for the West

Stand.     This was after the incident   in pens 3 and 4 and people had

started to come out, onto the pitch.      Everyone started to discuss what

was going on and these two men said that, they should be in those pens

and showed the tickets which were complete without the counterfoil
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        SI 22?

being removed,

I experienced no persona)    crowd crush within the ground only that

outside which was about 2.45 pin              J. did not see any crowd

surge within the ground and was not injured.

At about, the time these men had appeared at the entrance to my section

of seating which was three quarters of the way along the North Stand

nearest to the Spion Kop about ten rows from the front,,         I saw people

climbing over the fences from pens three and four of the Leppings Lane

stand from kick off but initially they were directed behind hoardings

and sat near to the pitch.     I could not see whether they were directed

by stewards or Police.

After about five minutes a Police officer      ran on to the pitch and

stopped the game.     People then began to climb over the front fencing

onto the pitch at will and 1 could also see people          pulled up into the

seating area above.     At no point did i   see any gates opened to allow

escape from the pens.

Once play had been stopped the Nottingham forest fans in the Spion Kop

began to taunt the Liverpool Supporters.

A fan then ran onto the pitch and then ran up to the Spion Kop and

began shouting and making    'V   signs with two fingers at the forest

supporters.   Myself and other fans in the North stand began to shout

telling him to go away because we could see there was something wrong

in the Leppings Lane end.     This man who was in his early twenties with

long hair and a black capped sleeve T shirt was then turned back by

either stewards or Police and ran back towards Leppings Lane but was

detained by Police before he got back.

Another older man then ran up to the Spion Kop and then began to wave

his hands at the Forest fans.     He w a s n ’t taunting,   he was signalling

for them to calm down and trying to tell them there was something

wrong. Shortly after this the Police formed a cordon across the
                                                                     PAGE     £
                                                                     S12#»2

halfway line.      I*m not sure if this was after the first or second man,,

People in the Leppings Lane end then ripped down advertising hoardings

and began to carry people on them up towards the corner formed by the

Spion Kop and the North Btand.      1 could see that some of them were

presumed dead as they had coats over their faces and one man in

particular had a jumper pulled back to cover his face.       These   people

were then rolled onto the pitch and the carriers went      back for more

pea p1e or bodies.

The police then formed a further     cordon in front of the North stand.

Around the same time a number of people wearing tracksuit trousers and

sweatshirts    came from the direction of the players tunnel and went to

the Spion Kop end,     They then pulled down more hoardings here and went

to help carry more peop)e up from Leppings Lane.

A number of people were also carried up to the corner in front of me

bodily.   There were a large number of people    in this corner either

laid out behind the police on the pitch or sitting with their heads in

their hands.

1 did not see any of the Police in the cordon in front, of the North

Btand break ranks to assist these people,

1 saw one person on the pitch about a quarter of the pitch length away

from the Spion Kop about twenty feet from the hoardings      in front of

the North stand.      I distinctly remember this because   later on as 1

will describe an ambulance drove directly past us and a St J o h n ’s

AiriJ/uJ ance man who was with rue tried to flag it down but it carried on.

S. am not, sure   if this man had been carried on a hoarding or by his

friend who was with him.      I saw this man lying on the floor having

convulsions.

1 he Police cordon in front of the North Btand appeared unconcerned and

'smarmy', this agitated the supporters     in the stand who were shouting

for them to go and help the people on the pitch.      None of the Police
                                                                                PA lit.
                                                                                SI SEE

officers      J.eft t h e cor >1o n »

X was? very close to the pitch so I went down the aisle?                over a small

five foot wail with hoardings on,               I walked through the cordon without

being    challenged at all and then went to the man having              convulsions.

Almost      immediately 1 was joined by a St J o h n ’s Ambulance m a n .       I

identified myself to the St Johns man as an off duty Police Officer.

He then said to me " You do mouth to mouth and 1*11 do heart massage".

1 then took his pulse iri his neck.               1 could feel a slight    pulse-     1

then commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and the St J o h n ’s man

started heart massage..            1 undid two buttons on the top of the m a n ’s

shirt.       If I remember rightly the bottom of the shirt appeared

ri pped .

We continued to work on the man but after about five minutes he went

grey and his face was withdrawn.               As I had approached the man his head

had moved as if he was being sick.               When I got to him I cleared his

mouth and the back of his throat                        before commencing mouth to

mouth resuscitation.                                                   After about

five minutes when the man went grey,




After about seven minutes               1 swapped peaces with the St John^s

Ambulance man and he commenced mouth to mouth and I heart massage.                        As

I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally prominent                 in the whole

of his rib cage even though he was only thinly built.                  His stomach

was depressed and abnormally               lower than his ribcage.

After a short time I undid the button on his trousers and ripped open

the zip-       1 then continued heart massage..

Shortly afterwards an ambulance entered the ground.                  It appeared to be

a. Hea3'th Authori ty ambulance as opposed to St Johns.               It began to

drive down towards Leppings Lane.                I then told the St J o h n ’s man to
                                                                                   PAGE
                                                                                   S1 22H

try and stop it.     He tried to flag it down but it continued on as if

it had been ordered not to stop in the top corner but to go to the

Leppings Lane end.

The St J o h n ’s man then rejoined me and continued to give mouth to

mouth resuscitation.

Bhortly after this we were joined by one of the men I described

earlier    in the tracksuit trousers and I think green sweatshirt.                     He

asked me if 1 was a) 1 right and knew what              1 was doing.

I said "J'.'lm an off duty bobby,         (*m ail    right", with that he left as if

to go somewhere where he could be of more use with other                     injured

persons.

Shortly after this man, which must, have been about six minutes since                        1

had changed places with the St Johns man, a female St Johns Ambulance

officer came     over and pushed me out               ofthe way and took        over from me.

I then stood up and watched as she was               obviously better trained in

First Aid than me.

I then stood, by the injured man together with his friend who had been

there all along,    telling us to keep going and not to let his mate die.

Within two minutes of this,            the St Johns Ambulance man told the St

Johns Ambulance woman,         "ile,'s gone", and stood up.         I looked at the

m a n ’s friend who was standing by his head,            he was completely grey.

8y this time,      1 felt   ill myself and            just turned away as there was

no t hi ng else I cou 1 d do

1 would describe the man who            died ass- between      17 and ?0 years of age,

approx V 6      5*9 tall,      short    sandy or reddish coloured hair,          slim

build,    no facial hair, white         european,    1 could   see no cuts or

abrasions on him.      i   seem to      remember freckles      on his cheeks,     but I ’m

not sure :                                          I ’m almost   positive    it was

freckles.    As 1 said previously he had an unusually prominent, rib cage

and depressed stomach.
                                                                                PAGE
                                                                                S I dc'.'d

He was wearing a light,      possibly white button up shirt,            light grey or

beige cotton trousers,                       boxer shorts.           I noticed no

jewellery or footwear.

His friend 1 would describe as £1 or 2£ years of age,                dark brown hair,

shortish hair,   about *:>’9 tall.     1 cannot   remember much of his clothing

but he appeared quite    plump with a slight beer belly.              He had no

facial   hair nor glasses.

The St J o h n ’s man was in uniform,    the only thing       I can remember was

that he had dark hair and was thirty plus years of age.

The St John's woman was in uniform again very slimly built                and   no

older than IB years of age.

After the St John's man had said        the man was dead I'd seen         enough,

I felt ill and had to get out of        the ground.        I knew         would have

stayed where he was because he knows no First, Aid.                 1 went over to the

wall where   X had climbed in.       As 1 got there    t    saw a photographer

kneeling down with an orange tabard he was taking photographs of the

injured and dying.

A fan who was already on the pitch went over to him and said “Fuck

off, you're taking pictures of my injured mates".

The photographer carried on taking pictures so the fan started pushing

him.     The photographer stood up and the        i'an then pushed him back to

the w a i 1 and tried to take the camera from him.            The camera then swung

and smashed into the wall.       1 then climbed over the wall using the

photographers    case as a step.      1 then rejoined

He said to me "Come on we're going",        and we both then lePt.           1 cannot

say what, time this was.

Whilst at Hillsborough the only criminal offences were of a. minor

public order nature ie, the fans        climbing over the gates etc.            APter

the disaster within the stand,        1 saw a number of instances such as

the photographer's    camera and sausage rolls thrown at the cordon in
                                                                              PAGE    10
                                                                              S12E2

front of the North Stand and one old man who threw a cup of tea at an

officer   in the rordnn.

This was caused purely by agitation amongst, the crowd by the apparent

callousness of the photographer and apparent             inactivity of the police

with regard to the injured and. dying™

I witnessed no serious offences.

There were a number of factors which 1 believe contributed to the

number of deaths and injuries.

Outside the ground there appeared to be             alack   ofco-ordination

between the mounted and foot police officers. The approach                roads to

the ground, were well manned, with Police officers at junctions and

outside pubs and off licences.           However,    X made a comment about being

misdirected b y     the police officer to another officer and he said it

was understandable because a lot of the officers were drafted in from

outside stations and had poor local knowledge of the area.                This may

have contributed to the build up outside the ground which caused the

initial   crush o ut s i d e ..

Inside the ground once the disaster had occurred there appeared a lack

of co — o rdi nat i.on between senior police officers and lower ranks on the

pitch.    The actual      scale of the incident wasn't appreciated

immediately which resulted in a delay in the response and personnel

being despatched to deal with it.

F rom my own personal experience         X and most, Police officers have only

basic First Aid knowledge.           When 1 administered first aid to the man 1

felt, totally inadequate on reflection.             However with that   particular

man,   1 d o n ’t think more knowledge would have helped but it might have

in others.

1 would also     like to add that though the Police in the cordon did not

assist the    injured and dying       I saw a number of other officers who did.

In particular two small           policewomen who tried to help a very large man
                                                                        PAGE
                                                                        SV d??.

           but couldn’t carry him until helped by fans.




                                                          D W fcSRUDF.R SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PL ACE 5

             TIMES

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURES

 OF F 1CERS y I GNATUREs

END OF REPORT
1n c„i d e n t    3DM    091 £97       OF'9 3 1               DOCUMENT       RECORD PRINT

                                                                                     STATEMENT NUMBER               SI&eiHA

                                                                                                                St at j.o n

 Surname                     BRUDER

 F-o rename?                 DERF.K     WILLIAM

 Age                                                              Date of birth

 Address                     HALEWOOD POLICE LFI A 1 3ON
                             HALEWOOD , L t VERPOOL.■

 Occupation                  POL PC78US F DIVISION

 Telephone

 1C                          He ight                              Liu i Id

 Ha i.r c o 1o u r

 Ha:i r type

 IIyes                                                            Compi ex ion

 FaciaI h a 1r

 Glasses                  Use                                     A c.c e n t

 N u mbe r oP P ages S

 Dated                       17U889                                                                    D BRUDER Signed


                 Further to my previous statement dated H7 April                            19 6 9    (5=!7D489).

                 On 17th August          1989 (170889),          1 was shown photographs taken at the

                 Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 13th April                         1989 <130489)          by

                        and                       1 can

                 (Ref . No   »                (Ex    .   No

                 (Ref. N o .                  (Ex. No

                 (Ref. N o .                  (E x   .   No

                 (Ref. No                     (i£x . No

                 (Ref. No .                   (Elx » No

                 (Ref. N o   .                (Ex. NO                 )

                 On the above mentioned photographs                       f. am administering first aid to an

                 unknown male,         .1 cannot         remember his face but 1 remember the

                 boxer shorts he was wearing.

                 '.( have also been shown a photograph of Kevin Daniel                               WILL IAMB, No. 31,
                                                                                             p
                                                                                 B 1£*.£2A

            but 1 am unable to say if this i       the person i. am treating, as 1 can

            only remember the clothing.



            D BRUDER




                                                                      D BRUDF.H SIGNED

 STATEMENT FAKEIM
           PL.AC Ids

              TIME 5             DATEs    170889

 WI TNb.SS TO S J.t.iNA IURE s

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE.:

END OF REPORT
Incident       1Pis    091297 OF1931              DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                                             STATEMENT NUMBER     81222B

                                                                                                Stat ion

burname                BRUDER

Ko renames              DEH ILK    WILLIAM

Age                                                   Da t e o f b i r t It

A d dret. s             MER BEYS ILK.: POL
                        *F* D I V , HALEWOOD P S T N , LIVERPOOL

Occupatj on             POLICE OFFICER MERSEYSIDE POL

Te J.ephone

1C                      He? g!it                      H u i 3d

Ha i r c o 1ou r

Hai r type

Lyes                                                  C o rnp 1e x io n

Facial hair

Glasses                Use                            A c ce n t

Number of Pages 7

Dated                  030590                                                          D BRUDER S i q ne d.


              Further to my previous statements of P.7 April                   1989 (2704-89) and 17

              August   1989 (170889),        3 have been asked to think about a number of the

              points which are raised in the statement                    I made nearly a fortnight

              after the l!i13sborough Stadium disaster on IS April                   1989 (150469).

              Before clarifying a number of these points                    I would point out that I

              have today been shown a number of photographs,                    plans and documents by

              Inspector SAWERS of West Midlands Police which I have viewed to refresh

              my memory.     I t ’s also fair to say that my first statement                (H7.4.89)

              (270489) was the first occasion that involvement with the disaster was

              set down in any detail,          in writing,       although I did make some brief

              notes myself on Sunday 16 April          1989 (160489).            I retain these    in my

              possession and would say that they do no relate to my dealings with any

              deceased casualty that day.

              I am a single man and joined Merseyside Police on 27 October                      198/
                                                                                PAGE         2
                                                                                  S 1PE2B

(271087).     During   initial training at Bruce District Training Centre,

Warrington,    I received basic first aid instruction in both

theoretical and practical application.              1 obtained a pass and was

issued with an identifying          card qualifying me for,       1 think 2 or 3

years.   On 13 April     1939 (150489)        1 had received no further    instruction

or refresher training in basic first aid.              However,   as a direct      result

of the situation I found inyself in on the day of the disaster                I

personally felt inadequately equipped in either theory or

practise of first, aid.        1 am absolutely satisfied that the first aid

1 rendered in terms of mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage

were correct and that I could have done no more,             but, nevertheless,          I

felt   I di dn ’t know enough and regretted not, having taken that aspect

of initial training seriously enough.

For these   reasons,    1 applied on rny own iniat.ive for further first aid

training in the form of a one week full time             course leading to

qualificat ion as a first, aid public: order trained officer,              3. undertook

the course in June      last year, which means        1' now have a special       role

within public: order deployments to treat            casualties either of members

of the public or police officers as injuries occur.

As a result of that course,          1 feel    confident and much better equipped

to deal with injured people whether those injuries be minor or life

threatening.     It also       confirms that in fact,, my actions were      right on

the day and my attempts at resuscitation,             although unsuccessful were

Pr o pe r Jy a dm inistered«

1 will   now deal with a number of specific points from my original

statement   (27.4.89)    (270489),     using the page numbers of that statement,

1 understand that, the numbers         1 will use in brackets are those of the

file of statements      contained in respect, of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS,

prepared by West Midlands Police under the deceased reference number
                                                                               PAGE              3
                                                                               S 'I2 2 H 8

On page 6 (File page 41)        I first refer to the youth I now know to be

Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS lying a 1/4 3 ength of the pitch from the; Spion

Kop.     I refer to him been "on the ■floor11, meaning the pitch surface,

arid "having convulsions".        I have thought about this       carefully today

and with the added benefit of my training I can say that this was not a

process that lasted for any time.            It certainly w a s n ’t anything similar

to an epileptic fit,     for example.        It was an impression that       J. had

which I originally associated with the lad



                           ]»    I will    correct further references                        as

they occur in my original        statement.

On page 7 (4£)     I describe approaching the body.           Hewas notconvulsing

as I did so (line 3).

1 refer to feeling for a carotid pulse           in the neck and said original I y

that    I thought I could detect a slight        pulse however I now feel that               I

am able to correct this,         I felt for the pulse with my first two

fingers of my left hand,        I believe,    to the carotid artery I cannot say

absolutely that 1 felt for the pulse before              I started mouth to mouth or

after,   nor indeed whether      1 did both simultaneously.        Whilst, I would

now have much more skill,        on the day I cannot say with absolute

certainty that I went, accurately,           straight, to the carotid artery,

for all these reasons,      1 can say that 1 felt for a pulse in the region

of the carotid artery,      but I may have also touched the area of the

"Adams App3e" or felt something           in the neck    region which I   originally

thought was a pulse but may have been mistaken.

1 refer to the face going "grey" and his "face was withdrawn."                   l

cannot say specifically that this was a change from normal                pallet" to

grey,    or what   1 now know to be cynosis       or blueness. I mentioned           it in

the sequence of when I became aware of            i.t.

1 refer to approaching the lad and having the impression that his head
                                                                                                                                                                                  PAGfc           4
                                                                                                                                                                                  S1222B

moved          and        a s s o c ia tin g               th is           w ith       h is        b e in g      s ic k .                 I    am     now          a b s o lu te ly

s a tis fie d             th a t         he     was        not         s ic k ,

                    The        movement                 of        th e      head,            i f    th a ts          what             i t      was,           I    w o u ld         say      its


best         d e s c rib e d             as     a     ''tw itc h '.

I     re fe r       to      c le a rin g              h is        m ou th         b e fo re          re s u s c ita tio n ,                      by        th a t        1 mean             to

say      1     checked               th a t         h is     a irw a y            was        c le a r       b e fo re            e x p re s s in g                 a ir       in to       h is

m o u th .          There            was        a     flu id           of       some         d e s c rip tio n               but              1 accept                 re a d ily           th at,

th is        c o u ld      have           been          s p ittle               or     p h le g m .

1     re fe r       to     th e          man        g o in g          g re y      a fte r          about         5     m in u te s               and         a     ve ry

d is tin c tiv e               s m e ll         co m in g             fro m       h is       m o u th ,

its      tru e        to       say         1    can          s t i l l rem em ber                  i t     now        as        i t           caused              me    to     heave

and     fe e l        s ic k         m y s e lf.

1   re fe r         to      p e rfo rm in g                  m ou th to              m ou th       w h ils t          th e        St           John          a m b u la n ce m a n

d id     h ea rt          c o m p re s s io n                fo r       about            7   m in u te s .            W h ils t                th is         is        p u re ly

re c o lle c tio n               1       b e lie v e            i t    to       re a s o n a b ly           a c c u ra te .

H a v in g         changed               p la c e s        w ith           th e      Bt ,    Johns          A m b u la n c e                  man     I      re fe r          to

fe e lin g          what         1       th o u g h t        was           an     unusual                rib     cage            and           abdomen.                       A

p h o to g ra p h          I    have            been          shown             at     post         m o rte m         appears                    to        suggest                th is .

1     re fe r       to     u n z ip p in g              th e          la d s      tro u s e rs            a t    th is           p o in t           and           in    my        second

s ta te m e n t           re c o lle c t              th e                             boxer             s h o rts      w h ic h               X have              seen           in

p hi o t o g r a p h s         (Re f           No

I   have           been        shown            d o cu m e n ts             w h ic h         p u rp o rt         to        g iv e             tim in g s           of        th e

a rriv a l          on     th e          p itc h        of        th e       1st       a m b u la n c e          (S t        Johns               A m b u la n c e )               and     th e

2nd     a m b u la n c e             (b e in g          th e          1st       SYMAS          a m b u la n c e ).                    I       have         c o n s id e re d            th is

in fo rm a tio n               (re fe rre d                to         as    MAP         1

c o m p a ris o n          w ith          th e        p h o to g ra p h s                                                                                 >h i i c h    p u rp o rt          to


show         th e     c a s u a lty             b e in g          c a rrie d           on      a    s tre tc h e r               a t          1 5 .3 2        (1532)              and

w h ic h       I    u n d e rs ta n d               w o u ld          be    b e fo re          S. s a w         and     a s s is te d                 to          re s u s c ita te

h im     a t       th e    S p io n            Kop      end           of    th e       groun d.             1    cannot                     re c o n c ile             th e       tim e

sequences                 and        i    am        s t i l l         sure        th a t       I    d id        see        an         a m b u la n c e ,               d is tin g u is h
                                                                                                                                                                             PAGE:      !:}
                                                                                                                                                                             S 1citZ'dB

        •i.n m y        own        rnind        th a t     i t       was        not       of     St       Johns        but       H e a lth             A u th o rity             and

        th a t      1     to ld       th e        St     Johns            man        w ith       me       to    s to p        th e    a m b u la n c e .               1     have

        c o n s id e re d           th a t        what       I       re fe rre d            to      may        have       been        th is            a m b u la n c e

        e x itin g           fro m         th e    s ta d iu m            but        1    d o n 't        th in k      i t     was.        My          re c o lle c tio n                is

        s t i l l       th a t      i t     was        e n te rin g             th e      s ta d iu m .         I    re fe r         to    b e in g           jo in e d          by     a

        woman           St     Johns            a m b u la n c e          o ffic e r           who        pushed          me      out      of          th e      way.            1

        re c o lle c te d             th is        to      have           been           about        6    m in u te s         a fte r         I       had       changed

        p la c e s       w ith        th e        m a le     St       Johns              o ffic e r .           That          makes        a       to ta l,           fro m

        re c o lle c tio n                 of     13     m in u te s            jo in t        re s u s c ita tio n              w ith         th e         St    Johns              m ale.,

        1   w o u ld         s ta n d b y         th e s e       e s tim a te s             o n ly        in    as    much           as    1       fe e l        we    a tte m p te d

        re s u s c ita tio n                fo r       b e tw e en          10       and       15     m in u te s .

        W ith in         a     fu rth e r          tw o      m in u te s             of     b o th        St    Johns           p e o p le         w o rk in g         to g e th e r,

        th e     man         d e c la re d         "H e’ s           gone"           and       sto o d         up.        1    re fe rre d              to       and       r e - a f f i rm

        th a t      he       was      "c o m p le te ly               g re y”            and     th e re        is    a b s o lu te ly                 no     doubt          in       my

        m in d ,        b o th      now         w ith      th e       b e n e fit           of      fu rth e r        tra in in g ,                and        th e n       a t       th a t

        moment           th a t       th e        y o u th       1    had        trie d          to       save       was       dead,           c e rta in ly               dead         and

        beyond           any        fu rth e r           h e lp .           I    and        th e      St       Johns          p e rs o n n e l,         w o u ld       not           have

        s to p p e d         i f    th e re        had       been           any          g lim m e r       of       hope       at     a ll         -     th e re       was           none.

        I   d e s c rib e           th e        body       of        th e       y o u th       on     P8       & 9     (43        & 44)            and        b e lie v e            th e

        d is tin g u is h in g                  fe a tu re s          1     re fe rre d             to     IB       m on ths         ago       a re         p la in        to        see        on

        p h o to g r a p h s „

        1   have          se e ii         in ju rie s        shown              on       p h o to g ra p h s         of       th e    neck             a re a,        however               I

        d id     not         see      th em        or      n o tic e            them        on      th e       day.

            R ruder

        M Saw ers              In s p e c to r




                                                                                                                                                   D BRUDER                SIGNED


TATh-HhN i" TAKEN
            PLACES
W ITNESS   TO   SK'iNATUHE s
                  / 7 c




                                              V f


   / * /-•   i~                        'A     U   ^ t       / e ****■
s g ^ d i^ A       * 'i      ^




                                               - 7      t    W        -

 i W     *   «            / ^ . .   < * « '                      .


                 ^ < ^ € o €                                     /,
                      Ts a fr6    £L      T M 9 £/L£M    tit
                      Ts a 89     99      iaD/L9 £M      ZLL
                      Ts a 89     6 /LT   i a D £ 9 £M   T 8t
                      is a 96     9 ET    r M 9 8 /L2M   ET8
■
                      is a 8£     T/L     CIAQLLZR       928
)9                    isa  89     9fr     Cm£LZR         19L
:9               *    isa  89     LZ      CIAQZLZR       99L
iL                    Ts a ZVl    6       emiLZR         99/1
[                     is a 96     fr6     ■iMDSfrTN      L 19
[                     isa  96     £       JMDTtTM        ZZL
[                     is a 8E     L9      JMD/LETM       Efr 9
[                     is a 8£     SL      5M D 9 ETM     frZE
[                     Ts a 8E     £01     .iMDEETN       ZOZ
D                *    is a 0      0       3M M E 66W     6666
:S6 9 S          *    isa  6£     T£      T M 1 T 26W    89E
                      isa  Tfr    90T     TM1026W        9 ET
LE8 2 E          *    isa  Tfr    8       T M 1 6 T 6W   TL9
106ES            *    Tsa  6E     88      T M 1 8 T 6W   XL
1O 6O 8          *    isa  It     Z9      T M 1 /LT6W    frEfr
ILZ9 Z           a    isa  It     Z9      T M 1 /LT6W
3                *    isa  0      0       H M 3 S 68W    6666
3                *    isa  0      0       X O Y S 6 8W   6666
ST               *    Ts a 8TT    8L      T M l t 88W    ZLZ
ISOLT                 is a 89     68      T M 1 E 88W    Z 99
9L 8 Z£          *    isa  89     L9      TM1288W        9 L£
LXLIZ            *    isa  89     L9      TM1288W        £6Z
0L 6 ZZ          *    isa   89    01      T M 1 T 88W    69T
06TE                  Ts a  96    TfrT    TM1088W        IZl
09EZ                  isa  96     OfrT      Y A A T 8W   9£
       ---
______________       ---- ----    ---       -----        ---
IHY1 S awY           aoHd 3d Ai   dH0       lag'll       H 3A
                                                                                                                                                        F     A    *




                A                                                                                                             / V                       < /             -<■'




                                                                  ✓                           y                         ^

                                                                                                                                             't'dt^sj




                      ?£SL*C*                                            /J                    ^         / ?    /       ^ Z ’’!




                                                                                                                    s           -' i-
                                                                                                                                                                  ■ >
                                                                                                                    /   <?     / /          ^ ?

                                                                                                                                                  r £ L




                       / * />- 9~> .
        f ' ^ 4 ^ ,l^ C l k L »          S ' /C                  -cfe*"^ f     d-$~-~*—                   ^    / * " «■' * ^        -

        / ] 't € c c                              ^ te-^ L e .                            b        ~ »'<-■-—y _ ~ ~-         /^ y       &    >     *>£",          s tL C '^

        /tA&CC^~             ;                                        s£^u~C y ^ /                              4 ^ ^           f            //                    .
         .4 /          -/         ,. '     ^ r /             .'        /><''    )
                                                                                                                                                                  :W )         *
                                                     !**4[
                                                                      /1             7        s /£ * ^
                                                                                                                                                                                   ?




M ? l   ./?
1 8 - NOV, ' 9 ? ( T U E )    10:48                                     TE L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13      3113      P. 0 0 1




  **   CONFIRMATION             REPORT   **




  TRANSM1SSION
 TRANSACTION(S)                COMPL ETED




   NO,       DATE/TIME               DESTINATION                  DURATI ON   PCS             ST AT US     MODE


    095      NOV, 18         10:37                 901216264160   0°11*06"    019             OK           N ECM
                                                                             Discipline & Complaints Department
                     South Yorkshire
                                                                             Hillsborough Scrutiny

                     POLICE                                                  50 Windsor Road
                                                                             Heeley
                     JUSTICE             with    COURAGE
                                                                             SHEFFIELD S8 8UB


TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3083/3084

FAX: 0114 2963113

INTERNAL FAX: 3113


                                         Facsimile Transmission

Date:                                /$ /A 9 7
To:

For the attention of:                                                                                H fa>^Cu
Comments:                        '       /)
/) £ * *    7 h lc 4

                                                        c*-c^cX ?                                    'P T t& d d d + iL e h   /^ c j£ e .

                                     *C *-(k sf-a   jQ d ^ t                                    / ‘y l*£ ^ C 4 -J ~ r

                                                $& Zf f S & 2 / S                                Sb2f C

       ji                           /)    5 8&      7               f }   6^£>$




^     *2 ^ 6 r6 < . 4 -^ p L C c J ^ t    d t> *C £ ^ /^ J L ^ L j ^ C c J ^ b , f                                S- £



                £ < ^ t\
            V
From:

Telephone Number:                         Offl^                     l&fy-
Number of Pages (including this page)                                     / ?,

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3083/3084 - Internal Extension 3083/3084
incident              3.Oft      1&1197 O P ¥31                         DOCUMffNT Rf-.CGRD PR IN't'

                                                                                                             ATI-KCNT      numiM        S6E 1

                                                                                                                                       S tatio n

s'u r name                            MARTIN

i-orenames                            DEO!? A            JANf.

AQS
                                                                               Date        of   birth

A ddress



O e c u p a t i on                    POL

1"e 1 e •::<h a n e

                                                                               P Si I J.
1C                                    H e i. g f i t ­



Haj r colour

Hair      type

Eyes                                                                           Corn pi ex 1 on

F a c ia 1 hai r

0.ilass s s                       Use

Number         of Pages               4

 liated                           OdUt>&V                                                                               D J MA P T i N Pi gnetl.


                 i am Debra Jane M A R T I N and                           I Live at, the           above address.              i am

                 sinqls..                 My o c c up at io n      is a dental             nurse?     i. am also a Special              Police

                 C o n stabl e              number PP1           based at WOO'OPPATB              CPP Sub-d i v i s i o n )      of b cmth

                 Y o r k h j re Po 1 i ct?*

                 On B a t ur day                  lb April       1V89   <150489)           I paraded for duty at 9.00arr,

                  (0900)          at HXU-SSQRGUCiH f o o t b a U                   s ta d i u m where        there was a briefing               for

                 3 i)         officers               involved      in the semi-final              between L W L U P O O L        and

                -NOTTINGHAM P ORi-IBT»                           The briefing was            at 9 4 ,::>ara_ A 1 1 9 4 5 ) »                        ;./••
                                                                                                                                                        t J
                  At'                           CiOcO)       1 returned to the gym at the football                             ground -ror a
                                                                                                                                                    m
                  separate                briefing           for special      constables.

                  At      10, 3ham              (1035)       1 left HIS A. .BLK)R OU G H stad i u m          to patrol         liERRlES''R£A%;i:^.

                  SOUTH to st oo the                         parkinq of      cars      by fans        on the ha r d shoui <lf:r ^ »             I
f? -
                  d id        th is       w ith                               We     con t i n u e d to       patrol      H F R R I L S oR0A D •

                  SOU FH f which                     is a very      long    road,      until, about          1; 1Upm      (1310)     that
                                                                                                                        PAGE
                                                                                                                        36 El

■3f t e r n o o n ,,     A t t h i s t %rne w e h a d. o r iers to go to P0m.ES TONE RD to cover

t r a f f i c outs i d e        t h s rna i n e n t r a n c: e    ga t e s f 0 r t h e N 01'T S i 0 R l:.lS T fan s .

A I, t h .i.s p d i n L' 1.      a w 3.Ir>o i.iL 6    L i o k 0 t touts,           1 saw them selling                tickets

and. money          changing         hands,.         3. also      saw numerous            fans     both Liverpool

fans and Notts Forest,                      who were        a hvic u s iy        drunk,     a l t h o u g h at     this

stage       they were           behaving        re a s o n a b ly .

Ait, a Gout. k:it.’'V pn't ( 14 £!-5)       1 started to nia k e rny                way    10    t h e i...£ P P IN <:iS L,A N £

entrance,,          as    ). passed what             I think          is the main entrance                to the SP10N

KOP,     the turnstiles               were     shut      down.

At about 2.. 50 pm              (1450 > there           was trou b 1e at            these       turnstiles         when the

Motts Forest              fans,      realising          they wer e being              locked out,           were     trying

any way they              could to get            in,    this         in c 1 u d e d na y i n g m 0 n e y 1 0     the

turnstiles             stewards and trying                to buy          t i c k e t s f r 0 m t in5    tou13 „       The

crowd       became        very abusive and angry a nd 1 had to assist                                      in the

re m o v a 1   0   f f a n s f ro m t h e g r 0 u n d .           I w as on the           road side and            the

p 0 1 i c e :tn 5 i d e w e r e pa 5 s i n g f a n s b a c k o u t o v e r t h e t u r n s t i 1 e s a n d

there was a very                 large number            of fans          t ry i n g t o g e t i n s t i 1 1 , s 0 rn u c h

that mounted              officers and their                hors? s were            being       pushed up against

the wall,,             The next       thing      I know          is       large     blue gate was             opened and

a   large m a j ority            of the       crowd      pushed          their way        into    the ground,,               1

found myself              being      carried along wit!'                  the    cr owd unab I.e to           re s i s t „       A


m o un t e d   officer          grabbed my           collar       bui     had to let go,            because        he would

have     been       pulled from his horse,                        1     :iot pashed to the              f 1 oo r , but       1

m a na g e d   to get back             to my feet by              pu.!11 ing myself          up a man's           back,,         I

then      r e m e m fae r o o e n i n g rny e y e s a n d f :i.v"iding myself                inside       the ground,

a t t h e b 0 11 o m       0   f t h e b p i 0 n K o n a n d t,rie gates              had been shut             Denind

me „      I asked the steward on the gate                                to   let me out,         but, at first            he

                                                        :lifficer,
r e fu s e d , j t w a s o n 1y w h e n a rn0 u n t e d •                             the same          one who      had

% r i ed to he 1 p me a few mo ments                       ear 1.1e>r,        put his horse             up against           the

gate,       he opened           it a short way and                    1<:■
                                                                         >t m e o u t «
                                                                                                                                      !!A ClI".
                                                                                                                                      ti&H 1


Once          outside          I found myself                su r rounded          by drunken                  f a n s , screaming

a b u s e , and           th e    a re a    covered by police,.                        An officer                  used my      radio     to

try and             c a i 1 for      back up but to no avail                            because               the     channel      was

full          of static.,            My     radio was            handed          back to me and                     1 ran to the

L e p p in g s          Lane     end of the g r o u n d .                  Ambu l a n c e s       and         police       cars were

rush;i ng to that end of the g r o u n d ,                                      When    I got to the Leppings                         Lane

end of the ground                       [ saw a vast                crowd o u t s i d e           the turnstiles                  trying

to get             in,    it must          have       been about            four       times         larger           than the        crowd

[ left at the other                         end,       so that w ould mean                       the     crowd at           the Spion

Kon      end numbered about                        1000 plus and                 1 w ould estimate about 4000

o u t s i de        Le p p i ngs     I....ane    end.

1 can't             really        remember            how,      but somehow             I got          inside          the ground,

t hrough the               large        blue gate wni ch was                      open,       and        1 ended up on the

P   it cf t   ,,    i d,i d n o t g o 11'i r o u g h t n e t u n n e J »

Once          on    the    pitch        1 saw a          lot     of    people          who    were            obviously        injured

and      1 can           remember          a man       coming         up    to me       shouting,                  "THFTftl:.'*S T W O D E A D

YOU B A S T A R D " .             X then         saw     peo p l e    who       appeared, to                  be    dead.      People

were          screaming           and      shouting          an d     ambulances             were        driving           onto    the    pitch,,

j. a s s x s t e d o 1*h e r p o 1 x c e o f t i c e r s w i t n d%e a d. a n d i n J u r e d p e o p 1 e a n d

he)ped             to    take     them      on    stretchers               to    the    gym,        and        1 can       remember

seeing             officers        from E2            (W Q G D S E A T S ) e v e r y w h e r e .

I took about 6 dead to the gym,                                       as well          as many            injured and whilst                   1

was trying                to revive a young                     boy    1 remember                s o m e th in g       hitting me         on

the      back of my head,                       but    1 didn't            really notice                 until much             later when

I found a                large swelling.                   I could see many                      bodies            being    put on the

pitch,             some    of t h e m       a p p eared         to be dying.                 X     'J o s t    count       of the      number

of     bodies            L helped          carry       into      the gym.

] helped                carry a young              boy     into the             gym from the                  pitch nearby.,             He

s t o p p e d b r ea t h i n g s o              C g a v e h im t h e k i s s o f 1 i f e , a n d h e a r t m a s s a g e

and a doctor also                       helped.            He    started          breathing and opened                          his    eyes.
                                                                                                                                      PAGE
                                                                                                                                      SS6E1

             his only word was                      "MOM"' and then he died.

             At 4 .06 pm          ( 'I6P6) Dr CURPEN                 certified death and                   j. stayed with him.                 1

             w ould      describe            him as white rna i.e * 3 * 6 3'7,                      14    15 y rs , -slim build and

             brow n       hair?       with a          cut u n d e r h.i s      c h in .     l-!e    nad

                          there were               no other marks              on the body.                He was wearing a whits

             s h i r t .. green sweat                s h i r 1,    beige t r a u s er s, wh i t e so c.k s , w h i t e Reefooks

                                                        .)oa n&dr s ho rt s ,,
                                                       )’                          He had a gold, metal                  chain wx L!”t a

             g o 1d h o r n ,     a       b u.s t ri. c k e t ,   a t ra in t :i c k e t a n d a n e n t r a n c <? t i c k e t »        IIe

             had no         identif i c a t i o n or money,.                   I    later found out the                  number     given

             to this boy was 31,,

             1 stayed with                 the     body and at 3. POaro (03 20)                       Sunday      16 April

             (160489)         an a m b ulance arr ived and                         I went with the body together                       with

             DC    PONT and <aK If I-']TUB to the Medico                            Legal          C e n t r e , WATER L A N K ,

             S h e f f i e 1d »       I    s t a y e d w it h t h e b o d y        u n t i i. h e    w a s s t r i.p p e d a n d d e t a i 1 s

             taken from me.                     1 finally went              off     duty at 6.30            (0630)       on Sunday

             i6 Apr i 1 1989                (160469)»

             At about 6 .,30pm (1830)                        Monday 8 May            1989     (080369)           1 saw

             and                  from West Midlands Police                           at my home.                PC ? showed to me a

             p artially           completed             report of death form that                         1 identified, as being

             the     form     I filled             in whilst           in charge          of the         body?    details      of name

             and other            personal           details are missing                   because         there    had been no

             id e n t i f i c a t i o n made           by the time           I’ went       home.          All    J. can say     is this

             form        relates          to body 31.              1 now know this                 is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

             b , 27„3.73           (27031973)              of I                                                                          I




                                                                                                                  D ,) MA R T I N SIGNED

S 1A fLMfc.N i IA h I.:.N
               Pi..A CH.

                  I IT                               DAT!-.: s       080389

W I TN E S S TO SIGMA fURE
0   ! - 1:; I C I:.: R S   S I G N A T U R hi s
Incident                108       IS1197 OP931                          LKJCuMr-.N I Hi:CORD HR IN I

                                                                                                     STATEMENT NUMBER         9 6 E "1A

                                                                                                                            Stati o n

Sur name                           MARTIN

I O i" & Ti a ITi 9 S              I)I
                                     -".!>HA     '.JAN hr.

A9 e                                                                         Date      of birth

A d d re s %


0 c c u pa t io n                 D ENTAL NURSE

7 e J. e p h o n e

1C                                i-le i a h t                              8 u i id

H a ir        c o lo u r

M a ir        ty p e

’
Ey p s

F a c ia l       h a ir

G la s s es                        U se                                      « C. CP T
                                                                                     'S!



Number           of Page?; 1

1.) a.   ed                        1c*07 ft9                                                                    D J MA R T I N Signed


                   Furt h e r      to my previous                statement        dated 8th May         1969    (080589) » on 1i£th

                   July       1989     (1H U 789)        I was      shown a video            tape Reference Number           CvRM/2)

                   £ x h i b j.t (               }   £>U'                        and KILL O C H      of the West Midlands

                   P o)ice.

                   At      tape    reference           n umber OH 4 9 and 030!i <Rea3                 T ime > I can identify

                   mys e i.f on the video                    located     in the      centre     right    of the    picture.,

                   At      T,I-1i s p o i"CsX- .1 was        ^-nc’aciec*. with    the deceased Kevin Daniel               WILL

                   <NA'ti-1 ) »

                   A lt ho ug h the            camera show? a clear                shot      of myself you       cannot     see   tne

                   decease d who               is out        of camera shot.               At thxs    stage    the body would        be

                   at my feet and to the                        right    of the screen as you             .took at    it.




                                                                                                               D J MARTIN SIGNED
WITNESS   ro SIG N A f'UR!£ s

OFFICERS SIGNATURE; ;

ND OF- REPORT
        rw.t.        III.*      1*1 I            <‘
                                                  ‘PV ! .             >»'» "Ill Hi      PI i C l-'!) |M,' INT

                                                                                                      ST ATP MEN'S' NUMBER          S621B

                                                                                                                                13t a t i o n

bur name                            MARI" IN

K o i”e name s                      dppra         janp:


Age                                                                         Date        of    birth

A d iire s is


0 >:::c upat :i.o n                 :' u L   hiCHHl          Dt'NTAi... MUR

'T'e 1 e p h o n e

IC                                  H e ig h t                              P U i J.d

Hair      col our

Hair      type

eyes                                                                        C o iTip 1 e k i o n

Facial        hair

G 1a s s e s                    U‘
                                 .ve

Nutnbe r of Pages                   1

D ated                          ybUVaV                                                                               D J MARTIN Signed


                further             to my statement             dated 3th May                -193? (0 3 0 S 3 9 )     I would      like to

                add          that       today     1 have     been shown         p h o t o graphs        by                  a nd

                               of the West             M i d la nds   Police,        relating         to the Hillsborough

                J n g u i !'• y „


                :i:r\   t h e fih o t a g ra p h ?> Ie f N o

                                    I arn able         to   identify the          person           receiving    first aid as the

                deceased K evin Daniel                       USILI J. AMO   (body L"S) whom               I refer      to   in my

                o r I i na I $ t ate rne n I-„



                D J M ARTIN SC L2 i (Bgd)




                                                                                                                    D J MART IN SIGNFD

8 TATGMENT TAKEN
                                     U A Ih.   O S D 989

 UiJ.1NL'.Bti I0 3 iUN A IUKfc.;!

 OKI' 1C K R v• SI (3N A TIJR I-15

END OF REPORT
Iric id e n t,               If.)8      "i8 "I"197 0 P 9 31                  D 0 C U M E N1'' R L C 0 R D P131N'i"

                                                                                                                  STATEMS-N'f NUMBER      S6P1C

                                                                                                                                        S t a t i0 n

 hi 11 f" n a ITi iS                     iv!AR i I N

 I' 0 S'" 6 n a !Ti £• 1?,               DEI.JKA        JANE'

 A ge                                                                              Ija t e    0   ■(' b i r t h

A d d re s 3


0 c c u pa !.■i o n                      DENTAL N URSE              POL SC 221

 "Ie 1 ephone

 IC                                          ig h t                                B u i 1d

 Ha :>i1' c o .1o u r

1"ia 1 r I*y p e

 Eyes

I" a c 1 a .1. n a 1

(.'«i   3 S5      :
                  ••                     U S £'                                    A c ce n t

N u rn ,b e r          of    Pa y e s   5

 D ated                                  170390                                                                              D J MA R T I N Signed


                        F urther         to my         previous       statements         I would           like      to add the following,

                        On S a t urday            15th April          1V&9    (150489)            1 wo r k e d      in the    capacity of

                        Special         C o n stable at            the F„A., S e m i Final               football       match     between

                        Liverpool            !■ „C a n d        N o t t i n g h a m forest        f „C . wh:i ch was         being   played at

                        the Hi j..I s b o rough S t a d i u m ,           Sheffield.,

                        My     recollection of the events                         of that day are                   vague and     confused..

                        As a result               of the        disaster      I was     prescribed m e d i c a t i o n            by my Doctor




                                                                                                                                          It 1 i k e
                                                                                                                                     I fe '
                                                                                                                                          .

                        a    *7.o iTib i e *

                        A p a result              of this        1 feel      that my memory,                 my     recollects on of that         day

                        i s p o s s i b .1y i n a c c:u ra t e           t a m u n s s.!r e o f w h a t t im e 1 a r r i v e d a t t h e

                        L.eppi nqs Lane                entrance       to the ground               or even how          1 came     to be on     the
                                                                                                                  PAGE              2
                                                                                                                  Sriif.'i:' 1 (J

p :i. t c h    bat   l    d i d ,,

By time          i got onto             the     pitch      it searnedto        bemass confusion,               there

we re po 1 i c:a of f i ce r s and *upparts r s a j.j. o ve r the                         place .       I could see

people who a p p eared                   to be       injured and        possibly dead,            lying    on the

pitch,,              1 was       in a state          of shock.     I   d i d n ’t know what          to do but my

natural              Instinct was to help these people                        in the      best way that           I could,,

I c a n ’t describe                  to you     in any detail          my exact movements               over    the        next

half an hour or so.                       1 know that         1 a p p r o a c h e d several        people      lying on

the      pitch and a s s i s t e d               if possible.            Idid not give         any    ofthese

pf»op 1 e m o u t h ■■ to- m au t h or heart rnassage .

1 decided            that       there were           enough   people       dealing with the situation

at     the Leppings ! ane                 end of the ground and made my way to the Bp.ion

Kop end of the ground,,

1 could              see that bodies were                being carried from the Leppings Lane                              end

to the Spion Kop                      end of the ground and. then being                     placed on the             pitch,,

1 a s s i s t e d to          carry a, number           of dead and. injured              people      from the Spion

Kop      end of the             pitch,        into    the g y mnasium where a temporary mortu a r y

had been set                 up,,      1 was talking          to some      of these people,          comforting

t h e m a n d t ry i n g t o r e a s s u r e t h e m          I        a m u n a b 1 et o d e s c r i b e a n y o f

t h e s e p e o p 1e         i n t h e d e ta :i i „

By this time                 1 r e a l }y was         in a state       of shock,        1 c o u ) d n 't believe what

1 was          seeing,,         X seemed to           be on aut o m a t i c     pilot,,      My memories          are

very          confused and distorted,,

1 can recall                carrying a youth who                  1 now know to be,            K evin Daniel

W I L L I A M S from the               pitch to the gymnas iu m ,,              He was      the    last    person that

1 a s s isted            in car ry;i. n g ,,     1 first      saw Kevin W.i Li.,iA Mi.! lying on the                    pitch

near          to the      goal       area at the Spion Kop end of the ground.                              At that

stage          he wasn't             on a hoarding        or a. stretcher,,

I remember               that        there were       several     people around where                he was     lying„

1 can't          recall anyone                giving     him mouth       to mouth.          W:i.th the     help of
                                                                                                          S6,ZL 1 C


other     people,      who     I can't        recall,        K evin WILLI AMS was       placed onto a

hoarding and           carried       into      the gymnasium,,          Someone    instructed me to

s t y w 1 Lh (/h 0     ijo d.y „

1 didn't       know what           to do.       I   didn't want        to believe      the   boy was        dead.

I    d i d n ’t know   if he was             dead or not but          I decided that I had            got to

attempt      to    revive      him.1 started to give                   h'im m o u t h — to.mouth      but

someone,       I don"t       know who,          touched me on the shoulder and told me he

was    dead.       !">y this       time      rny head had gone, I w a s n ’t aware            of what         I wa

doing     or what was          really happening.

At    16.06 hours        < 1606)      Doctor CUkPLN. examined Kevin WILL IAMB and

certified         him dead.

I    i'eri'iember a detective             of f i ce r ,                           h e 1 p i-n g rne t o

comp 1 e t e t he Gi£M 18 f o rm (sudden deat h f o r m ) .

1 stayed w.>th the             body until           the ear ly hours of Sunday               16th April

(160489)       when    1 escorted Kevin WILLIAMS,                     who at this       stage       had not

been     identified,         to the Medico L e g a 'J Centre,,

1 identified, the            body     by the number allocated,                which     in   the     case was

Number'      1„     1 had no further                dealings with Kevin W I L L I A M S .

This statement          is made           to the best         of my    recollection and         I    believe          i

to    be the truth,.           H ow ever,       under       the   circumstances      1 cannot        be

positive       that    the details are accurate.




) have marked          on a plan of the                   pitch   (Reference D.J.M.1)          the

approximate         location where              I first       came    into   contact with the

d e c e a s e d , Ke v i n Da.n ie 1 W 11..L 1AMS „

D J Martin




                                                                                     D J MARTIN S1GNLD
                                                                                             T ';
        -    . ■ • I-11.AC E 5 ■                        V'

                             T iAf. 5                        DA"!   r,     i7 A 3 VO

V A A A mA S A         I'O    HS U . i N A' V U K £ S   AAA     /A 4 A   A A A L A : i UA;


O f.'       Of   ftA    :f   ;.:-;AATuKr" =             -.AA A i\   A ^rf.L   ^
)nci dent       IOft       181197 OF931                   ACTION RECORD PRINT

                                                                                             AC TIO N     NUMRER      A5867
AC TIO N   RESUME      5                     TELEPHONE    S C 5221   M AR TIN          RE    V IEW IN G   VIDEO       ,% P H O T O S

R AIS ED   BY   OPERATOR?                    1H37               DATE!           28-~06~89               TIM E 8       2013

 T E L E P H O N E S C 2 2 1 M A R T CN        RE V I E W I N G V I D E O & P H O T O S
 TEL., NO :: 0 7 4 2 3 0 0 2 0 0
 A B O V E OF!- I C E R H A S B E E N I D E N T I F I E D A S H A V I N G T A K E N BO DY   NO 5 1 K E V I N      W ILLIA M S
 FROM P I T C H . , C ON TA C !" O F F I C E R .% A S K I F C O N S I D E R A T I O N CAN   B E G EVEN T O        VIEW IN G
 V I D E O & I ’ H O I OS.! „
 FOR A L L O C A T I O N TO I N S P L A Y T O N

2 8 -0 6 - 69    2013     OP 1 2 3 7   R A I S E D FROM M 1 5 6 5
29--06■-89       1446     0P4909       ALLOCATED       TO I N S P    LEYTON
17 0 7 -8 9      1500     0P3739       COMPiJ-TED
1 9 - 0 7 -89    0944     OP6 1 3 7    R E S U L TED
DOC UMir: N T S T A K E N s     8621   A
SC M A R T I N S E E N 1 2 0 7 8 9 .
V I D E O I D MADE & S"i AT E Mi '     N"i   RECORDED.
O F F I C E R S RECORDED                                  PS6818      KILLO C H
21 • - 0 7 - 8 9 0857     OP 1 5 3 1   FILE D
Incident         IOft       181197 OP931          ACTION RK CO R 0 PRINT

                                                                           AC"i JON NUMBER A6368
ACTION RESUME:          s              SPC * H 1 Di-BRA MARTIN TO 8 E S HOWN PHOTOS REF TTI/>28,   !"I'

RAISED BY OPERA'! OR ?                 9361           DATE;     09-08-89        1 IME';;   1439

 SPC ESI DEBRA MAR TIN TO BiE SHOWN PHOTOS REE T'i"I/28? TTI/H9 , TTi/3 0 , T T I 3 i r
 T U / 2 V , DM 1/4, CAN SHE iDENT IE Y THE BODY SHOWN AS 1 HA'I OF WILLIAMS UODY t r i
 WHO SHE D EA L T WI Til IN THE GYMNASIUM,

09 - 0 8 - 8 9   1439       OP9361   RAISED
DC I TOPF
10~08~89         0937 Of'4909 ALLOCATED 10 INSP LAYTON
09 139-89        1027    OP 3 749 COM PI .ETED
"13--09--89      1133    O P 7383      RESUI TED
DOCU M E N fS     TAKEN :     S 6 2 18
PHOTOGRAPHS SHOWN - P O S I TI VE RESULT - S TA TE M E N T D E T A I N E D
O F F I C E R S RECOR D E D
•13-09-89 1711           OP 5439 H E L D
Incident              103          181197 OP931                              NOMINAL. RECORD PRINT

    Non d. n a 1 n o „     N4 4 8 5
    Surnam e         M AR TIN
    f o r e n a m e s DP,BRA                                      JANH

    13 i r t h p i a c
    Dof: '                                Age                 1o                    Sex
    0 c: c u p a t i o n   POL        S C P .'d '1            0{£NTAL      NURSE
    urnp 1 o y e r / S c h o o l      n ar ne
    H e ig h t             to                           Hi u i I d
    H a ir C o lo u r
    H a ir     Type

    L y e <3
    C o rn p 1 e   .i o n

    T a c :i. a 1 h e i r
    G la s s e s w orn                            Use
    •Jewel 1e r y                                                                                            Accent

    R e c „ i n j u r y , t a t t o o s >• ma r k s , s c a r s , p e c u I. i a r i t i e < » , a b n o r ma i i t i e s




    Know? V i c t i m                                     N a tu re o f r e la t io n a h ip
    At S ce ne                                            F i n g e r p r :i. n t s

    C KO     number                                            L o c a l ref,,   no       NMPOLSCE
    e io o d S a m p ie           U                         G roup (A 80)                   01her
    B a ) i va S a m p le         U                              B e c rs ts r U            8 us pe ct             L’ l i m   Code

    C1o th in g




    Other Free Text
  INF 0 M 8 6 1 „
  B U I S BCZifl OF S Y O R K S H I R E P O L I C E .



         C r o s s •- r e f e r e n c: e s s -•
ADDRESS                     HOME
STREET                      POSTED                      P E N I S TONE R D ,      HILLSBOROUGH ,           S H E F F IEL..D
"I E L E P H Q N l ”.       HOME
'TELEPHONE                  13US   [NESS
CATEGORY                    S 6 S 1 ABC                 i -;0DY      b 1 W ILL JAMS     N619              DECEASED
CATEGORY                    SCEHi                       S P E C I A L CONS T A B L E S                    SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E     PO LIC E
CATEGORY                    DJM /1                      P L A N S OF I N S I D E GROUND
CATE( : i ORY               "TOOK BODY                  G Y M N A S I U M A T GROUND
CATEGORY                    C ARRIED                    IN J U R E D PERSONS
CATEGORY                    MOVED                       D ECEASE) ' )
CATEGORY                    WITNESSED                   A L C O I SOL. OF F E N C E S / D I S O R D E R   OT FI: N C E S
CATEGORY                    PRESENT                     M E D I C O L EGAL. C E N T R E
     N o m in a l      no.        N4485
     Surname  MARTIN
     Forenames DEBRA                                          J ANE

          C !" o s 5 ■ • r e f e r e n c e s   c.o n t i n u e d ; -
CA T EGORY                   REFERS ;T)               TICKET T O U T S
CATEGORY                     I D DODY                 PHOT OGRAPITS OF DECL.ASFD             D E C EASED
C A T E GO RY                8621                     AWARDS                                 R E CO G N I T I O N
CAT F.GOR Y                  L.'i NK                  SP I O N KOP DISORDER
CA TEGORY                    8 fATEMEN Y              INJURED P O L I C E O F F I C E R S    SOUTH Y O RK S H I R E POL.ICE
CA T EGORY                   A"! T ENDED              SPION KOP                              STANDS AT GROUND
N 10599                      )..INK                   KILL O C H                      JOHN
                             L 3NK
                             REFERS TO?
                             COf.Jr AGUE
                             COL L E A G U E
                             ASSIST ED
N619                         LINK                     W I L L IA MS                         KEVIN                   DANIEL
A5 8 6 7                                              TELF.PHONR SC221 MA R T I N                    RE VIEW I N G V IDEO & Pi iOT'OS
A6368                                                 SPC 221 DEBRA MAR T I N TO BE SHOWN PFIOTOS REF TTI/28, T T
sap- :                       SUBJECT                  11-03-89 MART IN
862 "iA                      SUBJECT                  1 2 - 0 7 - 8 9 MARTIN
■ 9 6 2 1 1-;                SUBJECT                  0 5 - 0 9 89 MARTIN
S621C                        SUBJECr                  17-03-90 MAR 1"CN
 M 1:383                     SUBJECT                  23-06--89 M A R T ]N
i’i861                       SUBJECT                  09--05-89 MARTIN
 D3698                       SUBJECT                  17-03- 90 MAP OF P ITCH S H O W I N G P O S ITION OF- BODY 31
SI 850                                                            8 TS SAW N4433 IN N STAND 1900 SHE WAS O B V I O U S L Y
                                                      D I S TR FS SE D A I  ___ _ | TOOK HER TO T HE POLICL ROOM.
8427                                                             ISTS AS SAW GATE a P E N I S T O N E RD f / S T I L E S OP E N E D
                                                      SAW A STEW A R D ( I                   I
                                                                                             ) & POL
                                                                                                  P O I . (N4483?) C LOSE BY
S621                         MARTIN                   N 4 4 8 5 TOOK BODY 51 TO GYM UNABLE ro REV I V E N35 CERT
                                                      DEATH TOOK BODY TO MEDICO CTRiv WIT                        '       'S N6926
8821                         MARTIN                   ID ’D DEATH REP OR T' PAR T IA! LY C O M P L E T E D ON BODY 51 TO
                                                      W EST M1DS OFFICERS
8621                         MAR fIN                  N4483 DESC SCE N E S AT P E N ISTONE RO & L E P PINGS LN
                                                      T U R N S T I L E S & A S S I S T I N G INJURED INSIDE THE GR O U N D
8621A                        MAR 'fIN                 N 4483 SHOWN VIDEO VRM/2 BY I                         I A N 10599,, 3 0249 &
                                                      0303 SAW 1-iERSE! !• DEALING W ITH N 619 (BODY 3 1 ) -NOT SEEN
862 IB                       M ARTIN                  N 4483 STS VIEWED PHOTOGRAPHS & CAN IDENTIFY BODY 51
                                                      W 1L ! IAMS 1IM T i l/31 T"I 1/28 1T 1/3? 'FT 1 /30 D M 1 /4 TT 1/29
8621C                        MAR !'IN                 S PEC I A L 8Y POI ICE H ELPS WITH INJ *0 A D E C ’S INCLUDING
                                                      N 6 19 ( BODY 31) IN GYM HAS HIM CERT THEN TKS TO MEDICO.
8888                                                            I 8 TS ON DUTY WI TH N 4 4 8 3 , ITERRIES RD. LATER TO
                                                      P I'"Cl Ix N4483 INJURED HEAD. BOTH DEAL WITH D E A D / I N J U R E D
8888A                                                            IWAS ON DUTY WITH M A R T I N N 4485 IN HERR EES RD NOT
                                                      WITH                    I AS PREVIOUSLY ST AT P D IN S 8 8 8 I
8905                                                              SE'S RE8P RE SUPER VIS EON N4485            |[~     I ALL
                                                      P OSTED ON TRAFFIC DUTY IIKK HIES RD S & PENIST ONE RD N.
8907                                                              STS JOINED N4485 EN THE G Y M N A S I U M WI I'H BODY 51
                                                      WILL] AMS. STAYED WIT H BODY UNTIL. 2230HRS
M 1585                       MARTIN                   N 4485 I D ’ D H AVING T AKEN BODY 51 KEVIN W I L L I A M S FROM
                                                      PITCH. RFQUEST N 4483 VIEWS VIDEO & PHOTOS.
M861                         MARTIN                   S T M E N T FROM WSC221 D EBRA MARTIN RE DISORDER AT EAST
                                                      END & C ON T I N U I T Y OF BODY 31 KEVIN WILLIAMS
','?AQQ                      MARTIN                   PLAN OF PITCH SHOW I N G LOCATION OF BODY 51 C O M P L E T E D
                                                      BY N4485 MARTIN,,
                                                                                                                               CO ITT
                                                                                                   PAGE:.



   N o m i. n a .!.   no „    M4 4 8 '
   Jr>urnb.n1e          MAK 1IN                                    Is tie
   i" 0 f e TV^ITiS 5    DhbRA                       jA N i" : .


          Cr os&      reference;:; c o nt :l. n u e ei ; -
I.)!>01                      FAX MFSSAG        FAX LIST i ROM 8HLF-1- II-LD 100b89 fcTATEMCNT FROM SUBJECT




                                                        END Of RFPORT
Inc. id & T i t       iOa        1b "!197 OP 931                          NOMINA!.         RECORD PRINT

   N o m in a l no.       N7 9 HS
   S urnam e     A P P L . ET O N                                         f:i t, 1 e
   F orenam es JU LIE

   I:'i r t h p 1a c e
   DaD                                Age       1o                                S e ;< f*                   I c
   O c c u p a t i. a n   POL       PS7344
   Em p 3 o y e r / S c h o o l     name   W M IDLANDS                  PO LIC E
   H e i g hi t          t o                8ui I d
   H a ir C o lo u r
   H a ir      Type

   L.:.ye s
   C o m p i. e   :i. o n

   Facial hair
   Glasses w o rn                           Use
   J ewe 1 1 e r y                                                                                       Accent

   i i e c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s , ma r k s , s c a r s , p e c u .1. i a r i t i s s ,    abno r m a .1. i t i a s




   Know? V i c t i m                                 N a t, u i" <? o f r e 3. a t i o n s h i n
   A t S c e rie                                     f i n.ije r p r i t i t s

   C RO n u m b e r                                        I... o c a 1 r e f „ n o
   3 i. o o d S a m p l e       U                      G r o u p (ABO)                        O t he r
   S a iliv a S a m p le        U                              S e c re te r U                Su s ps cI              E I i in C o d e


   C I. o t h i n g




         r o s s •••• r e f e r e n c e s 5 -
ADDRESS                    e x o u s in e s s      NECHELLS          GRE P S T N , i ' O W LE R S T , N E C H E L L S ,              BIRM ING HAM
 TELEPHONE                 EXBUS229                021               3 !::>9
TELEPHONE                  B U S 1 MRSB            021               3!::>92:532
 TELEPHONE                 EXPAGER                 0345              333111               0 8 0 0 6 /3
CATEGORY                   S3P39A                  BODY 6 6 JO N E S N 7 0 8                        DECEASED
CATEGORY                   L IN K                  NGRTHERN GENERAL H O S P I T A L                 H O SP ITALS
CA1EGORY                   0 B  T A 3 NED          P H O T O G H A P H B OF DEC !•’ A S E D         DECEASE!)
                           LIN K
M1(J64 2                   L I NK                  H ARR I S O N                                  K ARi- ,N                      MAR I E
                           R E T U R N PRO
                            G I V P P H OT O
N 1 0/3 1                  R E T U R N PRO         T HOMP SO N                                 W I N I F R ED
                            L INK
IME7 33                    SHOW P HO T O           ROBERTS                                     M IC HAEL                         JAMES
N6863                       LIN K                  BELL                                        W J L..L. 1 AM
N708                       L 1 NK                  J ON ES                                     GA RY                             P H IL IP
   Nomi nai n o „ N 7955
   Surname    APPLETON                                             7 :i.1 1e
   Forenames JULIE

       Cr os s   r e f e r e n c e ?;   c a nt , i n u e d •
N 71 S 3              SHOW P HO T O            ALLEN                                 D AVID
                      !.. I N K
A6950                                          O C I T O P E C O N S I D E R E X A M I N E R E C OR D S RE |_____________ | C ER T I F [ C
A8 5 4 7                                       PS A P P L E T O N ; ; CON'! AC "I 1 HE I 'O! ..LOW I MG STA F F' MF.MFsETi OF T H E
A8348                                          P S A P P L E T O N s C O N TACT SHE F O L L O W I N G S T AP f MEMBER OF T H E
A 8558                                         PS AP P L P. "I" ON s C O N T A C T THE F O L L O W I N G S"l A I--I-' MEMBER OF THIv
A8591                                          DS A P P L E T O N s CON I"AC f THE R E L A T I V E S OF BO DY 0 5 , C O L I N A
S3239                 SUB, I L O T             31            8 9 APPLETON
S3239A                SUBJECT                   1 8 0 9 89 APPLETON
R99                   SUBJECT                   1 3 0 7 8 9 A P P L E TOM
Ml 359                SUBJECT                  2 6 - 0 5 - 8 9 A P P L E TON
HI 731                SUBJECT                  3 1 - 0 7 - 8 9 APPLETON
Ml 741                SUBJEC r                 3 1 “ 0 7 8 9 A P P L E TON
MHO 47'               SUBJECT                  U P 0 2 •••••90 A P P I...ETON
M 2048                SUBJECT                  0 H - 0 2 - 9 0 APPLETON
M2049                 SUB J EC 7'              OP 0 2 - 9 0 APPLETON
M2106                 Su b j e c r             136 - 0 3 - 9 0 A P P L E VON
M2148                 SUB J EC"!               0 6 0 4 --9 0 APPLETON
S1266A                SELL                     N 6 8 6 3 ST'S WAS SHOWN P H O T MW 1 7 3 B Y N 7 9 5 3 & I D ’ S H I M S E L F
                                               ON S A ME W I T H N 5 5 1 B O DY 2 8 B U I C A N N O T R E M E M B E R E V E N T S *
S2038C                                                      ST'S SHOWN PHOTO|                             [f OOK N 5 7 3 < B 0 Q Y 3 5 ) TO
                                               GYM ON H O A R D I N G . , I F         (BODY 3 5 )          IN PICTUR E P O S IT IV E 1 / D .
SS399                                          _______ S f S H A N D E D T I C K E T S T U B T O N / 9 5 5 REF NO I                         BUT
                                               REQUEST THAT ’ I T I S R E T U R N E D .
S3194                                          I               Si'S L IV E S W ITH N 2 2 1 4 & I                   I. G I V E S P H O T O S OF
                                               N 6 0 9 ( B O D Y 4 6 ) TO N / 9 5 5 , , S T S P R O P E R T Y R E T U R N E D 2 6 0 4 8 9 , ,
S3196                                                       | S f S SAW P H O T O S U N D A Y M I R R O R 1 6 0 4 8 9 O f BO DY 9 1
                                                 ( N 7 2 2 ) ,, S T S FsANDED PFi OTOS OF BODY 1 0 N ' 7 9 5 5 .
S3198                 H A R R [ SOM            N 1 0 6 4 7 ; S T S ON 2 0 0 7 S 9 H A N D E D l"WO P H O T G R A P H S OF H U S B A N D
                                               B O DY 0 3 H A R R I S O N TO N / 9 5 5 , , A L S O G I V E S NEW A D D R F S S
53224                                                        | S T S I DEN T'S & R E C E I V E D D E N I M J A C K E T B E L O N G I N G f O
                                               N 6 8 1 FROM N ' 7 9 5 5 &                    |, G I V E S A N T E C EDE.NT H I S T O R Y N 6 8 1
53225                                                          G I V E S H I S ORY OF N 5 3 3 ( BO DY 2 4 ) & S T S f O M A T CH
                                               w n h                  I-        1 & [       Z D G I V E N 5 3 3 * S P R O P E R T Y TO HER
53226                                                          S T S ON 2 5 0 ' 7 8 9 G A V E N 7 9 5 5 &\               H COL OU R PHO ro
                                                               N 5 8 0 ( B O D Y 3 8 ) "10 A S S I S T W I T H V I S U A L E V I D E N C E -
S3239                 APPLETON                 N 7 9 5 5 S f S O B ' f C A S U A L T Y R EC OR D BO OK S FR N O R T H E R N GEN
                                               HOSP & H A N D E D 1 HEM 'TO E X H OF'F 1CER [                                           |,,
S3239A                A P P L E LON            N 7 9 5 5 S T S I N S P E C T E D M A J A X R E C OR D S A T NCi H. M A J A X 3 0
                                               R E L A 1 E S T O B O DY 8 6 J O N E S & L E T T E R I N C I- ROM
33246                 T H OMP SO N             N 1 0 7 3 1 STS N / 9 5 5 & |                    | R E T U R N E D P O R T I O N OF T I C K E T
                                               U S E D B Y SON N 6 2 2 ( B O D Y 5 3 ) TO A T T E N D M A T C H .
S/92C                 R 0 8 E R T'S            N 2 7 8 3 C L A R I F I E S M ME NT S OF BODY 4 2 A F T E R N 7 9 5 5 SHOWS
                                               H IM    V IS U A L . EVIDITNCL,,
S935A                                                  I S I'S WAS SHOWN T R A I N TNG SHOE               BY   N /9 5 5 ,   ID S   AS    H IS ,
                                               I...0H1 A'l GROUND 1 5 D 4 8 V , H A N D E D B A C K U ND E R S I G N A T U R E „
R99                   APPLETON                 R E P R O R T RE I N J U R I E O & D E C A S E D A T S H E F F I E L D H O S P I T A L S .
                                                1 6 2 S E E N y 1 2 DOA r 2 D I E D L A I E R .
Ml 359                APPLETON                 A P P L E T O N S T S S T A T E M E N T S S Q U E S T O B T A I N E D FROM
                                                          | & S'i E V E N C A I N . WHO WENT W I T H D EC D 1 YR EL I - BO DY 3 6
M l 731               A P PL . E TON           R E F E R S T O C A S U A L T Y R EC OR D FORM BOOK S A OR (G C A S U A L T Y
                                               RECORD FORMS,, H A N D E D 1 0 1                     Z 3    S 3 2 3 9 RE E X H I B I T S .
                                                                                                                                    CON t"
                                                                                                                            P AG I.



   N o m i. n a. L n o ,     N7 9 3 5
   8 u rnam e        AP P I ..K"I 0 N                           T i 1 1&
   F o r e n a m e s JUL.IE

     G r o s s ■■ - r e f e r e n c e s c o n t i n u e d s -
Ml 741                    APPi. E T O N         N 2 0 1 S T B A T PRfc"Si£NT T H E R M I S A D I S C R E P A N C Y RE T H E
                                                F OOT WEA R WORM 8 Y N 6 1 3 ( 8 0 D Y 4 S > I M 7 9 3 5 TO C L E A R T H I S UP
M2G47                     APPLLTOM              N 7 9 5 5 G I V E S MEW A D D R E S S OF N 1 9 9 1 WHO I S 1 i i t T A T H E R
                                                OF N 6 6 4 ( B O DY 7 1 ) .
M204S.                    APPLETON              N 7 9 5 5 O B T A I N S S 1 A T E M F N 1 FROM N 2 7 K 3 RM H I S D E A ! ..I N G S
                                                WITH N 6 0 2 ( 80DY 4 2 ) „
M2049                     A P P L E T ON        N 7 9 5 3 T A K E S H J R T H E R £>7ATF.MEN        ••■ROM |________| & DOCUMENT
                                                0 3 6 5 3 , P H O T O RE H I S D E A L I N G S     W ITH N 5 7 3 (BODY 3 5 )
M21U6                     A P P L E ! ON        N 7 9 5 5 B I S PC L A N D E R S M I S T A K E N A B OU T □
                                                A S S I S T I N G W I T H B O D Y 6 0 . ’|__                   ’ CHECKED N E G A T I V E
M2 144;                   a p p l e t on        N 7 9 5 5 FOR WA RD S S T A T E M E N T S FROM
                                                                         RE D O C U i i E N TAT I ON OF D E C E A S E D 3 N G H .




                                                    END    Of    REPORT
incident              IOS     I S 1 1 V 7 O P 931                NOMINAL RECORD              PR INI'

   N o m i n a l no,,  Nil 159
   Surname        SAWERS                                         Tit Le       MR
   F o r ename-s M A T T H E W

   B i r t h p .I.a c e
   DoB                             Age       To                         Be      M                 1c
   Occupation           POi      [NS3451
   Emplayer/School               name  W MIDLANDS               PO! 1CFL
   Height               to               Build
   Hair Colour
   Hair Type

   Eyes
   C om p Ie      io n

   I-a c j a j ha i r
   GI a s s e s worn                    Use
   Jewellery                                                                                           Accent

   Re c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s ,m a r k s , s cars , pe cuI iar i t i es ,a b n o rrna J.i t i es




   Know? Victim                                N a t u r e a ■(' r e 1 a t i o n s h i p
   A t S ce n e                                Fingerprints

   CKO number                                        L o ca 1 r e f » n o
   B l o o d S a m p !,e U                       G r o u p (AS 0)                   0 1h e r
   SaJiva Sample U                                     Sec s'-e t e r U             8 u s pe ct           L 1 im C o d e

   C 1 o t h :i.n g




  0 1 h e r 1: r e e T e t
 FROM A 7 0 2 8 .




         C r o s s - references;-
ADDRLBS                 L X R U 8 1N E S S    ME).)3 CO L E G A L C E N T R E ,      WATERY        ST,    U P P L R T H O R P E , SI iEF I 1F.I..D
TELEPHONE               EXBUSINESS
TEl. E P H O N E        BUSINESS
TELEPHONE               BUSINESS
'IP I...FPH'ONE         I'.:X P A G E R
CATEGORY                LINK                  p oi.. ic e l i a j:s o n o f f j:c e r s
CATEGORY                REf'ERB T O           SOCIAL SERVICES                                     SHE.F F I El D C I T Y COUNCIL.
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO        SHEFFIELD MAJOR PEACETIME                           EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
                        LINK
                        R E F E R S TO
                        !. INK
                        LINK
                                                                                                                                          0 ON T
   N o m i n a l no,,    Nil 139
   Surname          SAWF.RS                                         .i.e
   F o r e n a m e s 1ATTHEW

        C ro 5 5 i ■e r e n c e * c o T"i'i i n u e d.s
                       REFERS         TO
                       REFERS         TO
                       REFERS         ro
                       REFPRS         10
                       REFERS         T'O
                       REFERS         TO
                       REFERS         TO
N1979                  I.INK                SIVA! ..OGANATFIAN                  SOMABUNPRUM
                       Rtl- fc.R‘3    TO
                       REFFRS         10
N 6 1 “>1              LINK                 PURCELL                              W J.1...I.AM
N8334                  REFERS         TO    EDMUNDSON                             MAi ..COLH
A72H3                                       INSP S A W Y E R S T'O P R O V I D E C O P Y OF S T A T E M E N T S 3 4 6 1 T O S / Y
A7327                                       HP s INS SAWYi:: RS V I E W G S L 1 3 7 9 & I NVt ST IG A TE R ER S O N A L L Y ,.
A 7330                                      INS S A W Y E R S T O H A V E D I S C R E E T E N G S M A D E RE R E S U L T S H O W N
A? 39 6                                     O B T A I N ORIGINAL, fif-COLL P.Cl I O N S F R O M P C P 6 1 8 HOUL.T SY P „
A8361                                       INS SAWERS;; OS fA IN B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E Of C O L I N SEF'fON,
A&37^                                       INS SAWERS s                          C O N T A C T Ti-iii R E L A T I V E S OF B O D Y 4c%
R 102                  BUSJECf              20-1 1--89 S A W E R S
M1B39                  S U B J h Cl         1H-10-89 SAWLRS
A 7330                                      RESULT:                  IW A S 'SICK D I D N O T W O R K M A T C H , N 3 3 1 8 IN
                                            S E R I A L 6 3 , S 3 3 3 7 R E F E R S , NO J O H N S O N IN S E R I A L 3 OR 6 2 .
A8361                                       R E S U L T S C O P Y OF B I R T H C E R T I F I C A T E O B T A I N E D , A T T A C H E D
                                            T O B O D Y r ILF. 61.
A837R                                       RESULT'S I N F O R M E D OF ALL. D E T A I L S AS ABOVE. „
H 11H3B                P U R Oil Li         N 6 1 3 1 S T S H A N D E D C O P Y OP T R A N S C R I P T T O Nil 139 & ID'S
                                            AS REF W P / 1 (03437) H A S R E T A I N E D O W N C O P Y OF S A M E
SE733E                 S V A i .OGAM A      N 1979 S T S A S K E D BY Nil 139 &                            pTO C L A R I F Y P H R A S E S
                                            IN 1ST S T M E M T R E P O S T M O R T E M B O D Y 06. C L A R I F I E S THESE,,
b'3EX)6i:.;                                             R E S H O W N VI S U A L E V I D E N C E R E DEC 9D BY N11139,,
                                            C L A R I F I E S I D E N T S . 1) N 6 4 3 0 3 00Y 61),, & P O S S < 8 0D Y 88) .
S3633                                                    |S T S S H O W N A C O P Y OF A C A L I B R A T I O N C E R T I F I C A T E
                                            BY Nil 139 I D * D A S AN O R I G I N A L H A N D E D T O E A S TWO O D S
S3800                                                    IS T S V I E W E D i; 1L.M REF MA P 9 / E W I T H Nil 139 & ID*D
                                            S E C T I O N S OF THE F I L M AS B E I N G H I S O W N R E C O R D I N G S „
S38tKJA                                                  |SIS H A S B E E N S H O W N V I D E O BY N i l 139 OF H I S
                                            F I L M I N G IN L/L..N R E I                      <% G E V E S O P I N I O N S .
R 10S                  S A W I".! S         R E P O R T F R O M INSP S A W E R S TO D S U "SAY!..OR RE L O C A L
                                            AUTHORITY RESPONSE < SHEFFIELD PEACETIME PLAN )
Ml 8 3 9               SAWERS               Nil 139 S T S HE H A S C A N C E L LI:.D T H E I N S T A L L A T I O N OF A
                                            H O L M E S L I N E ON S E C O N D F L O O R 3 F U R N I V A L H 3 E , S H E F F I E L D ,
HE 130                 WE3 GOL D            i'URTHER S K E N T F R O M DC WEIGOL.D RE CL.AR1T 1C A T ION 01-
                                            C ON. 1"IM U IT Y OF D E C E A S E D ,




                                                     E N D OF    REPORT
                                                            Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                            50 Windsor Road

              POLICE                                        Heeley
                                                            SHEFFIELD
              JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                            S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission

Date:                             I "7 2)cce<«lo e* t

To:                               lOeat-                             QoUu jl


For the attention of:             C&u         fia s -ne/z

Comments:                                            R        i **




                                   "<J©k*v U)0o£>coc*
                                   S   k a   *.

                                   f t W           BVVSDtrvl

                                                          POW^kL




                                   I              **jyv




From:

Telephone Number:                CHu*. 't£2-io<4“i

 Number of Pages (including this page)                      (4- ^

 In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
 South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
 Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
1 7 -0 ^ ^    9 ? (WED )    0 8 = 14
                                                                                   T E L : 01 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13    3113      P. 0 0 1




 **   C O N F I R M A T IO N    REPORT    **




 TRANSMISSION
 TRANSACTION( S)               COMPLETED




   NO.       DA TE /TIM E          D E S T IN A T IO N                  DURATION PGS                     STATUS     MODE


   121       DEC. 1?       7:45                          901216264160   0* 2 9 ' 0 1 '   049             OK         N ECM
Incident           IDS       1 7 1 P 9 7 OP'9 3 1                   DOCUMENT R E C O R D            PRINT

                                                                                                      STATEMENT         NUMBER         S2259

                                                                                                                                     Station

Surname                       GR O O M E

F arenames                    HAXWEL.            DERYCK           CHARLES

A ge                                                                       Date        of    birth

A d d r e s <5


Occupation                    P O L P C 446

T e 1ephone

3.C                           Height                                       B u i.1 d

Hair     colour

Hair     type

Efyes                                                                      Complex.!on

facial       ha i r

Glasses                       Us e                                         A ccent

N u rrsb e r o f P a g e s

Dated                         0405&9                                                                  M I) C GRGOMF. P C 4 4 6 S i g n e d


                 At   9.30am        (0930)       on S a t u r d a y ,   1 5 th A p r i l       19«9        < 1 5 0 489) , i c o m m e n c e d

                 duty    at H i l l s b o r o u g h      football       Ground          in    connection with              a f-ootball

                 Association          Challenge           Cup Semi-final                between Liverpool                and Nottingham

                 F orsst.

                 At   9.45am        (0945)       the     s a me    date,     1 attended             a briefing          in the       North

                 Stand      given     by C h i e f       Superintendent                DUCKENFIELD.              Police     Sergeant

                 C H A P M A N wa s   our    serial         Sergeant        and        we w e r e     to    take    up d u t i e s     on the

                 perimeter          track    of the         playing        are a .          inspector        DARLING       was    in    charge

                 of   the    serials        on    the     perimeter          track.           1 can        specifically          remember

                 Chief      Superintendent               DUCKEIMf I E L D      stating         during         the   briefing         that     "AT

                 THIS    STAGE THERE             IS N O P R O V I S I O N F O R         THE KICK           Oi-F T O BE. PUT       BACK,"        and

                 "UNDER      NO C I R C U M S T A N C E S     IS A N Y O N E    TO 8E A L LO W E D ONTO THE P E R I M E T E R

                 TRACK."

                 At   ID. 4 5 a m     ("1045)      the    same      day,     I took          up m y    us ual       position      on    the
                                                                                                                                PAGE
                                                                                                                                S2259

perimeter            track,      that       is at       g a te     2 on       the S p i o n H o p           (Penistone          Road

end)     of     the    ground.          During          the       foil o w i n g       four       hours      the    Kop    filled          up

at     a steady        rate.        The N o t t i n g h a m F o r e s t            supporters               were     coming      into

t he    ground        reasonably            early       and were           for     the       greater         part       very    well

behaved™             During      this       p e r i o d we        received         frequent            visits       from Chief

Inspector            BEAL    and    Superintendent                   GREENWOOD           checking            on    the    position

of     the     crowd       on the      Kop     and      the       nearest        section          of    the       S o u t h Stand.

Visits         from        other    supervisory               officers,            ie,       Chief      Superintendent

D U O K E-INF IE L D a n d Ins p e c t o r D A R LING,                  were     somewhat            less     f requen t *

Twenty         Officers,         mostly        Community             Constables              from      'l-*1 B u b - D i v i s i o n ,

including            myself,       were      placed around                 the     perimeter            track       at    intervals.

We     had     nothing much            to    do at       this        location           at    this      time.

By     12.30pm        (1H30)       that      day,       the N o t t i n g h a m         Forest         supporters          started

to     come     into       the   ground        in      increasing             numbers         an d     by 2 . 3 0 p m     (1430)          the

S p i o n K o p w as        four    fifths          full.          There        wa s    room at         the       front    of    the

Kop     but     not mu ch.          I noticed            that        the      corner         of    the L e p p i n g s     Lane

terracing            was    full    and      plenty          of    room was            available            in the       sides       of

the     terracing.

During         the    period       between          '12.30pm         (1230)        and 2.45pm               (1445),       many

Liverpool            supporters         ha d      gone       onto       the     Sp.ion K o p w i t h          tickets

purchased            from    touts      outside          the       ground,         or    ha d      gained         entry    with

forged         tickets.          The    raised area                of     the    Kop,        near      to    the N o r t h      Stand

had     been     set       aside    for      up to        1,000 Live r po o l                supporters            in    the    Kop.

Inspector            CALVERT        was      in     charge         of a s e r i a l          dividing         the L i v e r p o o l

and     Nottingham           supporters.                During          the     period        12.30pm         (1230)       to

2.30pm         (1430)       there      were       no    signs        of    trouble           from      this       area.        And

during         this    period,         myself          and    Police          Constable           2046 HOLMES             must       have

directed         as m a n y as         120 L i v e r p o o l         supporters              up to      the       raised

a e rt i o n

About        2.45pm        (1445)      that       day,       about        eight        Liverpool            supporters          came       up
                                                                                                                                         r A C'it.
                                                                                                                                         S&239

to    gate    2 a n d a s k e d me            to    escort          them        up to       the       raised          section,                  E

contacted          Inspector            DARLING.*            who    went        to    seek advice                as       to    what        to       do

with    these        supporters.               Th e      Liverpool              supporters             could          not       get      up to

the    raised        section           due    to N o t t i n g h a m          Forest        supporters                blocking              their

way

At'?.47pm,           (1447)        Inspector             DARLING             returned        and       t o l d me          to       escort

these    supporters               across       the       front          of    the     Kop    in f r o n t            of    the

Nottingham           supporters              and    into       the       raised           section.,             1 pointed              out       to

Inspector          DARLING         that       this       would          be    dangerous           to m y s e l f           and       the

Liverpool          supporters.                However,             Inspector              DARLING          insisted             that        I

escort       the L i v e r p o o l       supporters                in    front        of    the F o r e s t           fans,          and        not

across       the     perimeter           track,          some       £0 yards              (20 y ds),            to    the       safety           of

gate    ’O'',        Fortunately Police                       Constable              HOLMES accompanied                         me     with          the

Liverpool          supporters            as    far       as    the       main        exit/entrance                   underneath                 the

end    of the        raised        section.              I then          accompanied              the       Liverpool                fans        from

the    rear     of    the        Kop    into       the       Kop    an d      through a very                    densely             populated

K o p arid into           t he    raised       section.

As    I returned           across        the       back       of    the       Kop     towards          gate          "0",       I saw many

Police       Officers            rushing       through             gate       *0*     towards          the       perimeter              t ra c k .

1    returned        to    the     perimeter             track          and     saw       that    a    l arge         number           of

Liverpool          supporters            were       spilling             onto        the    p i t c h at         the L e p p i n g s

Lane    end.         I assumed           it wa s         a    pitch          i n v a s i o n a n d as m a n y              officers

were    rushing           up to        that    end,          i returned              to    gate       2,        A fe w         seconds

later    Chief        Inspector              BEAL     approached                myself,          Police          Constable               GRLEN

and    Police        Constable           HfcX-LiWh'LL, a n d                 instructed           us       to    stay          at    the K o p

and South          Stand area            to    prevent             Nottingham              Forest          fans       from          co m i n g

onto    the     pitch..           Approximately                5 to          10 m i n u t e s     later          we       were

reinforced           by at        le ast      another          serial.               Suddenly          about          4 D — t>0 L i v e r p o o l

fans    charged           down     to    the Spi.on K o p                end      from      the       half -way            line.            Myself

and    other       officers            intercepted             them.            These       supporters                were          obviously
                                                                                                                                   PAGE
                                                                                                                                   S2£t>9

u p s et ,    most       were      drunk      a nd were         screaming             and       shouting          angrily          at    the

Forest        fan?,         who    were      chanting         at    the        Liverpool           fans,         obviously          making

them more           and more          ups e t .       We     turned        the       Liverpool             fans       around       and

s e n t t h e m back          to w a r d s    the      I.e p p i n g s L a n & e n d .           Many       L iverpool            fans

began        to    bre a k    up a d v e r t i s i n g       hoardings           and      ferry        the       injured and

dead     t o w a r d s the         gyinn a s i u m .

From around              1.30pm       (1330)        r adio      communications                   had       been       very     bad,      the

sound        becoming         wobbly         and    distorted.                 However,          I cannot             remember          any

radio        message         being       passed        from    the       Control          Room        from aro u n d           3.08pm

<1308)»

Liverpool           supporters            began        to    run    down        towards          us a n d        break       up

advertising              hoardings,             I began        to a s s i s t         them       in this,              I then

helped        to    carry an ad v e r t i s i n g             hoarding           up to          the    Leppings           Lane      and

and    wa s       helped      by a L i v e r p o o l         supporter           to     bring         it    over       towards          the

Control           Room.

Three        or    f o ur    Liverpool          fans        loaded       up a b o d y           onto       the    hoarding

saying,           'TAKE HIM         O U T OF       HERE,      H E ’S D E A D " .         Myself            and    maybe        4 or 5

Liverpool           fans      ran w i t h       the     hoarding           towards          the       exit       between          the

North Stand and                   the Kop,          The      exit       was     very      crowded           with       supporters

and    hoardings             and    injured and              dead       people,           I lost           my    grip     of      the

hoarding           as    it d i s a p p e a r e d     towards           th e    gymnasium.                 1 was       knocked          to

o ne   side        and      eventually          returned           to    gate        ?. a n d    the       South Stand.

Chief        Inspector            BEAL    instructed           me       to a s s i s t      Police          Constable

1-iHLLlWELL at the S o u t h S t a n d w i t h s p o n t a n e o u s f i g h t s b r e a k i n g out in

the    S o u t h S ta n d .         Many Nottingham                 Forest           supporters             were       s t ill    abusing

Liverpool           supporters            and      fights       were       b r & a k i n g out         in the          South       Stand.

Many Liverpool                fans       were      still      swarming           down       towards             the    Forest       end of

the    ground,           obviously           upset      and     trying          to     pick      f i gh t s .

Many     of       these      Liverpool          fans        were    dru n k .          I c o u ld      sme ll         intoxicants

and    they were             unsteady         ort t h e i r     feet,          some     could         hardly          sta n d .
        On    the    pitch were             Chief        Inspectors          SEAL, a n d S U M N E R        and     Superintendent

        GREENWOOD.               It w a s     utter          chaos™     Eventually,             about      4 « DH pm     ( 16 0 b-) t h i n g s

        seemed       to     be    running          more       smoothly       and        things     were     becoming         organised,.

        The     ground        started         to    empty and           half      of      serial      2 were      placed          near

        to    the    players         entrance            on    standby.,          Many      Liverpool         fans       were      sti l l

        wandering           about       the      pitch,        intoxicated.

        At    6 » 0 0 pm    (1800)        C attended            t h e ■ M e - f a r i e f * in the N o r t h            Stand and            then

        helped       colleagues             from        'F 1 v a r e a w i t h      their       emotional         problems.              I

        went     off       d u t y at     1.00am         (0100)       on    16 A p r i l       1989    (160489).

        As    regards         the    policing            at    the    event       and     my    previous        experience            of

        football           matches        at H i l l s b o r o u g h ,      I would add            the    followings

                            In    previous          matches          which       h av e    involved Liverpool                at

                            Hillsborough                there    h a ve     been many           drunk     supporters              getting

                            into     the      ground,          fighting          broke      out    in the L e a g u e        m a t c h at

                            the     end     of     the       1984/3-3      (000084/000085)               se a s o n ,    a n d at     last

                            year's        semi-final            there       was     a     pitch    invasion         at     the     end

                            of    the     game,         Liverpool          fans     swarmed        onto     the     pitch,

                            attempting             to    goad and          fight        with Nottingham             supporters.

                            The N o t t i n g h a m          supporters          wrecked        the   e:<it g a t e s       and

                            some     fencing            at    the K o p     end,        while     fencing       was      torn

                            d o w n at      the L e p p i n g s       Lane       end.     Nobody       learned, f r o m           this,

                            last y e a r ’s s e m i - f i n a l            was    s e e n as a s u c c e s s .

                            In    previous          years,       Chief       Superintendent               MOLE      would walk

                            around        the      perimeter          track       asking        officers        h ow     things

                            were     going         and       obviously       noting         the    ground       capacity.




                                                                                               M D C GROOME             P C 446    S 1 GNE-.D

STATEMENT    TAKEN
             PLACE

             TIME                             DATE             040589
W r m f e s s to s i g n a t u r e s

OF MCfc'KS S 1 G N A T URt s
Incident            IOft     17 1 2 9 ?     0 P 93 1                   DO C U M E N T     R EC OR D PRI NT

                                                                                                         B'VAI E M E N T N U M B E R       SEE39A

                                                                                                                                          Station

Surname                          GROOME

F o r e nan if-1%                MAXWELL          DERYCK            CHARLES

Age                                                                           Date        of    birth

Address                          HAMERTON         RD        FI11..1. S B O R O UG H „ S HE F F I E L D


0 c c u p a t ion            Fs0 L P C 4 4 6

Telephone                                    |

IC                           Height                                           8 u i 1.d

Hair       colour

Flair t yp e

I.'.-yes                                                                      Complexion

F a ci a i ha i r

Glasses                      Use                                              Accent

N urn Jbe r o f P a g e s 2

Dated                        0310S9                                                                      M D C GROOME              PC446    Signed


              Further            to m y     statement            dated 4th May                 1989    (04(3589)           I would       like    to

               add     that       today      I h av e        been      shown      a     photograph           relating         to    the

               Hillsborough Football                         Disaster         by W P C                   and W P C                  of    the W e s t

               Midlands           Police.




               In     p h o t o g r a p h Ref      No L P E         4/11     (Exhibit           No                ) I can       identify

               myself        engaged         in    carrying            the    deceased              I no w   know     to     be C o l i n WAF l-R,

               body        13.     1 carried            this        person      from       the       Leppings        Lane     end    of    the

               pitch       to     11"ie 8 pi.on K o p          end.         However,           as    I reached        the     corner       between

               the S p i o n       Kop      and    the N o r t h S t a n d            I lost         grip    of    the      hoarding       a n d was

               knocked           out   of    the       way.         The     other       fans        carrying       the      hoarding       carried

               on with           the   person          to     the    ga p    between           the Spi.on K o p a n d          North Stand.

               I had        no    further         dealings           with     any       other        people       t h at    died.
                                                                                                                                   PAGE
                                                                                                                                   SHE’S'?A

             I have        also    b ee n    shown a      photo g ra p h Ref            Mo      MA    13   (Exhibit       No            )

             which        is the    clothing         worn      by    the     deceased,           WAF IfR .       1 can    identify

             this    clothing         as     being      worn    by the        person         I carried           on the     hoarding.




             .1 h a v e    marked     on a     p l an    of    the    pitch       by m e a n s        of   two    blue    d o ts   marked

             'A*    and     *B * the        places      where       I first       picked         up the      hoarding          carrying

             WAFER        and   where       1 lost      grip    of    the     hoarding,              respectively.              I now

             produce        this    p l a n as R e f      No M D C G       '1 ( E x h i b i t    No               )»     (Sig n e d )

             M D C G R O OM E PC446,                            1




                                                                                                M D C GROOME           PC44& SIGNED

 STATEMENT      TAKEN
                PLACE:

                T 1MIT s                       DATE            03KJ89

 WITNESS     T O SIGNATURE;;

 OFFICERS     SIGNATURES

E N D OF   REPORT
Incident             I OH      171297      OP9 3 1                 DOCUMENT!          RECORD P RI NT

                                                                                                     STATEMENT NUMBER               S2223

                                                                                                                                  Station

Surname                         WHITE

I" o r e n a m e s              HARRY

Age                                                                        Date       of    birth

Address                         HAMMt£RTON R D P O L I C E S T A T I O N


0 c c u pa 1 1 o n              POL    INS

Tele phone

IC                              '■eight                                   0 u i 1d

Ha i r c o l o u r

Hair      type

Lyes                                                                      C o m p 1ex ion

Facia.I.      hair

& lasses*                       Use                                        Accent

N urnber of P a g e s

Dated                           101)689                                                                               H.    WHITE Signed


                9.00am            (0900)        On Duty        at H a m m e r t o n    Rd        Police Station.           Full     group

                                                 pre s e n t .

                 To g r o u n d     :in P o l i c e    Transit       D634

                9.30am            (0930)        Gymnasium/Police               R o om.           Report presence           draw     radicf.

                9.43am            (0945)        North     stand      for       briefing          by C h i e f    Superintendent

                                                 Du e kenf i e 1d .

                10.00am         (1000)          Sri e f i ng

                1 Li. 1 3 am      ( "1013)       15a c k e d m e a 1 ..

                10.43am           (1043)         Alone      to L e p p i n g s     Lane terraces            and West        Stand,

                because           1 have been          Inspector          in    c h a r g e of     this     end    on a f a i r l y

                regular           basis        since    1985.        I h o l d a set of            keys     to    the p a d l o c k s   on

                 inner       gates     and      the    main      exit/ingress              gates     A,   f:) a n d C.      Information

                of     capacity        crowd,         therefore        padlocked            six    pen g a t e s     (one    upstairs,

                five        in t e r r a c e    pens)     to w al l       in the       open       position.         Checked       that       two
                                                                                                                            PAGE
                                                                                                                            S2223

West     Stand         ''wing'1 e m e r g e n c y       exit      gates      ha d      b olts    ’shot"        with       gate    in

closed         position        but     gates        NOT     padjocked.              Checked        storerooms             and

tunnel         gates      beneath West              Stand       (including           switch        gear       room).        Quick

physical          che c k    of     terraces         and     elevated         section           for     unwanted

articles.               Area       secure        a 1.1 okay.

•1-1.1 d a m     (1110)        B r ie f e d s e r i a l s       "14 a n d    15     (from Barnsley)                 on    terraces

:i.n f r o n t    of    central        tunnel        and     in two         areas       at     rear     West    Stand       behind

turnstiles             A-ti a n d     11-16.         (Note        9 and      10 t u r n s t i l e s      to    be    used       for

N o r t h Stand.            Blue      g a te     left     o p e n a n d C.C.           barrier        hung     on has p ) .

Brief       per    ow n     notes      of      14.4.69        (140 4 8 9 )    scribbled            on m y      briefing          notes

and    covering           mainly       -

1.     SAFETY

Evacuation             procedures           and messages            and      identify Police                  Constables          with

specific          gate      responsibilities                 in e m e r g e n c y       evacuation.             Other       E/E

r e s p a n s i b i l i t i es «      S e a r chi ng      dr i n k / w e a p o n s .

2.     TV

Individual             behaviour           on N a t i o n a l     TV a n d    our       ow n    to m o n i t o r .        Here    to

Police,          not    watch match.

3.     PROPERTY           CABIN

Provision          new      porta-cabin             for     retaining         seised           i tems    and    procedure

dealing          property.

4.     CASH SNATCH

Last     y e a r ’s cash           s n a t c h at    snack        bar   West        Stand.         Showed       physically

location          snacks       bars        and    included         programme            sellers         and    one       thousand

pound       they w o ul d          take     and     hold     in    cloth      bags.

5.     FIN       15*s

S p e c i a 1 E.v e n t s

6.     f'JCKET C O L O U R S

Brown       to N o r t h S t a n d ,

Red    to W e s t       Stand.
Purple       to L e p p i n g     Lane      Terraces.

7.     OFT       DUTY

No    one    to    go    off    duty without               permission.

11.25am          (1125)        Called       all       stewards           to W e s t    Stand whether                   deployed           on

stand       or    terraces.            Identified             two       stewards        responsible               fo r W e s t      Stand

wing     E/E      ga t es .     Ensure       all       aware        E/>£ p r o c e d u r e       and     repeated            tannoy

messages          for a l e r t      and. s t a n d      down.           Stewards         would         h av e    to    ensure

ticket       in    r i ght     place         and steward                crowd.

No ticket - no entry.

All    aware       their       positions              allocated           by    club.

All    wearing          proper       identification.

12 n o o n        (12.00)      Turnstiles             open.         Officers          and      stewards           in    position,

liuiid      up g r a d u a l    and       friendly,,           W e ll     behaved.             Made      constant            c h ec k s

of    snack       bars,       programme          sellers           re    security.             Supervision              of    pen

filling          unnecessary           officers,          stewards             and    turnstile            progress           okay.

Between          1.30pm       (1330)         and 2.00pm             (1400) A p p r o x i m a t e l y          six m e n w i t h

Liverpool          accents        at      Gate        *C,*.    S t e w a r d on       g a te c a l l e d      men.      Produced

small       wallets       with       dynataps          claiming           '’O f f i c i a l    Liverpool           stewards’.

No    tickets        attempt         to    ’y a n k 9 g at e        open       but    1 anticipate                and    held       firm.

I slammed          it   shut.          Repeat         performance              ten m i n u t e s        later.          No    entry.

About       2.30pm       (1430)        ’L as t    m i n u t e ’ build           up    started.             Press        on

turnstiles.             $oy     fainted          to    property           cabin.          Deploy Police                 Constable

to    snack       bar a n d     then       two    Police           Constables           to     programme           sellers          not

in    porta-cabins.               Check       pens       and       elevated          section.            No      problems.

Approxima.te 1 y 2 » 4 0 pm               ( 14405 . You.ng Po 1 i ce C o n s t a b l e                   w .11h      'stupid. a nd

l e g l e s s ’ drunk         wandering          about        in    concourse           at     rear      A--G t u r n s t i l e s .

Did    not       know where          to    go.        “look    him       to P o l i c e       Roo m .      Had     to    support

drunk       ail    way.        (Police       Constable              ‘1/19 or         1715      or   similar).

2.45pm       (1445)       Checked watch                 leaving          police       room,         radio        message,         ’G e t

some     more      horses       up     here",         (or s i m i l a r ) .          Auto      — assumed           Leppings          L an e
                                                                                                                                    I-'AGE
                                                                                                                                    S2223

end.        Unknown          officer         said,        "Sounds         like     its       getting        b u s y at        your        en d

Marry".           Returned          to L e p p i n g s         Lane      end     via     rou t e    under         N o r t h Stand.,

Getting          busy.        Concourse             rear       11-16.          Climbing          over      wall     above           gate

*B'„        Joined       Police          Constables             at    *B'      gate      entice          down.       Fans

distrustful.                 Waving        their         tickets.           inspector            John.Bennett                ha d

c 1 i m b e d on'to tur n s t i 1 e s roof                 to    dea 1 .

Aware       of    the    crush          outside          11-16       turnstiles.                Coming      through           very

slowly.           Stepped          away      from        turnstiles            to w a t c h      Inspetor          Bennett           but

two    or    three       times          I was      pulled        by L i v e r p o o l        people       wh o     ha d      got     inside

who    were       complaining              about         the    crush       outside.            " Yo u    should        be    out

there.           People       are       gonna      get     killed".

Through          the    g at e     in the         wa'i 1. b e t w e e n     the        two c o n c o u r s e s     at     the       rear       of

two    sets       of    turnstiles.                I became           aware       of a m o v e m e n t       of      p eo p l e .         From

previous          experience             ,
                                         ‘C k n e w      it was       too m u c h        for     turnstile           flow       and

there       were       too m a n y       for      waiting        friends          responding             to a k i c k         off        or

crowd       cheer       or    similar.              I stepped            through         into      the     concourse            behind

A~G„        (Not       sure      whether          pulled again              by fans).

Twice       called       on      radio       using        allocated            call      sign      ' In d i a 7 9 .

I seemed          to    recall          t h at    all     the    turnstiles              ha d    stopped.           Men were

screaming          trapped          in them.              Gate       'C     was    open and              people      were       coming

through.           The       terror        in the         turnstiles             communicated              itself         to me

and    brought          the      seriousness              of    the      situation           to mind.

1 went       out       through          gate      ’C'

I remember             standing          alongside             Inspectors              Graham Delaney              a n d Liob P u r d y

and Sergeant             John Morgan                   pulling        people           out of      the    crush         on

turnstiles             A-G.        I feared            some     would       be    killed.           Some      were        reluctant

to    come.        I think          they         had     got    so    c l ose     to     the     turnstiles             they        had       the

single       intention             of     passing         through.             I shouted           at     some,      and      as m a n y

as    possible          I pulled           under         the    i ro n    bar     t ha t     is a        continuation               oF    the

wall    housing           g at e    ’ C ¥»        Th e    crush quite             suddenly           ea s e d .      1 saw          gate
                                                                                                                                    PAGE:
                                                                                                                                    SZS&3

* B ’ had        been     opened.             Th e    queues          became            controllable          and        containable

again.           The     two     turnstiles               nearest           g a te             appeared       to       function

again.           Sergeant           Barry Sorsby                on his         police          horse       came    up to        the

railing          and     using       the      horse         as a b a r r i e r           we    were    able       to     filter       out     of

this     agitated           crowd         fans       wh o      produced            tickets.           I told       the     stewards           on

gate     'C        to    ta k e the         stubs .

By    now     I h a ve      no      idea      of     time       or w h a t         is    happening          outside.

By    word       of m o u t h       information                passed?         "Inside          - Pitch       invasion".               Went

to    the     pitch       vi a      rear      of     police          control            box   and     down    the        first      s t eps

in the        S ou t h Stand,               1 saw         no    players            or    officials          on the        pitch.

The    invasion appeared                      to     h a ve     spread         as       far   as     the    penalty        spot.        I

got    on     to    the     pitch and              had      got      n e ar    to       the    goal    post       when     3 noticed,

those       on     the    pitch were               not      running           towards         opponents           en d    or   away

from     Police          Officers.              Some        were      holding            themselves,          others           lying

d own.        I looked           towards           the      fence         holding          back      fans    in the        Leppings

Lane     terraces.               Police         Officers             were      standing             on the    fence        and      leaning

over.         Through          the       gaps      in the           legs      ! could          see    the    faces        of   fans

pressed against                  the      fe n ce .         I realised               they      were    stood       up dea d .          The

gate     to      this     pen w a s         opened.             I think            it w a s     number       3 gate.

Automatically               Cor      it     s ee m e d )       Police         Officers          formed a double                 line    up

to    the     g at e     and     formed a            chain          gang      to     pass     out     casualties.              When

there       was     no    one       at    your       e nd      of    the      line       to    pass    on the          casualty,        you

carried          it on to           the     pitch.             Police         Constable             R417 Pete          Rotchel        and     I

carried          the     unconscious               body        of a       14 y e a r s        old    boy,    dressed           in a blue

tee-shirt           and     blue         jeans,       on to          the      pitch.           I felt, his         heart        beat    but

his    breathing            w as     so     extremely               shallow          that      1 thought          he w a s      dead.         We

prepared           to    do m o u t h - t o — m o u t h w h e n             I realised              he as    in f ac t         breathing

himself.            We    did       not     interrupt               his     n a t u ra l      breathing       and monitored

his    condition            very         c l o s el y ,     keeping           him w arm and            protected.               I

remember           as    .1 w a s    kneeling             over       hi m     that       I was       kicked       in the        back.         I
                                                                                                                                 PAGE            &
                                                                                                                                 SE223

seemed       surrounded              by    the     click-whizz,                c i :i.c.k -whi zi of' c a m e r a m e n .

People        came w i t h       a    board and             this     boy w a s         c a r r i e d a way.           More      came

with another             board        to     carry away            the     young            w o m a n b e i n g a t t e n d e d to

next    to       us.      1 remember             intervening              as    they        were        g o i n g to     p l a c e her      on

the    board       nails       up.         I turned and              saw       b e h i n d me a f i r e m a n           apply

cardiac          message        to a m a l e          in e a r l y        thirties.               He    then     gave        oral

resuscitation and                    I knelt          beside       the     casualty              to do     cardiac           message.

As    the    fireman          sat     back       he    signalled           me       not     to    continue.             We    checked

for    v i tal     life       si g n s ,     there      were       none.            I covered           the     casualty's            face

with        the    front        of    his       sweater.

I heard          someone       say,        “They''re         charging".                I looked           towards         the    Spion

Kop    and       saw     people       on     the      field moving              towards           it.      They       were      not

running,,          it    l o o k e d as         though a         confrontation                   wa s   imminent.             I went

beyond       the       half    way        line     and made          uniformed              officers           form     up    in a

line.        There       was     a    line       across        the    width          of     the     pitch.           This     halted

the    progress          of     the       Liverpool          fans.         Some        of    them were           cr y i n g .        Some

were    frustrated.                  -Some w e r e      angry,,           It d i d not        help       to      hear        the m a s s

of N o t t s      fans     behind          chanting          and. g o a d i n g .            They seemed              u n a w a r e of   the

tragedy.

4 . 2 0 pin ( 16 ? 0 ) T h i s        wa s      the    first       lull        in    the     sequence           of     events        since

I left       the       police        room,,        I l o o k e d at        my w a t c h ,         it w as       4.20pm        (-1420).       I

became       aware        that       my    radio       was     sti l l     working.               There        were     public

address          announcements               and      the    ground        slowly           emptied.

b.OGprn       (1700)       Given          hot    drinks.           Mustered            serials          in N o r t h S t a n d        and

spoke       to    officers           distressed             by e x p e r i e n c e s .

About       5 . 3 0 pm    <1730)          I went       to    gymnasium              w h i c h wa s      being        u s e d as a

temporary          mortuary           and       I assisted           in    the       collation            of    details         of    the

dead.

11,00pm          (2300)       Went        off    duty       from     the       gymnasium.
                                                             PAGE
                                                             S2223




                                            li„ W H I T E S I G N E D

 STATEMENT       TAKEN
                 PLACE' S

                 TIMf-'s          D A TE;

 WITNESS     TO SIGNATURE:

 OFF ICK.RS S I G N A T U R E ?

i£ND OF   R E P OR 1“
!!n c i d e rit,     10 8      17 "I29 7       0 P 9 31                  DOCUMKIMT KF.CORD PR I NT

                                                                                                            SIATEJitNT N U M B E R             S2238

                                                                                                                                              St-at ion

 Surname                        WOODCOCK

 Forename?;                     JOHN           HOWARD

 Age                                                                             Date       of    birth

 Address


 0 c c u.pa t i o n             POL P C 2359

 T e .Le p h o n e

 IC                            Height                                            B u i 1d

 Hair      colour

 Ha? r type

 Eyes                                                                            C o m p i ex ion

 Facial         hair

 G la s s e s                  Use                                               A c ce n t

 Number         of P a g e s

 Dated                         0 !..>□:.>8 9                                                                                                      Signed


                   [ am a C o n s t a b l e        with        19 y e a r s      service          during      which        t i me    I have         been

                   on d u t y at       every        football          ground        in the         force      area?        including           last

                   y e a r ’s S em i    Final        when        I was     on     duty        on L a p p i n g s    Lan e ,    where          I sa w   no

                   trouble      at all          either         before       or a f t e r         the   game.

                   I reported          on d u t y         at D o n c a s t e r    D U G at       8.30am       on S a t u r d a y ?        13 A p r i l ?

                   1989 where          1 teamed, up w i t h               the     rest        of m y     serial?       number            31   I think?

                   which      included PS 2881                  Pearson,          PC    919 Evans?            PC    139 L a n g l e y ?        PC    1934

                   Smith?      PC ?3!:i IIlackharn? PC                   1239 R a y b o u l d ?        PC    1 9 0 0 Kent?          PC    273!'i Wade?

                   with      Inspector          Millet         in o v e r a l l     command.

                   We    travelled         by P o l i c e        'Transit V a n         to H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m w h e r e           the

                   main      pre-match          briefing          wa s    held      in the         North Stand about                     10am..      This

                   was      followed       by a       p a c k e d m ea l      taken         in the       stand      before          deploying          onto

                   the      streets.           l d o n ’t r e m e m b e r        a great          deal      about    the      briefing?             it was

                   the      usual    format         describing            who     was       going      where       etc..      1 do        remember
                                                                                                                                       PAGE
                                                                                                                                       S&S38

Chief       Superintendent                    D u c k e n f i e l d ’s w o r d s         however          that     the      match would

start       ’p r o m p t l y       at      3pm.*

I remember             thinking             to m y s e l f        t ha t     with     all      the       pre m a t c h      build         up on

TV and        in the            pr ess      about         Liverpool           supporters              having       the      smaller         end

of    the     ground            and     less      tickets             than Notts,           forest,          that       if a      lot      of

them       arrived          without           tickets            and    tried       to     get      in t h e n     he    c o u l d well

be w r o n g      in that             assumption.

About       11am,          my     serial         walked          for    the     ground         to     the    roundabout              at    the

end    of L e p p i n g s          Lane ,        where       we w e r e       deployed           in      pairs     at    various

points        around            the     roundabout,.                  I was     paired         up w i t h i-’C 9 1 9 l£vans and

we    concentrated                 on      the    shops          leading       just        from       the    roundabout              to

Penistone             Koad        for      fear      of     the       fans    smashing           windows,          and      causing

trouble          at    a    ’H ot       Pie      and Pastie             S h o p ’ that         w as      open    just       before         the

turn       off    to N i a g a r a          Sports          Ground.

There       w e r e n ’t m a n y           fans      a r o u n d at        this     time,        but      I soon        noticed           that

certain          f an s     in g r o u p s        of S or 3 w e r e               walking           backwards           an d    forwards

from Leppings                   La n e ,    past      us,        up    towards        Wadsley            Bridge       and      back       down

again,        asking            other       f a ns    for        tickets        and      had     anyone         any     spare        tickets

o r t i c k e ts       f o r s ale.

It    soon       became           evident         that       as       time    passed        and       the    crowds         got      bigger

there       were       even more              fans        who     had      travelled           to     the    game       without

t ick e 1 s .

"she m o o d      of       the     fans       prior         to    the      game     wa s    jovial,          and      neither          myself

or PC E v a n s            received           any abuse               from    any     of    the       fans.        We    had      to      speak

to    quite       a fe w          fans w h o         were        walking        towards          the      ground        carrying           cans

of    beer       and       lager.           Th ese        fans        were    told       that       if    they went            any     further

then       they       probably would                   be    be a l l o w e d       into       the       ground       and      they       agreed

to    go    to a g a r a g e            just      round          the    corner        where         according           to PC        Kent,

who    wa s      outside            the     garage,          they       sat     on the         w a il     and    c o nsumed what

beer       they       had       left       before         walking          up L e p p i n g s       Lane     towards           the     ground.
                                                                                                                                           I-'AGE
                                                                                                                                           S2238

There     wa s    also          quite       a few       f a ns    sat       on    the       wall       opposite             the       road        to

us,    drinking            beer,        e t c , , but        there       wa s     no    trouble           with any               of    these

peo pie „

The    crowds      got          bi gger       and     bigger          and    quite          a    lot w e r e          leaving          it     late,

in m y    estimation,                 to    get      into       the    ground and                get     comfortable                  before

t he   s c h e d u 3 e d. k i c k of f t i me ,,

Indeed      i remember                a group         of     older       fans      in t h e i r          3 0 vs a n d        4Q*s          asking

me,    about      2.30pm,             where       the G a t e         inn was.              I told        them and away                     they

walked      towards             the     pub,        in the       opposite          direction              to       the      ground          with

only     half    an        hour       before           kick off.            It w a s o b v i o u s           a     lot      of     the      fans

had    been      drinking,              and myself              a n d PC     E v a n s had         to     stop         them        using          the

rear     alleyway           behind          the     s h op s     as    a toilet,                this    being          the       first

secluded         spot       they        had a fter           getting         off       their       buses           on C l a y w h e e I s

Lane,      As 3 pm a r r i v e d              there        were       still       a fe w         fans     making            their          way     to

the    ground,         most        of      these      running          or    jogging,             but     nowhere            near          the

large     amount           there        had      been      some       10 m i n u t e s          previously.

All    ou.r s e r i a l         started          to w a l k      up L e p p i n g s         L a ne,     as       our     brief         wa s       to

wait     there     on a bus                until      half       time       when       we       were    to       go    to C l a y w h e e l s

Lane     for a hot              meal,       if    t h er e      was    no    need       for       us     to      remain          there        on

standby,

I d i d n ’t h a v e        a    personal            r a d io    but     1 can         remember           hearing            somebody

e Ise's    as     we       walked          up L..eppings Lane .                   We    ha d      been        joined         by o t h e r

officers         and       one     t o l d me          fans ha d        b r o k e n a gats             d o w n at        the       Leppings

Lane     end of        the       g r o u n d . We    all       started        to            run t o w a r d s         the        g r o u n d as

assistance         was          required.             This       would       be    shortly after                      3pm.

On arrival         at       the       ground        I cannot           remember             if t h e r e         were       st ill         any

large     numbers           of     fans       outside           the    turnstiles,                but     we w e r e         originally

formed      into       a    large          cordon       outside          the      ground          next        to      the    road.            I

don't     k n o w why,           nobody          said what            was    happening,.                 Little          bits         of

information            filtered             through          that      there       had          been     some         trouble          and
                                                                                                                                    PAGE              4
                                                                                                                                    SH238

there       were     some       people        injured and              one       f an     said     there      were          some       dead

as    he    passed        us,     leaving          the    scene™

Our    serial        was    then        taken       towards           the    access         road       outside          Gate        C on

the    attached           map.       As      we    approached,              1 saw         people       l y ing     on       the     ground

near       to the       fence      next       to    the       river.         I knew         immediately                some       of       these

people       were       dead.        There         were       people        l y ing       there      with     their          eyes          still

open,       clothes        missing,           blue       in    colour        and        having       had     bowel          and     bladder

movements,,             1 have       seen         enough       dead     bodies            in m y     service           to

know       something        really           terrible          ha d    happened.                We w e r e    formed           up      in a

cordon       by    Inspector            Sykes       at    this        location,            to    guard       these          bodies,

facing       towards        Gate        C.        The    gates        kept       being      opened and             other

policemen          kept      bringing             more    p e op l e    out.            Some     were       dead,       others             were

injured.           They w e r e         kept       separate,           awaiting            ambulances             which        by      now

were       arriving        at     the     scene.          The     road       was        kept     c l ea r    for       them       to

arrive,          pick     up a n d      depart.           1 s t ill         ha d    no     idea what          had       happened

inside       the     ground.              1 estimate            there        were         about      12 to        15    bodies             right

b e h i n d me.

A    short       time     la ter     the      Liverpool           fans       started            leaving       the       g ro u n d ,

where       the    first        people        they       saw w e r e        us,     guarding           b od i e s .         They h u r l e d

abuse       at    us,     saying        it was          all    ou r    fault        for     opening          the       gats.           1

d i d n ’t e v e n      know      what       they       were    talking            about,        but      what     could          I. saw,

they       might     be    right,         1 d i d n ’t know.                Dy     no w    there       were       lots       of

injured          outside        Gate      C and medical                teams        had a rr i v e d         in    response                to a

radio       call.         Polite        vans       were       used     to    ferry         some      of     the    injured             to

has p i t a I .

As    the    crowds        built        up o u t s i d e       the     Leppings            Lane      end,     a superintendent

whom       I did     not    know,         took      10 of       us a w a y         to     gently       move       the       crowds          to

the    other       side      of    the       bridge       and     stop anyone               approaching                the     ground

without          good     re ason.           What       a futile        exercise            t ha t     was.        As we          tried          to

move       people,        more     came       out       behind        us,    filling            in the       empty          s pa c e s .
                                                                                                                                            PAGE           5


             Paris w e r e          coming        up     to ms        looking        for    their      son?), a s k i n g        me    what, wa s

             happening.                  '.L c o u l d n ' t    teJ 1 them,           1 d i d n ’t know.          I made         something            up

             so    that        it a p p e a r e d        everything            was     under     control.

             1 felt           as    if    I should             be   doing      something         more       to   help      the    i n j u r e d,

             instead           of m o v i n g       people          a w ay,    getting        lots     of a b u s e       in the       process.

             1 never a c t u a l l y              went         into    the     ground       until      we    w e re   all    called         in for

             de-briefing                 in the        N o r th Stand™              I w a s n ’t a l l o c a t e d    a    body       to   deal

             with      outside            the     ground™             1 d i d n ’t k n o w      the    full      extent      of w h a t         had

             happened              un til     1. s a w    the       news      on    IV l a ter     that      night™         1 f e lt       so

             helpless,              in t h a t      I ’d b e e n       there        and    d i d n ’t feel       as   though          I ’d done

             enough       to        help™         I c a n ’t r e m e m b e r         seeing      any    club S t e w a r d s          on my

             arrival           at, the        ground.




                                                                                                      J WOODCOCK            PCS359         SIGNED

 STATEMENT        TAKEN
                  PLACHs

                  T 'JMF. s                            DATE s          O H O b 89

 WITNESS     TO S I G N A T U R E S

 O F F 1CERS SIGNATURES

END   OF   REPORT
incident             108      1 7 1 2 9 7 O P 931                    DOCUMENT          R F C OR I) PR INI

                                                                                                         STATEMENT        NUMBER          8863

                                                                                                                                        S taIion

Surname                           HUCKSTEPP

I-'o r e n a m e s                BRIAN       ROBERT

Age                                                                         Date       of     birth

Address                           B„ Y O R K S H I R E P O L I C E
                                  H A K E N T H O R P£ P S T N

0 c c u pa t i o n                P O L PC 115

T e 1e phone

1C                            Height                                        B u i Id

Hair      colour

Hair      type

E.yes                                                                       Complexion

facial        hair

Glasses                       Use                                           A c cent

Number        of P a g e s

Dated                         070589                                                                                                         Si o n e d


                At    8.30 am          (0800)       on the       d at e    shown       I commenced              d u t y at     Hackenthorpe

                Police        Station.              We w e r e     then     taken       to H i l l s b o r o u g h       by    bus a r r i v i n g

                at     the    g r o u n d at       approximately            9 am.       (0900)            1 w as      detailed         to w o r k     in

                Serial        16 u n d e r      Inspector          P u r dy and PS            "IHSS P a y n e      at 9 . 5 5     am    (0955)

                the        briefing       was      given    in the         North       Stand.

                Our        serial      was    to    be   deployed          directlyoutside                 the     7 turnstiles              A-&      at

                entrance           8 at      the L e p p i n g s     Lane      en d    of       the      ground.

                At     11,15 am          (1115)      we m a d e      our w a y a r o u n d          to    the     rear    of    the     West

                Stand        in    preparation           for     the      turnstiles           being       opened about            11.45        am.

                 (■1 -1 4 5 ) At     11.45 am        (1145)        I commenced               duty    directly          outside         turnstiles

                A & 8        in    c o m p a n y w i t h PC 6 0 7         T a ylor.          In the       early       stages      there       were

                j us t smaIJ           nurnbers      o f f an s      ent e r i ng      i.n     "I *s a n d      ?." s .. I t u r ne d var i ous

                fans       away,       who    had    either        no     tickets       or     tickets          for    th e Kop.             All

                fans        were     being      s e a r c h e d at      this    time         the    m o o d was       friendly         and
                                                                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                                             S863

jovial.         From approximately                        2    pm     ("1400)         onwards         the      number          of       fans

entering          the      g r o u n d at       this          end. s t e a d i l y       increased.                 During          this; b u i l d

up the       number         of    officers               in our        serial          were      steadily            depleted                by

officers          escorting            prisoners               through           to    the      Detention            A rea?         so m u c h             so

that     from      about         S . 3D    pm    (1430)             onwards           i.t, s e e m e d       that    there          was       only

myself       and      PC    2980 Wright                  left       directly           outside           the       turnstiles.                    After

2,.30 pm        (1430)          the    crowd         outside           the       turnstiles              appeared             to    swell

enormously            w i t h i n a few minutes                       and    from        the     queues            being       ord e rl y and

w ell    defined,           it s u d d e n l y           became        one       l a rge       mass      pushing          towards             the

turnstiles.                I found         myself             being        pushed        into        the w a ll          at    the       s id e        of

the     turnstile           entrance.                A    police           horse       came      up to         the       entrance             in a n

effort       to    regulate            the      crowd          but     this       had      very       l i tt l e     effect             as    the

pressure          from      the       back      of       the     crowd       grew..            Eventually myself                        a n d PC

E9M0     forced          our     way      into       the       turnstiles              and      into         the    ground.              We w e n t

around and            back       out      of    the       large        Exit       Gate         C and         continued             to    try and

control         the      crowd,        which         seemed           to    be    trapped            into      the       area       between

Exit     Gate      B and a single                    blue        barrier          which         runs a w a y         from          the

t u.r n s t i 1 e s „

f ram my        p o s i t i o n at        the    side          of     this       barrier         1 could            see       that       the

crowd      pressure             was    becoming               severe.            People         near         the    barrier             were

red     in the          face     and      straining              to    push       back.          Some         fans       were

panicking.              Many were              shouting             and     pleading            at    us      to    do    something,.

There      were         punches        t h r o w n as          some        fans       came      around         the       barrier             and

tried      to     join      the       crush      nearer             the     turnstiles.                  A    small       boy was             passed

over     the      head      of    the      crowd          to     us.        I pushed            a small            space       to a l l o w            a

young      lad     to      escape         the    crush,             but     he w o u l d n ' t        come         under       the       barrier

shouting          at me         that      he w a n t e d         to    see       the     match.Behind                me       there          were          a

large      number          of    fans      standing              away       from       the      main         crush       j u st     outside

Exit     Gate      C„       Many       fans      were          shouting           and      pleading            for       the       gates          to       be

opened       to    ease         the    crush.             I could           see       t h at    there         were       numerous             fans
                                                                                                                                         PAGE          3
                                                                                                                                         8863

climbing         on    to p    of     the      o u t e r w al l       and       entering            the      ground.                  There was

some      talk    amongst            the    Police         Officers             present            and      Inspector             Purdy

informed         the     Officers           directly            outside          Gate         C that         it w a s        going        to    be

opened.          ”ihe G a t e        was    opened         a    short       time         afterwards               from       inside           and a

lar g e    number        of    fans        rushed       i n s ide,         someone            stumbled            as    they went

through.          Th e      gate      was      then     closed again.                       It h a d        been       opened          for

approximately               30-60        seconds.              It, h a d    the        effect         of     clearing             the     area

directly         outside           the     Gate      but       did    nothing            to    e as e       the    general              c r u s h at

the    turnstiles.                 The     situation            continued              to     deteriorate,               people           were       in

distress         many       fans      continued            to     shout         for      the       g a te    to    be    re-opened.

That      they    all       had      tickets.           It s e e m e d          t ha t      it w a s        only a matter                 of    time

before- s o m e o n e         was     i nj u r e d ,    if      not    already.                Many         fans       were       helpless           in

the    crush and            could        hardly move             as    the       pressure             from        the    fans          behind

forced         them    towards           the    turnstiles,,               I could            see 3 or 4 P o l i c e                   horses

up n ea r       the    large         iron      gates       bordering             on L e p p i n g s         Lan e ,      the          crush

of    f an s    seemed        to     s t r e t c h well         into       Leppings            Lane         i tself.         Most        of    the

Police         Officers        I could          see     were         between           the     blue         barrier          and       the

temporary         barrier            guarding          the      sterile          area         at    the      rear       of       the S o u t h

Stand.With            the     situation           getting            worse       the        Exit      Gate        C w as         opened

a.ga i n f r om       the     i ns i de .       This       time       there        was        a rnuch a           1 ar ger        inf 1 ux      of

fans      into    the       ground.            The     majority            of    t h e m w e r e n ’t r u n n i n g               but     all

were      anxious        to    escape          the     crush and            get        into        the      ground.              .f

positioned myself                    directly          outside         Gate        C     in the          flow      of    fans          who     had

to    pass      either        side       of m e ,       They         were       told        not     to      rush,       to       take      their

time.          Hundreds        of     fans      must       have       p a s s e d me.              O n l y a few         running,              the

others         were    orderly.             The      influx          died       down        to a sm all            trickle             after     a

few m i n u t e s      and     the       Gate     was      narrowed             to a l l o w        one      f a n at        a    time,        and

this      time    each        showing          their       tickets          to a s t e w a r d .              The       area          outside

the    turnstiles             wa s    now      clear.           I regrouped with                      officers           from my

serial.          Almost        immediately              someone            reported            that         there       was       a     pitch
                                                                                                                                        PAGE            *■
                                                                                                                                        S863

invasion.              in     company with               other        officers             I went           in t h r o u g h G a t e         C

past     the      tunnel          to    the       Centre        section             of    the     terracing             into        the S o u t h

Stand and          onto          the    pitch.           There        were          many       people        walking           and    standing

o n the       pitch.,            'There wa s        a     lot    of     confusion               as     to w h a t       wa s    happening.

I could          see    that        there         were     numerous             Police          Officers           ne a r      the

perimeter          fence          behind          the    Leppings              Lane       end. goal.              I couldn't            see       the

crowd       b ey o n d .         Next       the P o l i c e      Officers                began        to    pass    injured           peo p l e

out     from an         open        g at e     in the         fencing.               Along       with        others         1 t o ok       them

from    these          officers             and    placed        them          in a s a f e r          position          further           on

t he    pitch.          Many        seemed         short        of    breath and                distressed              but     each       person

I h e l p e d was           alive       and       conscious.               i    helped          one        y outh who          said     to rne

that     people         were        dying         in t h e r e       pointing             at    the        terrace.            At    this        time

due    to    the       number          of    people        on or a r o u n d              the    fence         1 s till         c o u l d n ’t

see     through         to       the    terracing.               I moved             closer           and    1 saw       that        there        was

a mass       crush          of    bodies          just     inside          the       fence.            It w as      a    confusion               of

heads       arms       an d      legs.       1 saw       one m a n wh o              was       obviously           dead        but    he was

held    upright             by the          crush and           his     body m ov e d with                   the    crowd.            By     this

time     1 wa s        directly             outside        the       sma l l        open       gate.        Officers           inside        the

terracing          were          passing          the    injured           o nt o        the    pitch and           giving           first        aid

if     necessary            1 worked           my way across                   to    between           the a m b u l a n c e         which

had     pulled         onto       the       track       and     the     perimeter               fence        which       had        been

forced apart.                    I continued             to a s s i s t         in       carrying           injured         onto       the

pitch.       After          a short          time       J. c l i m b e d       into       the    terracing              through         the

hale     in the         fence          and assisted              in     carrying               people        to    the      fence.           i.

assisted          with approximately                       10    people             all    of w h o m w e r e           already         dead.

Eventually             the C e n t r e         Section          of    the       terrace           cleared.              I remember

that     soon after               t hi s     an a n n o u n c e m e n t         wa s      broadcast            that      the        match

would       not    be       continued.               Whilst          1 was          in the        terracing             and     on     the

pitch       helping           the      injured many Liverpool                             fans        were     directing             their

anger       at    the P o l i c e .            Calling          us m u r d e r e r s           an d    that       it w a s      our     fault.
                                                                                                                                                 PAGE
                                                                                                                                                 S S 63

              Others           t h a n k e >i m e „

              After           the    terracing             ha d    cleared         I joined            other      officers           on    the

              halfway           line.           Eventually             we m a d e       ou r    way    back       to    the N o r t h       Stand      via

              the L e p p i n g s          Lane       terracing.

               Throughout             the       incident           both       outside          and     inside       the       ground       there

              seemed          to     be    communication                   problems.            It     seemed          that    many       d i d n ’t k n o w

              what      wa s        going       on    or w h a t       wa s      the    best        course    of a c t i o n .        The      crush

              outside           the       ground          could       possibly          have        been   better        controlled            with

              more      Police            Officers             and a better             regulation           of    the       flow    of     fans    up to

              the     turnstiles.                    At    the     t i me     when      the     crush      reached           its    height       our

              particular              seria)          seemed          to    be    down       to a q u a r t e r        strength       of w h a t       it

              should          have        been.           I believe           t ha t    opening        the    outer          gates    was      a very

              necessary              decision             as    the    situation             wa s    becoming          out    of    hand      arid a

              serious           risk       of    i n j u ry .         Knowing          the     Hillsborough             Ground       as     I. do a n d

              how      the      Leppings             Lane       end    fills       up    it m i g h t      possibly           have    been       better

              to    direct          the     fans          coming       in t h r o u g h        the    open    gates          into    the     flank

              areas?          which        1 saw were              by no m e a n s           fu'Jl.




                                                                                                                   o . r . HUCKsrt'pr-’ s i        gned


 STATEMENT         TAKKN
                   PLACE

                   T I Hi:'                               DAT!r.

 WITNESS      T O S 1 GNATUHir-

 Ol-'l-K;n.RB S I G N A T U R E

E N D Of   REPORT
in cid en t,         108        171297        QP931                   DOCUMENT         R E CO RD     PRINT

                                                                                                      STATEMENT           NUMBER         8&63A

                                                                                                                                        Station

 Bur name                        HUCKSTHPP

 F a r e n am e ?>               BRIAN         ROBERT

 Age                             21     100                                 Date       of    birth

 A d d ress                      HACKEN'l'HORPP            PSTN


 Oc c u pa t ion                 POL     PC 1 "I

 T e l e phone

 IC                              He i ght                                   B u i 1d

Hair      c ol o u r

 Hair     type

 Eyes                                                                       C o m p i ex ion

Facial          hair

 GI a s s e s                    Us e                                       Accent

Number          of P ag

 Dated                                                                                                                                    Bi gned


                 At    8.30am         (0830)        on    the    d at e   shown,       I commenced           d u t y at        Hackenthorpe

                 PoJice        Station.             We    were    then     taken       to H i l l s b o r o u g h    by     bus    arriving         at

                 the       g r o u n d at     approximately 9.00am                    (09U0).         I was       detailed         to w o r k      in

                 Serial         16 u n d e r       Inspector        PURDY       and Police           Bergeant         1£?88 P A Y N E .       At

                 9.53am         (0953)        the    briefing        was    given          in the     North       St a n d .

                 Our       serial       was    to    be    deployed        directly          outside        the 7 t u r n s t i l e s        A — Oi at

                 entrance           B at      the L e p p i n g s    Lane       end    of    the     gro un d™

                 At    11.1Sam          (1113)       we m a d e     our    way    around        to    the    rear      of      the W e s t    Stand

                 in    preparation             for       the    turnstiles        being        opened about            11.43am          (1143).

                 At    1 "I„43arn       (1143)       I commenced           duty       directly        outside        turnstiles           A and H

                 in    company with              Police         Constable        607       T AYLOR.      Iri the       early       stages

                 there        were      just       small       numbers     of    f an s     entering        in    "I* s a n d S ’s.          1

                 turned        various         fans       a w a y , who    had    either        no    tickets        or t i c k e t s     for      the

                 Kop.         All     fans     were       being     searched          at    t hi s   time,       the m o o d      was    friendly
                                                                                                                                           PAGE
                                                                                                                                           8 863 A

and    jo vial.

From     approximately                    2.00pm           (1400)        onwards,            the      number          of    f an s     entering

the    ground           at    this        end       steadily           increased.                 During         this       build         up the

number        of Officer?;                in our           se ria l      were         steadily            depleted          by O f f i c e r s

escorting            prisoners                through           to    the    Detention              Area,        so m u c h       so      that

from about              2.30pm           (1430)          onwards         it s e e m e d          t h at    there       was     only myself

and Police              Constable              WRIGHT           left     directly            outside            the    turnstiles.

After       ?.30pm           (1430),           the        crowd       outside          the       turnstiles            appeared            to

sw ell      enormously              within              a fe w m i n u t e s          and    from         the    queues        b e in g

o r d e r l y a n d w e)I            defined,              it    suddenly             became        one     l a rg e       mass      pushing

towards         the      turnstiles.                     1 found myself                    being     pushed           into     the wall              at

the    s id e      of     the      turnstile               entrance.              A Police           horse        came       up      to    the

entrance           in a n         effort           to    regulate           the       crowd       but      this       had    very         little

effect        as     the      pressure              from        t,he h ac k       of       the    crowd         grew.        E v e n t u a 11 y

myself        and Police                 Constable              H980     forced            our    way      into       the    turnstiles

and    into        the       ground.                 We w e n t       ar ou.ncl the          back         out of      the 1 ar ge Ex i t

Gate     C and          c o n t i n u e d to        try a n d         control          the       crowd,          which seemed               to       be

trapped         into         the     area          between Exit              Gate          B and a single                  blue      barrier'

which       runs        away       from        the       turnstiles.

From     my     position             at       the       side     of    t h is     barrier           I c o u l d see          that         the

crowd       pressure              w as    becoming              severe.           People          near      the       barrier          were      red

in the        f ac e     and       straining               to    p ush      back.           Some      f an s     were       panicking.

Many     were        shouting             and       pleading           at    us       to    do    something.                T h er e      were

punches         t h r o w n as           some       fans        came a r o u n d           the    barrier         and       tried         to    join

the    crush         nearer          the       turnstiles.                  A s m a ll       bo y was           passed       over         the    head

of    the     crowd          to    us.         1 p u s h e d a. s m a ll              space       to a l l o w        a young          lad      to

escape        the       crush,           but       he      wouldn't          come          under     the        barrier shouting                 at

me    that      he      wanted           to        see the m at c h .

Behind        me     there         were        a    la rge       number          of    fa ns      standing            away     from        the

main     crush          just       outside              Exit     Gate       C»        Many       f an s    were       shouting            and
                                                                                                                                          PAGE
                                                                                                                                          SS63A

pleading         for       the      gates         to    be o p e n e d         to    e a se     the       crush.             I cou.l.d see

t ha t    there       were       numerous              fans       climbing           on    to p      of     t he    outer          wall. and.

entering         the       ground.            There          was     some       talk       amongst           the P o l i c e           Officers

present         and       Inspector           PURDY          informed           the       Officers           directly              outside

Gate      € t ha t        it w a s       going         to    be opened,,                 The    Gate        wa s    opened          a short

time after wa rd s               from      inside            and     a    l a rg e       number        of    f a ns      rushed          inside?

someone         stumbled            as    they went               through.               The    g at e      wa s    then       closed

again.          It    had     been        opened            for    approximately                  30-60          seconds.              It had

the      effect       of    clearing              the       area     directly             outside           the G a t e        but       di d

nothing         to    ease       the      general            c r u s h at       the       turnstiles.               The       situation

continued            to    deteriorate?                 people           were       in d i s t r e s s ?         many        fans      continued

to    shout      for       the      gate      to       be    reopened.               That       t h e y all         had       tickets.           It

seemed         that       it w as        only      a matter              of    t i me     before          someone            was    inju re d?

if not         already.             Many      fans          were     helpless             in the          crush and            could        hardly

move      as    the       pressure         from         the       fans        behind       forced           them        towards          the

turnstiles.                1 could         see         3 or 4 P o l i c e            horses          up n ea r          the    l a r ge     iron

gates      bordering             on L e p p i n g s          Lane,        the       crush       of     the       fans        seemed       to

stretch         wel',1     into      Leppings               Lane     itself.              Most       of     the P o l i c e         Officers          .1

could      see       were     between             the       blue     barrier             and    the       temporary            barrier

guarding         the       sterile         a r e a at          the       rear       of    the     S out h Stand.

With      the    situation               getting            worse        the E x i t       Gate        C w as       opened          again       from

the      in side.          This      t im e       there        was       a much          larger        influx           of    f an s     into    the

ground.          Th e      majority           of       t h e m w e r e n ’t r u n n i n g            but, all           were       anxious       to

escape         the    crus It a n d        get         into       the     ground.              I positioned                  myself

directly         outside            Gate      C    in the          flow        of    f an s     wh o      ha d     to    p ass      either

side      of rue.          They      were         to3d       not     to       rush?       to    t a ke      their        time.           Hundreds

of    f ans     must       h av e    p a s s e d me.              Only        a few       r un n i n g ?     the        others         were

orderly.             'The i n f l u x      died         down       to a small               trickle after                    a few minutes

and      the G a t e       was      narrowed            to a l l o w          one    f a n at        a time?            and    t hi s     time

each      showing          their         tickets            to a. s t e w a r d .          T he      area        outside           the
                                                                                                                                      PAGi;'
                                                                                                                                      3863 A

turnstiles             was    no w      clear,              I regrouped              with Officers              from my

serial.           Almost          immediately                   someone        reported       that        there      wa?        a    pitch

invasion.              In    company with                   other        Officers,.         I went        in t h r o u g h G a t e           C

past      the     tun n e l       to    the       Centre          section        of    the    terracing             into        the S o u t h

Stand       and    onto       th e      pitch.              There        were    many       people       walking           and       standing

an    the    pitch.           There          was       a    lot    of     confusion          as    to w h a t       w as     happening.

I c o u l d see         that       there          were          numerous        Police       Officers           n ea r     the

perimeter          fence          behind          the       Leppings           Lane    end    goal.          I couldn't               see        the

crowd       be yo nd-         Next          the P o l i c e        Officers           began       to    pass       injured           p eo p l e

from      an open           gate       in    the       fencing.            Along       with       others        i t ook         them        from

these       Officers          and       placed             them    in a s a f e r       position           further           on the

pitch.          Many        seemed          short          of    breath and           distressed           but      each        person           1

h e l p e d was        alive       and       conscious.                  I helped       one y o u t h        wh o    said           to me

t ha t    people        were       dying          in t h e r e       pointing          at    the       terrace.            At       this

t i m e r due      to       the    number           of      p eo p l e    on    or a r o u n d     the     fe nce ?          I s t i ll

couldn't          see       through          to     the         terracing.            I moved          cl os e r    and      I saw          that

there       was    a mass          crush          of       bodies        just    inside       the       fence.           It wa s        a

confusion          of       heads?          arms       and       legs.         I saw    one       m a n wh o       was     obviously

dead      but     he    was       held       upright             by the        crush and          his     body m ove d              with     the

crowd.          Hy t hi s         t im e     1 was          directly           outside       the       small       open      gate.

Officers          inside          the       terracing             were     passing          the    injured          o nt o      the     pitch

and      giving        first       aid?        if      necessary.               I worked          my w a y      across          to    between

the a m b u l a n c e        which          had     pulled         onto        the    track       and     the      perimeter            fence

which       had    been       forced           apart.             I continued           to a s s i s t       in     carrying

injured         onto        the    pitch.

After       a short          time,          1 climbed             into     the       terracing          through          the        hole     in

the      fence     and a s sisted                 in       carrying        people       to    the       fe nc e.         £ assisted

with      approxjmately                 "10 pe ople,              all     of w h o m w e r e a l r e a d y          dead.

Eventually?             the       Centre          section          of     the    terrace          cl e a r e d .     I remember

that      soon after              t hi s     an a n n ou nc em en t             was    broadcast           that      the        match
                                                                                                                                    PAGE
                                                                                                                                    S663A

              would     not    be    continued.             Whilst       I was      in the       terracing           and     on    the

              pitch     helping       the        i n j ure d,    many Liverpool              f an ?   were       directing         t h e ir

              anger     at    the   Police.            Calling        us m u r d e r e r s    and     t h at     it w a s    our    fault.

              Other**      thanked        rne.     After        the   terracing        had      cl e a r e d ,    1 joined         other

              Officers        on the       halfway         line.       E v e n t u a l l y we    made      our w a y        back    to   the

              North     Stand       via    the      Leppjngyt L an e         terracing,,




                                                                                                       13 R HUCKSTEPI'' S I G N E D

 STATEMENT       TAKEN
                 PI.ACE.:

                 T I MEs                          PA TEs

 WITNESS      TO SIGNATURES

 OF 111 C L R S SI G N AT URL-; s

E N D OF   REPORT
In cid en t          108        171297      OP9 3 1                  DOCUMENT              R EC O RD    PRINT

                                                                                                         BT A'l EMENT        NUMB I-R       SH296

                                                                                                                                           S t a t io n

 Surname                         RAM30EN

 F o re n a m e ft               ALAN       ANDREW

A ge                                                                         Date          of    birth

 Address


 O c c u p a t ion               POL    PCP547

T e I e phone

 IC                             Height                                       I•)u .i.I d

Hair        c ol o u r

 Hair       type

 L y e ft                                                                    Co m p l e x i o n

Facial         hair

Glasses                         Us e                                         A c c.e n t

Number         of P a g e s

Dated                           090S89                                                                                                        Signed


                 At      8.30 am       on S a t u r d a y ,    15th A p r i l         1989        ( 1 5 0 4 89 ) ,    I commenced           d u t y at

                 Mai n Street           Police        station,         Rotherham,                along     with       the    rest     of    the

                 serial.          We     left M a i n S t r e e t       at     approximately                  9 .10 am arr iv in g            at

                 Hillsborough             Football          Ground where              we a t t e n d e d       at     the    North      Stand

                 where      we    r e c e i v e d b r i e f i n g a L 10 „0 0 am , for                   the     d u t i e s .i.n v o I v e d in t h e

                 F A Cur* S emi         Final      Liverpool           v Nottingham                Forest„            The    briefing         was

                 given      by C h i e f      Superintendent              Duckenfield                  and a Superintendent                   Murray

                 a n d. D S C h a r l e s w o r t h , C r 1m e I n t e 11 i g e n c e „

                 My      duty    for    that     day wa s          attached         to Serial.           37    in     charge     of     the     ser ia l

                 was       Inspector        E-Zllis a n d      the     s er i a l     Sergeant           was     PS 2 8 8 2 K e n n e d y .         Our

                 d u t y was      to m e e t     arriving           Liverpool              supporters          on     one    t r a i n at W a d s ley

                 Bridge         Railway       Station         at    a p p r o x i m a t e l y E.QC j pm t h e n             stand     by d u t y

                 after      meal .        After       the     briefing         we     left        the N o r t h S t a n d       and with           other

                 officers         from R o t h e r h a m       made      our w a y          to    the    rear        of   the   gymnasium
                                                                                                                                         P AG E
                                                                                                                                         S2H9&

wher?       all      three        serials       from Ro t h e r h a m               h ad a s h o r t           briefing             given       by

Inspector            Ol'Jis.        After       this          we m a d e       our       way       on f o ot        up to Wad. 1 s ey

Bridge        Station         we    arrived         at        approximately                   1 1 . 1 5 am.          It w a s         v er y

quiet       no    sign       of a n y     supporters                or    of a n y t h i n g         amounting             to       football

supporters.                 Most    of m y      s eri a l          •including m y s e l f                went       up the          s t eps     onto

the    platform,             after       about       f i ve        minutes          we w e r e       requested             to       l e a ve    the

platform          b y ? 1 believe?              a Chief             Inspector             from South Yorksh ire                          Police.

"I lie r e a s o n     given was          t ha t     it was             Railway          property.              We     were         instructed

to a w a i t      the arrival,            of    f an s        at    the       bottom          of    the    steps.

There       would       be    two       serials          at    the       bottom          of    the       steps.           1 he      other

serial        Sergeant            was    PS    18H9 France?                   the    third          serial          from Ro t h e r h a m

was    carrying             out    supervision                of a r r i v i n g         Min i      buses       from       Liverpool?                at

the    side       of    the R a i l w a y       public             hous e.          The S e r g e a n t         in     charge          of      this

serial        was      DP    1ft? 7 i u s i n g t o n .            Whilst       stood          at    the       bottom          of     the      s teps

we    saw     one      or    two    football             coaches          travel          down       the       main       r oa d      towards

Hi 3 1 si) 0 r o u g h a,3 1 s e e m e d        orderly.

The    Public          House       directly adjacent                      to    the       raiLway S t ati on                   name      not

known       had all          its    windows          boarded             up.        A short          t i me     la ter         w i t h PC       260

Shipman?          we w e r e       instructed             to       go    over       to    speak          to D S      182       fissington.

Also     present            was    the    Landlord             of       the    railway Hotel                                                         He

expressed            concern        about       supporters                who       wanted          to    go    in the           'pub.*           He

requested            Police        attendance             to       supervise             but       there       were       no     problems

existing          at    t h is     time       and   told           him we w o u l d            return          if    required            to     do

so,      We w e n t         back    to    the       bottom          of    the       st ep s?        present          at    t hi s      time

parked        in a      car       some    100 y a r d s            up f r o m       our       p o s i t i o n wa s        a British

Transport            Police        vehicle          containing                a Police             Sergeant          1682        or    1672.

He    informed          me    that       o n l y 4/5- of            his       officers             would       be    travelling                with

the    Liverpool             supporters             on    the       train and             he       believed          there          would       be

a    total       of 4 5 0     travelling             supporters                from L i v e r p o o l »               There         would

also     be      one    dog m a n        f r o m B r i t i s h 'Transport P o l i c e ?                        to m e e t        the
                                                                                                                                          PAGE            3
                                                                                                                                          S/2296

arriving           train.

By    this     time          several            small       groups        of L i v e r p o o l        supporters             were         making

their        way    down        towards           the       gro u n d .        Groups        of all         ag es,        b o t h sexes,

good     natureri,            well         b e h a v e d , no       problems           at    all.

It w o u l d       be a b o u t           this    t i me     we     were       requested            by the          Landlord             of    the

Railway        Public           House           to a t t e n d at         his     premises           along          with PS Kenned y

and    PC     £910 Cammock                  we    were       requested            to    have        'words'          with        several

Liverpool           supporters                  who    had      become         abusive         when       not       allowed          into        the

pub.         They       quietened               down and asked where                        e lse    they       could        get         a drink.,

 We    told        theiv the              best    way       wa s    to m a k e     their          way     down       to     the

ground,        but       I must            a d d at     t hi s      t i me     selected           pe o p l e    who       were       suitable

were    allowed              entry         into       the    public          hou se .        We     then       returned           to      our

p o s i t io n a t t h e S ta t io n „

We    then     received               a    r a di o    message           for    our     se r i a l       to a t t e n d      at      a

Supermarket              on a s id e             road a b o u t          400 yards           from        our    position.                 The

general        message             was      '’P r o b l e m s      with      supporters             •- d r i n k i n g      on    the

streets.4               Along         with       IS o t h e r       officers           and a Sherpa                 van attended.

All    quiet        on a r r i v a l ,           but a       la rge       amount        of L i v e r p o o l         supporters                in

the    excess           of    150         sat    on    the      grass        banking         outside           shops        drinking             from

the    cans,        they        were        noisy,          but     caused        no    real        problems.               We    then

returned           to    our       p o s i t i o n at        the     Station,               Whilst        walking           down         the     road

with     PC C a m m o c k ,           we    were       approached              by a g r o u p        of L i v e r p o o l         supporters

three        adults          one      of w h i c h      was w e a r i n g         a Glasgow              Rangers          shir t.             With

t h e m was        one       smal)         boy,        1 hey w e r e         carrying          a fold          up    st oo l.            We

advised        them          t h at       they wo uld           probably          not       be a l l o w e d        in w i t h       this

st o o l .     They          said         they    had       only     taken        t hi s     to     the     game       so    the         li tt l e

lad    could        see       o nto        the    pitch,           and    they ag ree d             to    t ake      it     b a ck       to    t he i r

mo t or v ehi c 1 e ,
By    this     time          1 saw         l ar g e    numbers           of L i v e r p o o l       supporters              making            t h ei r

way    down        the       main         road,       carrying           p acks    of       beer     and       lager,            Ih ey w e r e
                                                                                                                                   I-'AGE
                                                                                                                                   SHH96

very     boisterous            shouting             and       singing-

X noticed         one       youth        in    particular             about          "I&-19 y e a r s          about      5*9*' ta.ll,

heavily       built         wearing           Union       Jack       shorts?           wa s     singing         l ou d e r     than

anyone      around          him-         He    definitely             appeared             worse         for    dr i n k -      His    mates

appeared         to    be t e l l i n g        him       to    keep       qu i e t -       They t h e n m o v e d            on d o w n     the

main     road.

X then      heard       a message              o v er     the    r adio          'Assistance              required           outside

Public      House?          Neeps        £ n d „ PC       having          problems.''

Mot    knowing         any     areas          of S h e f f i e l d        1 a s k e d PC         Cammock          was     it    close       by

he    informed         me    it w a s n ’t.

At a p p r o x i m a t e l y       ?..00      pm the          train       carrying            the     supporters             arrived.

On    leaving         station arrangements                       made          to    hold       them      together           outside        the

public      house        (name          not    known)„           1 he      supporters               all     age    groups?         b ot h

se xes ?    were       very well              b e ha ve d-       No       singing          or    chanting?           no      evidence        of

drink      made       their        way     from       off      the    Platform             down       the      step s.         We w e r e

t h e n j o i n e d b y t w o m o u n t e d o f f i c e r s ? I b e .1.i e v e f r o m S o u t h                          Y o r k s h ire.

The    supporters            were        held       for a p p r o x i m a t e l y               minutes         in the         small

t r iangular          area     o ut s i de       the      pubIi c house.

1 n o t i ced     t hat      two        m en at       t h e r ear         of     the      supporters            were      carrying          te a

urns.       We    were       then        i,n s t r u c t e d    to    es co r t, the            supporters           to      the

football         ground.            This       wa s      contrary           to      the    order         and also         it was

rather      unusual          considering                 the    supporters                were      so    quiet      and well

behaved-

We    escorted         the     supporters                down    the m a i n           road?        arriving         outside          the

Leppings         Lane       entrance           at     approximately                 2 . IS      pm.       No    problems

experienced            with        the     supporters            from          leaving          the      station        to a r r i v i n g

outside       the      gr o u n d .

They     then made           their         way      to    the    queues             that      were       forming        outside        the

turnstile         a rea?       outside           Leppings            Lane ,

Already       there         w as    a    l a rg e     amount         of     supporters              outside        the       ground       but
                                                                                                                                       PAGE
                                                                                                                                       S2296

th is    was       not     unusual           considering               it was          a S em i       Final-          I was

approached            by     several             supporters            at     different              times      and    asked       a

question           ’We     live        in D e r b y s h i r e         purchased             tickets        at    Nottingham              Forest

but w o u l d        like      to      stand with Liverpool                          s u p p o r t e r s »*      1 advised             them

that     they must             stand         in a r e a s       to w h e r e         the       tickets        are     allocated.               I

was     then       instructed               by     Inspector          F'.llis to m o v e              supporters            standing           on

pavements            across         the      r oa d      from Lepping s                L ane?        instructing them                 t ha t       if

they      had a t i c k e t            to m a k e        t h eir      way     into       the g r o u n d        if   no    ticket        to        go

home.         We w e r e       receiving                feedback           t ha t    tickets         were       being       sold

outside        a     pub     end       of I.e p p i n g s       i.ane        (name       not      kn ow n)      and also          that

forged        tickets          had      been          produced        but         1 myself           never      saw a n y       forged

t i c k e t s » 2 910?         2 9 6 9,      1679?        4 L?1 a n d m y s e 1 f w e r e             pat r o 11 i n g a r e a o f

pavement           on the         bridge          generally           moving           supporters             along.         We    spoke           to

one     elderly          man      (grey          hair?      wearing           a     l i gh t     brown Crombie              jacket        aged

about        65-70)?        numerous              supporters               approached             hi m a s k i n g     him      for

" s p a r e s . ’'    1 said           to    him,        " W h at     do     t h e y m e a n by s p a r e s . "            He     said?

"They're           asking         me    if       I ’m    selling           tickets."              In fact

several        supporters               asked           this    elderly man                 for      spares?         evidently           they

ha d    t r a v e 1 1 ed wi. t h o u t           t i.cket s ..

By     this    time        approximately                  2 , , pm the               numbers          of   people          outside        the

turnstiles            were        growing.              What        seems         strange         there       didn't        appear        to       be

any     policemen            in the          immediate              vicinity           of      the    turnstiles?            to    create           a

smal l       sterile        area        between           the       queuing          supporters            and       the    actual

turnstile.               There w a s             no     definite           queues.             W i t h 2 9 1 0 we w e n t         amongst

this      crowd       outside           the       turnstiles               to a s s i s t        in f o r m i n g     some      k in g    of

o rd e r .         The     n urne r ous          t i m e s we    were        as k e d by L.iver p o o 1 s u p p o r t e r s

'Which        is the        North           Stand.'            'Which         is the           Leppings         Lane       standing

area.'        'Which         is     the      West        S ta n d *   and         9W h i c h     is the       South        Stand.'

There        didn't        appear           to     be a n y     clear         signs         to    instruct           the    fans       where

to     go.     At     this        time       I saw         outside          the      Leppings          Lane      entrances
                                                                                                                                           PAGE
                                                                                                                                           S E 2 9 6



G u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a rsh a II an ri a C h i e f 1 n s p e c t or                           (na rn e not          known         t o me) „

At    this     po int         PC    Cammock         and       myself         moved          out       of    the        c r o wd     to a s s i s t        a

man    pushing           a wheelchair,                  who    requested assistance                              to      get       through          the

c ro wd     i nto       the No rth 8 1 a n d ,

We    escorted           him       o v er    to PC R o s e          and      PC       Morton          and       they      took       over.           1

believe       they           managed         to    get    him       into      the          gr oun d.

There       seemed           a general            complaint           from Liverpool                       supporters               of    the       size

of    the    cr ow d s        gathering            and    the       slowness               in    being          dealt      with          entering

at    the    turnstiles.

One    middle           aged Liverpool                  supporter            came          up    to me          and      mentioned             in

relation           to    the       crowd       gathering            t h at    they          had       the       s am e    attendance

every week              at    i i ver poi         and    manage        much           better.              In     reply        to    this       1

pointed       out        that       they       d o n ’t a r r i v e        all        at    the       same       time.

The time           now a b o u t                   pm.        I was        surprised              to       see     a     large       amount          of

supporters              climbing            onto    the w all          above           the       turnstiles.                   i    mentioned

this      to PC         Cammock,            and    also       that     they           seemed          to w a i t         several          seconds

before       jumping           off       th e w all       into        the     ground,                 A Police            Officer          I

believe       an        Inspector            then ap pe ar ed              on the w a ll ,                 the     climbing              ceased,

but    he was           lifting          sm all     children           from           the       developing               crush       to    s afe ty .

Again       myself           and    PC      Camrriork w e n t         to     g ive         what       assistance               we    could,          an d

I myself           could       feel         the    force       of     the     crowd             and    I withdrew                  further          back

toward s 'the roa d ..

1 seemed           to    recollect             earlier         hearing            a    ra dio         message            requesting

Public       Tranpsort              to      be s t o p p e d     from        travelling                along           Leppings           Lane       but

I saw       t he    bus e s w e r e          s t i 11    nio v i ng    11ir oughi t he                t.r o wd ? f o r c i ng            t hiem o ve r

towards       the        turnstiles               in the       bottleneck                  area       outside            Leppings

Iane

On    this     o c c a s i o n we           kept    the       c ro w d s     back          outside          the m e t a l           railings

and    gates        to a l l o w         myself         and    other         officers             to       carry         out       searches

etc.        Also        t h er e    seemed         to    be a g e n e r a l            lack       of       information               c om i n g
                                                                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                                                                             9SP96

from wi th in            the    ground            from       ground           control           via the           ra dio        or     the       public

address        system,          either            giving          information               to       us,     or      information and

requests           etc. ..     to     the         crowd.

The    mood        of    the    crowd         by this             time        wa s    growing             more       volatile              but       no

evidence           of   violence           towards               us,    but      they were                continuing              to       push,,          A

Land       Rover        containing            a PC w h i c h w a s               parked          to       the     extreme            left        of       the

turnstile           area       began       t o edg e in si o w l y                    i n an a t t e m p t             to    slow          down       the

movement           of    the    crowd.             He       then       ha d    to     stop       because             of     the      sheer

weight        of    numbers,,           He        then       left       the      position             i nt      he     cab a n d           standing

on the        s t e p was       shouting               loudly          for     the     supporters                 to      stop       p us h i n g ,

but    the     crowd app eared                    not       to    h ear       this,        or    t ak e      no      no t i c e .

I nspector          F.llis t h e n         appeared               w i t h a rnegaphone/hai ler a n d                              began          to

shout       "Liverpool            supporters,                    please        stop        pushing*             t h is      was      repeated

several        times.

At    t his    stage       1 didn't               see       anything           to     indicate             the       impending              disaster

even       though       there        was      a    larg e         crowd        but     this          is    u sual         for     big       games.

It w o u l d       be a b o u t      t hi s       t i me     1 heard, o ve r               my    personal              r a di o      somebody

making        reference           to a        'catastrophe.9                         I had       no       idea w h o s e          voice          or

whose       cal)        sign    it w as.               We    were       still         receiving              nothing            from Match

Control,           it   seeernd s t r a n g e .

I was       then ap pro a ch ed               by a n o t h e r          Liverpool               supporter              who      produced a

ticket        to me a n d         enquired              the       location            of    the       North          Stand.            I

indicated           the    general            direction                of     the     N ort h S tan d and                   saw that             a

large       double        blue       g a te       to    the       extreme            left       of    the       turnstile              area          open,

about       3--4 feet.            People           were          not    rushing            in,       it    s e e m e d as         if s o m e o n e

was    checking           tickets          and         using       t h is      as    an     extra          turnstile,                but     1 wa s

s t i ll    surprised           to    see         it    open.

1 pointed           out    this       to      th e      enquiring              Liverpool              supporter              and       he    started

to w a l k     over.

At    t his    time       1 heard          from         other          officers            that       the       game        had      be en
                                                                                                                                       PAGE
                                                                                                                                       SEE. 9 6

delayed         u ntil    3.15         pm.         I told        approaching               supporters               ' D o n ’t rush?             the

start      now    delayed.''               The      time        about        now 3 . 0 0        pm.        1 then         heard a           lo ud

ch eer     or    roar     likened            to a goal               scoring        chance,,           A group            of     supporters

cl ose     by    said,        *W h a t ’s t ha t           then.’            1 replied           ’C o u l d      be    the       t e ams

coming      out."         I checked                my w a t c h       thinking           t h a t ’s u n u s u a l ,         they       usually

come      out    ten minutes               before          st ar t.          One    Liverpool              supporter             made       a

comment         th at    the     start          had       not    b e en      delaye d and             that       1 was         lying.

There      were     still        odd       supporters                asking        for     spare       tickets.                1 saw PC

Rose      having        problems           with       one       youth,        apparently              he    d i d n ’t ha ve           a

ticket      and. was          j u st      making          a general           nuisance           of    himself.                1 then           saw

that      the    large        b l ue      g at e    that        had    been        opened       earlier             was     now      cl osed.

'Then a b o u t     e i g ht     minutes            past        three        1 received           a    r a d io       message

something         to     the     effect            ’All. s e r i a l s        or    personnel              o n to     the      pitch,,’           No

reason      or    further            order         wa s    given       or     did     we    hear       the      emergency              code

’Mr    Meadows          urgentLy           r e q u i r e d at         the P o l i c e       Room,’

1 then      ran     through a              la rge         blue       g ate    to       the      e x t r e m e r i g ht         of    the

turnstile         a r e a.       i     ran t h r o u g h         into        the      area       b e h i n d the          Leppi ng sLane

stand      then     to    the        r i gh t      towards           the     rear     of    the       Control          l-Jox.        To my

left      1 could        see     terracing                (extreme           rig ht      hand     corner            of L e p p i n g s

La n e)    seemed        to    be      plenty         of    room.            1 could        see       no     players           on     the

pitch,      but     I c o u l d n ’t see              any       fighting,,

1 then      eventually               made       my way          onto       the     pitch        via a gangway                  in the

outside         seating        area        of      the     South       Stand,,           From     t h is        position            I could

see    la rge     numbers            of    officers             on    the     pitch and           standing             on      the     fencing

behind      the L e p p i n g s           Lane      goal.            I saw        several       supporters                running           on

th e   pitch.           1 asked           a steward             what       ha d       happened,             he r e p l i e d        ’P a n s on

the    p i t c h a bit         of      trouble.’                He    d i d n ’t      seem       really concerned,

i-oilowing        other        officers             1 went           imediatley            to    the       fencing          behind          a

goal.       I    c o u l d n ’t see          any      officer          who        appeared        to       be   taking           control.!.

I joined         other        off ice res at               the       fencing        urging        supporters                to      push
                                                                                                                                             pamh:           9
                                                                                                                                             SP.296

back,         at    the       s ame      time     waving.                At    the      same        t im e      I heard          over       the

pufa 1 i <:: add.r ess             s y s t e , 'Wi 11         you        please         m   ove     of f the          pi t ch . *         I can

re c a l l     whilst          running           over        the       pitch       to       the     area        behind       the       goal       I met

a young            lad f r o m                                                                                         A    lad       called

                              he    shouted           then        came        over      to me        v 11J- s t e r r i b l e          in there,

people         are       dying        people          a re    dead.9

I continued               to       run     to    the       fence         and what            I saw         I * 11    never        forget.

Young         fans       faces        pressed          against              the    fencing,            pleading             to    he      r e sc ue d,

but     we     c o u l d n ’t get           to    them        because             of    the w i r e          railings.

1 saw         four       or    f i ve      bodies          j u st      piling          up    on     each        other,,          It    somehow

r e m i n d e d me        of       'Selsen        victims"               faces         .blue a n d         they were             b e i ng    trod

on,       It w a s        complete              and    utter           turmoil.              On e    thing           that    struck          me    on

reaching            the       fence        was    the        strong           s mell        of a l c o h o l         coming       from       the

area      behind          that        goal.           By     this        t im e    the       officers            in the          left       hand       pen

passing            the    dead        and       injured           through          to       us    on the         perimeter             track.

One     Liverpool              supporter              a big         heavy         lad       holding          his      chest.

He     w as    in d a n g e r         of    being          trod        on     by the         other         supporters.                 I pulled

him away            from       the       perimeter            track.              He    was       conscious            he a p p e a r e d         to    be

okay.          I placed             him     in the           recovery             position and                  shouted          o ve r     to

a n o t h e r c o u p 1 e o f I„i v e r p o o 1 s u f•p o r t e r s                     * s t a n d b y h .irn. *

I went         to a n o t h e r          casualty            wh o      appeared             to    h a ve     a severe            leg      injury,,

He     was     lying          near       the     goal        posts          again       in d a n g e r          of    being       trod       on.        He

wa s    another           larg e         lad     I shouted               to y o u n g                                  to    assist          to    take

him away            to    safety,           o ve r     towrds            the      South          Stand.          I saw       several

fatalities               l ying       in the          goal        area        with      jerseys            or    coa ts      ove r        their

f a c.e s „

All     around Policemen                        working           on     injured            giving         resuscitation.                    Also

many      Policemen and                    Policewomen                 cry ing.             A Liverpool              supporter              lying       in

the     goal        are a,         he a p p e a r e d        to     be      semi       conscious             1 forced            my Brook

airway         into       his       mouth        but       he a p p e a r e d          to    force         it out          with       his    t o ng ue,
                                                                                                                                              PAGE          10
                                                                                                                                              SEH96

            clearing            the    airway.            1 f o u n d a St.            .John's A m b u l a n c e m a n           who    was

            carrying            a bottle          of    oxygen        1 put       the      t ub e    into      the y o u t h ' s        mouth?         he

            appeared            to    come       round.          I placed         hi m     in the        recovery           position?

            reassured            him?       and    he     t o l d me       his    n am e    was                   but       he    couldn't

            remember            his    surname          or w h e r e       he    came      from      in L.iverpoo'l.                Several

            other        Liverpool              fans    came      o v er    to    him and           they      said      t h ey    would       s t ay

            with him.

            By    this        time     the       St.    John's        Ambulance            vehcile         came      r o u nd     the       perimeter

            of    the      pitch?          we    began moving              peo p l e ?     hoarding?           photography              equipment

            off     the       perimeter           to a l l o w       the    ambulance            through?         to     give       what

            assistance               they       could.

            People         were       being       put     on     hoardings         u s e d as        stretchers?              and      taken

            across         to    the       gymnasium.             I remember             helping         to    put a y o u n g          girl       o n to

            one     of     these       hoardings?               there      was    two      or    three        young      girls         at    one    end

            of    the      hoarding             attempting           to    lift    or      carry.          J. w e n t    to      their

            assistance               and    quiet       unknowingly              they      let      go a n d    left        me    with       the

            weight         of    the       hoarding        and       the    body?        and     I subsequently                  injured my

            back.          No    real       pain       f e lt   at    this       time.          Everybody         seemed          to    be    in a

            state        of     shock,           I was     never          made    aware         t ha t   there       h ad     been any

            breakdown            in    r a di o    transmissions                 but     the     general        ra dio        transmissions

            on the         day w e r e          poor.


                                                                                            A A RAMS DEN POL PC2347                          S1GNF.D

STATEMENT        TA KEN
                 PLACE

                 T XMl I                           DATE

 WITNESS    TO SIG NA TU RE

 OFFICERS    SIGNATURE

END OF   REPORT
Incident        10ft         17IE 97        OP9 3 1               DOCUHE'Nl        R EC O RD      PR I N I

                                                                                                   STATEMENT          NUMBER        SZ&Sb

                                                                                                                                 Station

Surname                      POWELL

I- o rename'                 RAYMOND            LLOYD

                                                                        Date       of     birth

Add ref-s                    E C C L E S F IF.L.D P O L S T N


0 c c u.pa t i o n           P O L P C £ 3 OH

Telephone

IC                           He ight                                    8 u i 1d

Hair     colour

Hair     type

                                                                        C o I’m d I e x A o n

F a c i aI   ha i r

Glasses                      Use                                        A c c e n t,

Number       of P a g e s

Dated                        300489                                                                                                     S ign e d



              INCIDENT         AT H I L L S B O R O U G H     FOOTBALL          GROUND

              13 A P R II. 19ft9




              At      9 . 0 0 a.m.     on S a t u r d a y ,      15 A p r i l    1989,          I paraded       for    d u t y at

              Ecclesfield Police                      Station,     a n d w as      subsequently              conveyed       to

              H i )Isborough           Football          Ground      for    briefing             re the S e m i - F i n a l .       I

              arrived        at     the      ground      together       with       other         officers       at    approximately              9™

              40      a.m.     At     this      time     there     appeared          to     be    very       little    activity          around

              the      ground apart             from     t hat    of P o l i c e    Officers.

              Briefing         for     the      event      subsequently            t oo k       plac e   in the       North Stand           at

              approximately                 1 0 . 0 0 a.m.

              My      duties       t ha t    day w e r e     plajn     clothes          f oot     patrol       in M i d d l e w o o d    Road,

              together         with         Temporary Detective                 Constable          O'Brien,          paying      particular
                                                                                                                                PAGL
                                                                                                                                82825

attention         to       teams     of    pick      pockets         and     theft       of a n d       from motor

vehicles.             My    supervisory           officer         being       Inspector            Pcaife.            At       the

conclusion            of    the     briefing         TDC    O'Brien          ami myself            made       our     way       along

Penistone         Road       and     into      Parkside          H oad,      this      would       have       been        about        11.

DO a ,m .

X saw      that w i t h i n         the    last      hour       there      had    certainly             been an           increase

in    pedestrian            activity        with      l arge      groups         of y o u t h s     wandering              around

aimlessly         w i t h a fe w          shouting         the    usual       football            ch ants.          We     both made

our      way along          iiiddlewood R o a d            in    the    direction            of    the       hospital..              When

nearing         the    'Texaco       pe tr ol     station         we    decided, to w a l k              back       in the

opposite         direction           towards         Hillsborough             shopping            centre.

At    about      12 m i d d a y      as   we    approached             the    junction            of iiiddlewood R o a d

and Wads ley           Lan e,       our   a t t e n t i o n w as       caught       by P o l i c e       Sergeant              "1948

Miller       who was         on m o b i l e     transit          pa trol.         He     stated         that     one       of    the

pubs      situated          further       up W a d s ley L a n e w a s            full       to    capacity           and       t hat

there      was    a    large        number      of    peo p l e      outside        on      the    frontage           and       road

drinking         beer.         He    appeared         concerned            that     they may            get    out        of    hand.

Also      s i t u a t e d at      this     junct io n are            a number          of    s h op s    where        a    large

number       of L i v e r poo I. s u p p o r t e r s        had      gathered          f or w h a t      can     on 1 y be

d e s c r i b e d as       a drinking          session.           There       were       numerous            cans     of       beer       and

1 a g e r b e i.n g a n d h a d       been      c o n s u rne d ..     I co nt inued          to w a 'I.k a 1 o n g

lvii d,d 1 e w o o d R o a d a n d    i n t o the      s h o p p i n q ce ntre.              W h i 3 s t w a 1 k i n g a 1 cm g

th is     road    J! a g a i n      saw   larg e      groups         of y o u t h s      drinking            from     cans       of

b ee r    and    lager.           Those     that      I did       not      see    drinking          1 could           hear       pass

comments         as    to    "Where       is    the    nearest          public         house?"

Once      TDC    0*    Drien        and   myself        had      patrolled          the      precinct,           we       decided          to

visit      Parkside          Section        House      vi a      the    park      grounds.              At    about        1.00        p.m.

—    1 ..1 !:> p.m.    whilst        walking         along       Parkside         Road,       I wa s         approached              every

fi ve     yards       by a L i v e r p o o l      supporter            asking       for a t i c k e t .             On

eventualJy            reaching        Parkside         Section          House,         I sa w a         lar ge      number           of
                                                                                                                                  PAGE               3
                                                                                                                                  S2825

youths         standing           behind       the S e c t i o n       House         and around          vehicle*            in

parking         ba y    situated          adjacent         to       the      Section        Ho us e,     the      majority             of

who m were         drunk          and were        subsequently                 removed.           Again      by the         accent              I

believe         these        to    be L i v e r p o o l    supporters.

1 recall          t h at     whilst       inside        the     box/section                House    I heard           footsteps                 on

the      roof.         On    inspecting           this     1 saw a b o u t            four       youths      to    be       standing

on    t o p of     the P o l i c e        Station         Station            drinking        cans       of   beer/lager.

Need)ess          to    say,       I took       prompt         and     necessary            action       action         and       removed

the      youths        who    were       again     from Liverpool.                      Whilst      engaged           in th is             1

saw      one y o u t h       emerge       from     the     rear        of      the    building          holding         a    can       of

lager      in one           hand and       holding         his       exposed          person       in the         other,

intending           to w a l k      along       the     road        in this          manner.        This       y o u t h was

spoken         to a n d a d v i s e d      accordingly.

1 DC 0"        Brien and           myself       thought         it     best      to     inform      ground         control             of

the      situation           at    the    Se ct io n House,               so    that       further       attention            could             be

p ai d    to    it.

We    were      some        fifteen       minutes         at    the       box    before          resuming         pa tr ol        in

lii dd 'J.ewoo d R oad

At    2.1b      p.m.        TDC    O ’lJrien a n d m y s e l f            returned          to    the    Police         a r e a at             the

rear      of    the     North Stand             via     the P e n i s t o n e         Road       entrance.            Whilst           en

r o ute    we w e r e        again approached                  by    dozens          of L i v e r p o o l    f an s     looking                for

tickets.           On ar ri vin g          at     the     gym       1 mealed.

At    about       2.45       p.m.     1 resumed           patr ol         together          with    TDC      O'Brien          and

together          with Police             Constables            HiJ.es a n d          Moulding          we m a d e      our       way

along      Penistone              Road    into     Vere        Load       and    into       Leppings         L a n e.       "I his         was

the      first     and       only     t i me    during         the     day      t hat      I visited         this       side          of       the

ground and             to    be    h on est ,     1 was        taken         back     by    the    si gh t.        The       crowd

appeared          to    be    solid       from     the     turnstiles                1— 16 to      near      the      centre           of

Leppings          Lane.

It    d i d not        however        cro ss      my m i n d        t ha t     people       may    be     i n j u r e d as        a
                                                                                                                                         FAC-ii".
                                                                                                                                         S2823

res u J.t o f s u c.h a            crowd      f o rm i n g „

We     continued            to wa) k past             Leppingd          Lane         and       through             the      car    park

situated         in H i l l s b o r o u g h        Park,         intending            to       go       back       into      the     precinct

i n M i d d 1 e w n o d fta a d «

It wa s        whilst        walking        in the          park       that      1 decided                   to    listen         in on       the

ch a n n e l    used       by    ground       control            whilst         Police             Constable             Moulding

monitored            the C . l . D        channel.              1 recall         hearing                at     about        3.QD     p.m.       the

request         for       an a m b u l a n c e ,      the       reports         of    somebody                 seriously           i n j ur ed.

Throughout            the       fallowing          five         minutes         or    so       there           seemed        to    be     chaos

and     confusion.               The      tranmissions              were        clear?             but       everybody            seemed        to

be     requesting            ambulances            at      the    s a me    t :ime „           I    rec all            seeing      two     or

three        travelling            along     Penistone              R oa d .         To    be h o n e s t ,            at    this       t ime      I

thought         somebody           wa s    over       reaching          until         1 heard a voice                        on    the     radio

who     I recongnised               to     be C h i e f         inspector            Sumner             w ho      is   stated        that

t here       were     a n u m b e r o f b o d.:ie s a n d s o m e t h i n g a b o u t                          a t e m p o r a ry

mortuary.             On     hearing        this        all      four      of    us       immediately                   returned         to     the

gymnasium.                O n my a r r i v a l        my    stomach         churned                as    1 s aw         them      bringing             in

the     first        of    the     bodies        on a d v e r t i s i n g        b oar ds .              On e      after       the      o t h er

for     some     few minutes               I was        in shoc k,              I just             stood          there      saying

nothing,         doing          nothing.           I recall            seeing         si.;-; L i v e r p o o l           supporters

carrying         a dead          body      into       the       gym,    three         of w h i c h w e r e               cry in g.         As

they     got     to       the    d oo r    the     b od y       just    dropped            off          the       boar d.         It w a s      on

seeing         this       that     1 tried         to      pull     myself           together.                    I do      not    know where

TDC     0 * Brisn          had     g o t t o or         t h e o t h e r of f i c er s .

I g ra h b e d h o 1 d o f a b o a r d a n d r a n o n t o 111e                            p :it c h w i t h the               s u p po rt e rs .

a g a in,      I wa s       i n >1i s b e 1 i e f .        I sa w      p e o p I e s t i J. 1 b e i.n g p u 11 e d o u t o f t h e

West     stand        some       unconscious,               but     the     majority                appeared             dead,          I just

di d    not     know what           to     do.        I saw       people         inj u r e d ,           people          dead and          people

in grief.             I at       first      tried          to    see    a) 1 t h r e e             at    once.,          I r ec a l l      most

if     not     all    of     the    injured were                 being      seen          to       by a m b u l a n c e        crew,       Police
                                                                                                                                             PAGE             5
                                                                                                                                             S 2 .& Z ->



            Officers           a n d St.         J o h n ’s.       I resigned            myself        to     removing          those      wh o      were

            obviously            dead       from      the       pitch.          1 rec all        there        were     Forest         fans      still

            chanting           obscenti.es            as      bodies          were    being      carried         in f r o n t      of    the        Spi. on

            I(o p .      "!h i s wa s       soon to sto p „

             1 carried           some       three        or     f ou r    bodies       from      the     pitch.          1 re ca l l       thinking

            I was        fortunate           to     be     in    plain         clothes?         seeing        the     abuse      and     ba d

            feelings           being        directed            towards         the    uniform         lads.          in m o s t      cases

            understandable                  as    a grieving              heart       sees      no    barrier.          Each       journey           to

            th e    gym       the a m o u n t       of     bodies          increased         two      fold.         I rec a l l       when      1

            brought           in m y    last        body?        just         standing       and      l o ok ing ?     thinking          t ha t      this

            should        not     h a ve     happened.               I was       up set ?       confused         and    d id     not     know        what

            to     do    next.         At    this        t ime     I sa w       that     I was        not     by m y s e l f .

            1 eventually               directed            my a t t e nt io n         to a s s i s t i n g     the     uniform          Police

            Officers           with     the       searching              and    i n d e n t i f i c a t ion    of     the   bo d i e s .        I

            assisted           some     three         or      four       officers        in this         task.         1 cannot          say        that

            I can        g ive    any       descriptions                 of    these     bodies.            f merely        assisted            the

            u n j f o rnie d o f f i c:e r s w h o            c o nip let p d t h e r e f>o r t s .

            I wa s       subsequently               conveyed             to H a m m e r t o n    Road Police            S t a t i o n where?

            together           with     other         officers?               1 took     missing         person        reports          from

            relatives            and    friends.                It was         only    at    t his     stage        that    I    recalled            any

            descriptions               of    the      bodies         1 had       handled.             This     wa s    disturbing            knowing

            that        the    person        they were             looking           for wa s        in f act       dead?       but     st ill

            having        to     t o m p 1 ete      the       report.

            At     1 . 00 a.m.         t hat      morning          the        temporary         enquiry         room was         cl ose d.           I

            was     subsequently                 conveyed          to Ecc. 1 e s f i e 1 d P o l i c e         Station          where      I signed

            off       duty.




                                                                                                                    R..L.   POWELL         SIGNED

fA T E M E N f   TAKEN
                 PL A C E s
                 TIMF.S       ■" '/   • DATH   3U04-B V   ’

W I # S, T O S I G N A T U R E

 OF F ) CFi'o B3 GNA'i URF.

■M l)   OF   REPORT
                      O N F I R M A T I ON   R E P OR T   **     AS    OF   24    NOU     ’ 97   13:55        PAGE.0 1

                                                                            S    Y P




      DOTE       T I ME                 TO/ FROM               MODE         I1   ' SEC    P QS     S T AT l
0 1   11 / £ 4   1 3 : 4G   361 £ 1 6 2 6 4 1 b0               G 3 - -■ ‘   08     5 :j   17         0K
                                                     Discipline & Complaints Department
              South Yorkshire
                                                     50 Windsor Road

              POLICE                                 Heeley
                                                     SHEFFIELD
              JUSTICE     with   COURAGE
                                                     S8 8UB




TELEPHONE: 0114 252 3861

FAX: 0114 252 3855

INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                           Facsimile Transmission
Date:                       2H-. \\ .a f\

To:                         W .A V f.

For the attention of:

Comments:
                                              TQ£»>0fi. *■             tHOcS
                          tK>tw/wu-d £ © o    (be.    f




From:

Telephone Number:            oit>4 z%uo^7

Number of Pages (including this page)                I^

In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-
South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 252 3861 - Internal Extension 3002
  n,c ids n,t        IDS          24119? 01’931                  NOMINAL RPCORD PRINT

   N o m i n a .1. no.  N 13 0 3
   Surname          HICKS                                         i:it-.i.e   MR
   Fore na me s TREVOR

   B 1 rthnlace
   DoEJ                            Age       To                                              J. C.

   Occupation              MANAGING DIRECTOR
   If.m pi o y e r / S c h o o l name
   Height                  to          8 u i J.cl
   Hair Colour
   Hair Type

   ifye <5
   C o m p i.e k i a n

   r a c i a l hair
   Glasses worn                         Us a
   J e w e 1 1 e ry                                                                                  A c ce n t

   R e c . i n j u r y , t a t t o o s ,m a rks , s cars , pe cu l i a r i t i e s ,a b n o rma i.i t i.e s




   Knows Victim                                 M a t u r e of r e l a t i o n s h i p
   At S c e n e                                 Fi nge rpr i nts

   CRO number                                        L o c.a 1 r e f . n o S.)PI 'D
   Blood Sample                  U               G r o u p (ABO)               0 1h e r
   Saliva Sample                 U                     S e c re t e r U        S u 5 pe ct                E 1 i Hi C o d e

   C J.o t h i n g




   Other      Free         "I e x t
 INFO F R O M Q S L 9 B . 1 0 2 S31 7.
 S 3 1 7 D - C H A I R M A N OF T H E H I U S P O R O U G i ■! F A M I L Y S U P P O R T G R O U P „
 A P P R O X 1 8 0 8 9 0 C H A N G E OF A D D R E S S TO I                L


        C r o s s - r e f e r e n c e s s-
ADDRESS                   S A W i'HO i0        D A I L Y S T A R R , 242 , BLA CK F RI.ARS RD, L O N D O N
ADDRESS                   SAW PHOTO            D AIL Y M I R R O R , M0L80RN CIRCUS, LONDON
ADDRESS                   BUSINESS
ADDRESS                   E XHOME
ADDRESS                   TEMP HOME?
ADDRESS                   HOME
A D D H P SS              SOL. I C I '!OR      SILVERMAN       LIVERMORE,          11,   V I C T O R j A SI,         LIVERPOOL
TELEPHONE                 EXHOME?
T El...EPH O N E          CONTACT
TELEPHONE                 HOME
1 ELJ..:'PHONE            CARPHONE
T£i E P H O N E           BUSINESS
                                                                                                                                 CONT
                                                                                                                               PAGE



   Nomina], no.      N13U3
   Surname    HICKS                                              T :it i e   MR
   Forert ames T R E V 0 R

       C r o a s - r e f e r e n c e ? co n t i,nue d s■■■■
CATEGORY                S317 A B C           BODY 64 HI CKS N649                            DECEASED
CATEGORY                 LINK                   E i iE RS
CATEGORY                CHAIRMAN             1-11:L L S B O R O U G H F A M ILY S U P P O R
CATEGORY                 S317 A B C          B O D Y 89 H I C K S N 7 1 7                   DECEASED
CATEGORY                LINK                 V I E W G 0 V I S U A E E V 1D E N C E
CATEGORY                 L IN K              T R A K - 1C D E L A Y S                       1 RAT F 1C P R O B L E M S
CATEGORY                LINK                 L I V E R P O O L S U P P O R i'ERS            S UPPORTERS
CATEGORY                 REF E E S 1 0       DECEASED
CATEGORY                S3178                A P P R E C CATION COMMENT'S                   R E C 0 G N 1 I'iO N
CATEGORY                 L 1NR               ADVERSE COMMENTS                               REC0GN1TION
CATEGORY                                     C O M P L A I N TS RE P O L C C E              RECOGNITION
CATEGORY                E O S 11 ION         FENS 1 & E STANDING                            WEST S"l A N D
CATEGORY                ThkOUGi i            G A T E S AT P E R I M E T E R F E N C E
CATEGORY                 D 1447              OTHER LETTERS                                  LETTFRS
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO       D I R E C T I O N S I G N S RE G R O U N D
CATEGORY                S317D I-'                                                           C O M P L A 3.NT S 1N V E S T 1 G A T I ON
CATEGORY                S3 170               SUPT GR EENWOOD COMPL AI NT
CATEGORY                S3171)               SUPT MURRAY COMPLAINT
CATEGORY                8 3 17D              SUPT MAR SH ALL C O M PL AI NT
CA'l E G O R Y          S 3 i 71) F          AC C J A C K S O N COMPi AIN'T
C A TEG OR'Y            L IN K               AD VE R SE CO MM EN TS RE PO LIC E R EC O G N I T I O N
CATEGORY                AT Ti-;N D E D       NORTHERN GENERAL KOSPITAE                      HOBPITA! ,S
CATEGORY                •33i /C              P H O T O G R A P H S OF D E C E A S E D       DECEASED
CATEGORY                 18DL>89             W I T N E S S E S FO R I N Q U I R Y
CATEGORY                R E F E R S TO       S T E W A R D S AT G R O U N D                 E M P L O Y E E S AT S W F C
CATEGORY                F.NT E R E D         TURNSTILES
N 1DEE                  LINK                 FLENLEY                              COLIN                          K E R 8 0 rSON
                         LINK
                        R E F E R S TO
N1310                    Si'OUSF             HICKS                                JENNIFER
                        R E P R E S E N I'S
                         LINK
M3 "i6::>               S P O K E TO         TAYLOR                               STEPHEN
                        RF I-E R S 10?
                        HEARD

                       REF E R S TO?
NS38                   LI NK                 BARNBROCK                            ANTHONY
N548H                  LINK                  MCGUINNESS                           PE ['ER                      JOHN
N:;>397                1..I NK               PEARS                                RUTH                         CHANTELLE
N5/19                  REF E R S ro          EDWARDS                              ANTHONY                      JAMES
N649                    I D E N T I T IE D   FUCKS                                SARAH                        LOUISE
N 7 1/                 I D E N T IF 1ED      HICKS                                VICTORIA                     J ANE
                       LINK
NS319                  R E F E R S l"0?      OR AIMS W I C K                      BRIAN
                       SE476
                       R Ef ER S fO
                       LINK
A60S6                                        IMSP L A Y T O N     TO S H O W V I D E O F O O T A G E T O MR H I C K S R E D A U G H
A 6 4 6b                                     INS L E Y T O N ;    A R R A N G E FOR MR & M R S H I C K S W H E N C O N V E N I E N T
A 7192                                       DCS FOSTERS          F U L L I N V E S T I G A T I O N R E SUP MARSHAL.!.. INFO FR
                                                                                                                                    com
                                                                                                                           PAGE


   N om ina l     n o ..       N1303
   Surn a m e iIICKS                                                   Ti 1 1e   MR
   F o renames TREVOR

       Ci- o s s r e l e r e n c e s          cont Irmeds--
A7193                                             DCS FOSTF.R; FULL INVESTIGATION ftP. SUPT MURRAY                          INFO FR
S3"! 7                     BUSJEC T               15••••04.89 H I C K S
S317 A                     SUBJECT                03 •-•■03-89 HI CKS
83178                      SUBJECT                18-05-89 MICKS
8 3 1 7C                   b u b j f:c t          03-08.69 HICKS
S3170                      SUBJECT                2 4 .0 8 - 8 9     HICKS
531 7 e :                  SUBJECT                1 1 - 1 0 .6 9     HICKS
S317F                      SUBJECT                2 3 - 1 1 ••••89   HICKS
OSL 92                     SUBJECT                0 1 - Ob-89        HICKS
Ml 4 6 4                   sus j eci              09-06 -89 FIICKS
Ml 6 30                    SUBJECT                05-07-89 HICKS
Ml 729                     SUBJECT                2 7 - 0 7 .8 9   HICKS
Ml 9 3 0                   SUBJECT                2 3 - 1 1 .89    HICKS
M321                       suejEC r               28-04-89         HICKS
M322                       SUBJECT                2 8 .0 4 - 8 9   IF! C K S
M609                       SUBJECT                04- -OS-89       HI C K S
D "1447                    SURJFCT                31 •■-03-89      L E T T E R F R O M MR. 1 . HICKS.
01792                      8U8..iEC f             03-06••••89      L E T T E R T O H I C K S N 1 3 0 3 FOR
1)3320                     SUBJECT                1a-11-89 T R A N S C R I P T Jl N 1 3 0 3 H I C K S C O M M E N C E D 1 8 0 3 8 9
D3670                      Buajec r               14-132-90 C 0 R R E 8 P 0 Ni.)ANC£ F R O M MR Hi:CKS RE CC
A 6036                                            R E S U L T ; N 1 3 0 3 a NEC! IF.11,8 BL.T 1700 & 2 1 3 0 H R S A G R E E D
                                                  A C C U R A C Y OF O O N T E N f'S S H O W N TO HIM.
S 13 1 4                   MARSHALL.              N 3 3 9 2 W I T H B O D Y 8 9 & H I C K S N 1 3 0 2 IN A M B O TO NORTHERN
                                                  G E N H O S P . N 1303 U P S E T & B L A M E D P O L I C E FOR I NIC I D E N !"»
S 13 1 4 A                 MARSHA! ,.L            N 3 3 9 2 S T S L A T E R G A V E !•• IRST A I D "(0 N 7 1 7 (BOD Y 89) TOOK
                                                  S A M E T O N / G E N E R A L WITH N 1 3 0 3 G E T T I N G V/ASUSE F R O M HIM.
81893
                           |
                           -------- 1                       1 S T S S A W M A N Y h AMS LYING PITCH, R E C A L L S G I V I N G
                                                  N717 HEAR T MAS SA GE WITH N 1303 BUT N717 A L R EA D Y DEAD
92043                                                         |8TS AM O U T 1313 H E A R D M A N L A T E R R F C O G N I S E D AS
                                                  N 1303 S A Y D A U G IN W S T A N D & W A S W O R R I E D S O W E N T F R O N T
8 2 1 01                   F 1..F'.Mi..t: Y       N 1022 Dt'.SC S E E I N G B O D Y S 6 4 & 89 O N PITCH S A W N 1 3 0 3 ,
                                                  N 137 ,N 139 W I T H S U B J E C T ALL. TRYING TO R E V I V E THE B O D I E S
S 2 101                    r-L E N U •Y           N 1022. S T S L A T E R C O N T A C T E D N 1 3 0 3 & HE W I T H H I S W I F E
                                                  V I S I T E D THE SUBJECT.,
82186                      PEARS                  l\i'S397 8 T H S T O O D B Y N / 1 ? & N 6 4 9 AS N 1 3 0 3 IDENTIFIED
                                                   THEM IN G Y M . N 5 3 9 7 RE T UR N E D P R O P E R T Y .
S2443                      CK’A N S W J Cl<       N 8 3 1 9 S T S W A S S T O O D 0 / S G Y M S A W NO. 0:" G R I E V I N G
                                                  R E L A T I V E S ESP 1 M A N D I S T R A U G H T O V E R 2 D A U G (N1303)
82476                                                        |STS H E A R D A POL. S W E A R AT N 1 3 0 3 A S H K B H O U 1bi> F OR
                                                  H E L P TO T H E O F F I C E R
S2884
                           |
                           ----- 1                           |D L SC G O I N G O N P I T C H & D E S C A UODY HE T R I E D TO
                                                  R E V I V E N O T ID S A W B O D I E S 89 & 64 H I       ’CKS & N 1 3 0 3
8317                       HICKS                  N 1303 S T S W E N T TO T H E G A M E W I T H N 1 3 1 t L N 6 4 9 ( B OD Y 64) &
                                                  N / 1 7 (BODY 89 ) „N "13 0 3 I D E N T'S N 6 4 9 T O               A !" T H E GYM.
8317                       HICKS                  N 1 3 03 S I S 1D E N T S N 7 1 7 (BODY 89) TO I                  A T 'THE GYM.
                                                  N 1 3 0 3 G O E S IN AM 130 W CTH N 6 4 9 (600Y64) WITH N3482.
S3 17 A                    HICKS                  G I V E S A N T E C L D A N T DEI A I L S O N DAUGFTi'F RS B0DY64 & HODY89
                                                  LISTS PROPERTY RETURNED & PROPERTY OUTSTANDING
8317B                      HICKS                  F A T H E R OF 2 DEC *L) N 7 1 7 (hK)DY 89) & N 6 4 9 (BOD Y 64) G I V E S
                                                  DE'T'S OF E V E N T S & I N C L U D E S COMPLAINTS A B O U T P O L I C E &
83173                      HICKS                  OTHER A G E N C I E S I N V O L V E D IN 'THE E V E N T S O N 13041989.
S317C                      FUCKS                  N 1 3 0 3 S T S S H O W N V I D E O / P H O TO “ BY N20l ■i 1        1 SHOWN 2
                                                  FOLDERS 'THAT RELA'I E 'TO N649 (UODY 64) & N 7 1"7 (HODY 89)
                                                                                                                                  CONT'
   No mi nai no-            (Ml 3 0 3
   Surname           HICKS                                                 MR
   F o r s n a m e <5 T R i£V 0 R

         C ros?1 re-Pe r p n c s?s c a n t i n u e d : .
83171)                  HICKS               M l 3 0 3 O F F I C I A L C O M P L A 1MS Al.iOUT J A C K S O N N£ft3i,M U R R A Y
                                           N 1112 ,DUCKE.NF I E L D N 1108, MARSHAI J.... N 1109 rG R E E N W O O D N 1110
S317D                   HICKS               N "I3 0 3 O F F I C E R S i-A I L E D TO C O N T R O I . C R O W D 0/S, O N O P E N I N G
                                           OF G A T E C & F A I L E D TO R E S P O N D T O T R A G E D Y , R E S C U E BLOW.
S31711                  HICKS               rf: u s e n u m b e r t h i s        is a n e r r o r
S31 7F                  HICKS              N 1303 C O M P L A I N T R E C S D U C K E N F I E L D M A D E F A L S E S T A T E M E N T
                                           A L S O D UCKF Nf IELL)                                  P O S S I B L E COL i.US I ON,
83230                                                   S T S B O D Y 8 9 S O U G H I" IN BY FAI RE R N 1 3 0 3 . W O R K E D ON
                                            BY S U B J E C T & |________ 1. UNAFfi ,.E 'TO R E V I V E
S3377                                                     S T S R E T U R N E D 'TO D U T Y AT T H E H O S P I T A L & A S S I S T E D
                                                          W I T H B O D Y 6 9 H I C K S RF ID B Y N 1 3 Q 3 ID N O T D O N E
8350                    BARN8R0CK          N 5 3 8 ST'S C A R R I E D B O D Y 64 O N T O P I T C H TRIED TO R E V I V E
                                            U N A B L E S P O K E TO N 1 3 0 3 ID AS F A T H E R OF B O D Y 64
S3639A                                     |              S T S P U T B O D Y 89 IN A M 80 . S T S N 1 3 0 3 S H O U T E D TO
                                            OTT E R P E O P L E "lHAT i!£ A L S O W A N T E D B O D Y 6 4 IN S A M E AMDO.
339                                        H I A C C O M P A N I E D H I C K S N 1 3 0 3 & H I C K S N 1 3 1 0 TO ID 'THEIR
                                            D A U G H T E R S , HE A S S I S T E D T H E M U N T I L T H E Y R E T U R N E D H OME.
S4/5A                   TA YL OR           N 3 1 6 5 ST'S N 1 3 0 3 D E S C B S B O D Y 89. N 3 1 6 3 S A W G I R L M A T C H E D
                                            D E S C PI..A S T E R RM B H O S P I TAJ. . N 1 3 0 3 W A N T E D T O S E E HER,
S365                    BENNETT            N 4 H 7 3 S T S N 7 l 7 W A S A C C O M P A N I E D TO H O S P BY F A T H E R N 1 3 0 3
                                            & N 3 4 8 2 . H O S P I T A L C A S U A L T Y NO. HO, POL M O R T U A R Y N O .& 9 .
£5593                   MOUNSEY            N 4 3 4 4 S T S IN G Y M W H E N N9 C E R T S D E A T H OF IM649 ( B O DY 64)
                                            N 1303 I D E N T S N 6 4 9 T O N 4 3 4 4
S597A                   CRUT TENDEN        N 43 &5 STS HICKS M l 303 & H IC KS N 1310 ID'D HI CKS N717
                                             (BODY 89) TO HE R IN GYM,, B O D Y T H E N T A K E N TO M O R T U A R Y .
S/51                                       1          I W A S A P P R O A C H E D B Y A M A N (N13 0 3? ) R E H E L P I N G H I S
                                            2 D A U G H E R S W H O W E RE NOT B R E A T H I N G , S H E DIDNT S E E 'THEM,,
S797                    MCGUINNESS         N 5 4 8 2 S T S TOOK N 7 1 7 (BODY S 9 ) TO N O R T H E R N G E N H O S P I f A L
                                            W I T H N 1303 A N D T R I E D TO A S S I S T W I T H RECUSI"! AT I O N .
S797A                   MCGU[NNESS         N'5482 S T S H E L P E D C A R R Y G I R L F R O M P E N W I T H N 2 6 1 3 , G 0 T
                                            O X Y G E N TO R B O D Y 89 H I C K S , W I T H B O D Y 89 W A S N 1 3 0 3 ( F A T H E R
S820                    LUNT                N 1 3 0 5 TOLD BY Nil 14 TO C L O S E T 3 T I L E S & S T A Y 0 / S . W I T H
                                            N 1 2 9 1 , N 1295 & M l 3 0 3 . S A M E T I M E H E A R D T A N N O Y A D V I S E T A N S
S856                    MADDOX             N 1 S 9 S T S N 1303 N E A R AS T R I E D T O R E V I V E N64 9. A M 3 0 'TOOK
                                            N 7 17, MO R O O M FO R N6 49, 'TOOK T W D S GYM, NO A M B O T H E R E .
S858                    GREAVES            N 157 S T S N 1 3 03 ON P I T C H W I T H B O D I E S OF D A U G H T E R S U P S E T
                                            A S K I N G FOR M E D I C A L EQUIPMENT' W E N T TO H O S P W I T H B O D Y 89
59 9 1                  EDWARDS            N 5 7 1 9 S T S D R O V E A M B O W I T H N 7 T 7 (BODY 8 9 ) r N 1 3 0 3 , N 5 4 8 2
                                            2 O T H E R B O D I E S , N U R S F F R O M N O T T I N G H A M , FA NS, 2 P C ’S.
QSL1342                                    |          | Si"S W H E N ON P I T C H T R I E D TO H E L P G LR ( N 7 1 / > BU T
                                            M A M W I T H HER R E F U S E D ( N 1303) S A W P H O T O & R(“C O G N I S E D
QSL.92                  HICKS               I....POOL. F A N W H O 'TRAVELLED W I T H F A M I L Y TO V E N U E . EN I'ERED
                                            L/I..N 1400 H R S TO P E N 2 B Y A C C I D E N T . L O S T 2 D A U G H T E R S .
Ml 4 8 4                HICKS               N 1303 H A S W R I T T E N L E T T E R A T T A C H E D TO P H O T O S F R O M
                                            N E W S P A P E R I N D I C A T I N G W H E R E T H I N K S D A U G S ARE,, V I D E O SEC
M 1630                  HICKS               Ml 3 0 3 A G R E E S T O S E E V I D E O F O O T A G E W I T H V I E W TO i         '
                                                                                                                                .0 B O T H
                                            D A U G H T E R S . AR R A N G E D FOR 0 7 0 7 8 9 M E C H E L I.S P S T N . A P P R O V E D
HI 7 2 9                HICKS               INS L E Y T O N S T S MR & M R S H I C K S R E Q U E S T E D 'TO BE A L L O W E D
                                            TO V I E W O T H E R E V I D E N C E . C A N DO B U T P R I O R I T I Z E D .
HI 930                  HICKS               N 1303 H A S B E E N S E E N A G A I N & STATEMENT'' S 3 1 7 F O B T A I N E D
                                            RE: CS D U C K E N F I E L D M A K I N G F A L S E S T A T E M E N T
                                                                                                                                   CONT
                                                                                                                               page:




   N o rni n a J. n o      N 13 0 3
   B u r n a rue    HICKS!                                       I 1 tr .1 s   ME
   F o r b n a m e s 1'R E V 0 R

       C r o s a - r e f e r e n c e s c o r<t :lnue-ti s••
Ml 9 3 5                 H1LLSB0I iOki        S U B M I S S I O N !JY HI U. SIJOROUGH S U P P O R T G R O U P 10 T A Y L O R
                                              Ml 1371 R E C E I V E D F R O M H I C K S N 1 3 0 3 d u r i n g P O L I C E V 1 S I f .
M196D                    LIVERMORE            M E S S A G E RE DEAT H 0!" SIR H A R R Y L I V E R M O R E N 1 3 2 b
                                              SOI EC i TOR A C T I N G F OR TREVOR HIC KS .
M3 21                    HICKS                N 1 3 0 3 S T S A P P O I N T E D N 1 3 2 3 AS B ARR 3S T E R J ;UR "IHE R CONTACT'
                                              TO B E M A D E fH»?OU<sH 0 3 / 8 4 4 APPL.ETOM OR D S S 7 9 2 MCCOMSJiE
M3 ? 1                   PiI CKS              N 1 3 0 3 M A D E O F r i C I A L C O M P L A I N T ALTL.R C O V E N T R Y C I T Y V
                                              L I V E R P O O L M A T C H ( DATE N O T K N O W N ) „ N1 3 2 5 A L R E A D Y AW A R E .
M3 EH                    HICKS                N 1 3 0 3 F A T H E R OF N 6 4 9 & N 7 1 7 S T S FI...E:NLPY N 1 P 2 2 W A S T H E
                                              S U P P O R T E R W H O T RIED TO R E V I V E H I S D A U G H T E R S
M609                     HICKS                F U R T H E R ORIGINAL. ST O B T L R O M S U B J E C T F A T H E R OF B O D I E S
                                              NO 648,89 SARAH & VIC TO RIA PUCKS
D "1024                  WITNESSES            LIST OF I N Q U I R Y W I T N E S S E S 1 6 0 5 8 9
D 1 447                 HICKS                  THIS IS A L E T T E R F R O M N 1 3 0 3 A B O U T H I S R E C O L L E C f IONS
                                              OF T H E E V E N T S OF 1 HL DAY.
D3030                                         LET TER S E N T TO MR H I C K S N T 3 0 3 8 Y I                        I& F O R W A R D E D TO
                                              AC C J O N E S I                                                                           I.
D3320                   HI C K S              T R A N S C R I P T J ; N13LK                   CO MMENCED 180589
D3543                    ILILL.SBOROU         H I L L S B O R O U G H I-AM 31..Y SUPPORT G R O U P , I S S U E 2, S U B M I S S I O N
                                              TO TAYLOR IM113/1,, CHAIRMAN - N13G3, SECRE'TARY N1 3 85 „
1)3670                  HICKS                 CORRESPONDENCE F R O M MR H I C K S O U T L I N I N G COMPLAINT'S HE
                                              W I S H E S TO M A K E A G A I N S T CC WRiGHT., ACC J O N E S S E N T R E P L Y
D3744                    SI lART'             COMPLAINT i-'iFF S U B M I T T E D IJY CC SHARP RE C O M P L A I N T S
                                              M A D E B Y H I C K S / D E V O N S I O E / H A M M O N D A G A I N S T CC WRIGHT,,
D3793                    1"ly V I C T O R     D 3 7 9 3 IS L E T T E R TO SILVERMAN                    1V E k M O R E F R O M N1272 RE
                                              N 1303„ C O P Y OF D 3 7 8 0 F R O M VINCENT H A L E S O L I C I T O R S E N T „
D3802                    SHARP                LETTER SENT" TO N 1 3 0 3 F R O M CC SHARP U P D A T I N G H I M ON
                                              SITUATION RE COMPLAINT' 1/89 4 ON C H A N G E S OF N E W 10.
D8VE                     11, V I C T O R      LETTER F R O M 8 ) EVERMAN & LIVERMORE S O L I C I T O R S WITH-A
                                              STATEMENT F R O M T R E V O R H I C K S RE INCIDENT,, ID TO S 3 1 7 B




                                                     end    of    uup o r t
Cn,cidsnJ            IU8     241197 0P931                      NOMINAL, REC O R D PRINT

   Nominal           no,,   N1310
   8 u rna m e   H XC K S                                       I”i 1 1 e
   s'a r e name s J E N N 11-'HR

   E3i.r t h lace
   DoH I                     I       A ge        ITo                    S'ex F             1c
   0 c c u pa t i,a n
   i:i'iip 1 o y e r /'S c ho o 1 n a m e
   H eight     to                            8ui.i. d
   Hair Colour
   Hair Type

   L'yes
   C o mp i exion

   Facial hair
  Glasses worn                         Use
  .J ewe 1 1 e ry                                                                           A c ce n 1,

   R e c . i n j u ry , ta tt oos ,ma r ks ,scars , pec u I.ia r i ties,ab n o rma I it ie s




   I(n o w s V i c t i rn                     Nature      of    r e 1a t i o nsh:i p
   At S c e n e                               F i n gar p r i.n t s

   CRO number                                       L o c a l ref. no
   Siood Sample  U                              G r o u p (A 8 0 )               0 1he r
   Saliva Sample U                                    Sec r e te r U             Suspect         E lim    Code

   0 J.o t h i n g




       C r o s s. refsr e n ces t -
AUDRFSS              EXHOME?
ADDRESS              TEMP HOME?
ADDRESS              HOME
TELEPHONE            EXHOME?
7 EL L P H O N E     HOME
CATEGORY             POSITION                N O R T H S T A N D A!" G R O U N D        ST AND S AT GR OUN D
CATEGORY             L INK                   TRAFi; IC D K L A Y S                      TRAL I- 1C P R O B L E M S
CATEGORY             L INK                   L 1 V E R POOi... S U P P OR TERS          SUPPORTERS
CATEGORY             POSSESSED               G E N U INE "i I C K E T S
CATEGORY             L IN K                  ADVERSE: C O M M E N T S RE P O L I C E R E C O G N I T I O N
Ml 3 0 3             SPOUSE                  HICKS                               TREVOR
N649                 MOTH DAUG               HICKS                               SARAH                    LOUISE
N717                 MOTH DAUG               HI C K S                            VICTORIA                 JANE
N7247                I...I NK                WARDROPE                            JAMES
A646!::>                                     INS L.EY1 O N s A R R A N G F     F OR MR & M R S H I C K S W H E N C O N V E N I E N T
0SL.93               SUBJECT                 01 --iJTi 89 Hi CKS
                                                                                                                              CONT
   N om inal       no.      N 1:310
   Suj rname         HICKS                              Ti t 1e
   F o r e n a m e -a J E N N I F G R

     C r o s>a - r & f e r e rices c o n t :i.n ued; --
S139E                 WARDR O P E         N 7 E 4 7 S T B SAW A WOMAN P O S S I B L Y N 1 3 1 0 TOLD I I E R , HFR
                                          DAUGHTER POSS N 7 1 7 HAD D I E D
S317                  HICKS               Ml 3 0 3 S T S WENT" TO THE GAME WITH N 1 3 1 C . L N 6 4 9 (UODY 6 4 ) &
                                          M 7 1 7 <BODY 8 9 ) . N 1 3 0 3 I DEN f S N 6 4 9 TO N 9 1 8 S A f THE GYM,
s;-«9                                         ACCOMPANIED H I C K S N 1 3 D 3 & H I C K S N 1 3 1 0 1 0 I D T H E I R
                                        DAUGHTERS, HE A S S I S T E D THEM UNTIL. THEY RETURNED HOME,,
S":>97                  CR UTTENDEN     S T S UODY TAKEN TO GYM„ LATER BODY I D BY N 1 3 1 0 ( MOTHER)
                                        P RO P E R T Y FROM BODY HANDED TO N 1 3 1 0 .
SL>97A                  C'RUT'iT-NDKN   N 4 3 6 5 S I S HICKS M13D3 & HICKS N 1 3 1 0 I D ’ D HICKS N 7 1 7
                                        (BODY 8 9 ) TO TIER I N GYM, BODY THEN TAKEN TO MORTUARY,,
0SL93                   HICKS           N 1 3 1 U I. .POOL FAN , WF NT WI TH F AM I ; ..Y , EN'i F.RED V I A ENTRANCE
                                        8 1 4 0 0 . SEA TED NORTH S f AND. LOS I" TWO DAUGH TERS L / L A N f .
M17E9                   HICKS           I N S LEYTON S T S MR & MRS H I C K S R LOUES TF D TO BE ALLOWED
                                        TO VIEW OTHER E V I D E N C E , CAN 0 0 BUT P R I O R I T I Z E D .
ll/ll/yy                 09:21              L1UERP00L ECHO NEWS DESK - 01ld?523l54 8154
: (I   J |   : »V    00;.)\   I* \ V tt.t                                    XA                              N O .0 6 7


                                                                                                  , SSOAO^
                                                                                                   •     t




                                        Hillsborough Family Support Group


             Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
             Home Secretary
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne's Gate
             I/ondon
             SWIH 9AT
                                                                                            9thNovember 1997
                                                                                          BY FAX AND POST

             Dear M r Sira'*,

             r«* : H illsborough ScrutiftV

             i i in with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your
             intervention ui the timetahle for the scrutiny. Since your announcement of the scrutiny on the
              (O'* June the problems of slow or non-disclosure of information by South Yorkshire Police
             and others have continued unabated.. It is of such scale and regularity as to render any
             arguments oJ mistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe it is a
             deliberate tact ic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
             outcome of the scrutiny.

              We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
              Justice Stuart Smith’s team I the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
              (mu attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation of our case are being thwarted.

              You   will recall from our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
              j and apparently control!!) of the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
              Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
              Rather than the spirit o f‘'openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
              oft tie problems of the last eight and a half yeaTS is reaJising our worst fears.

               They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
               h cannot be right, feir or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
               or delay o f information.

               1Examples of the problems we are encountering are:-

                i)     late as the 6® November we received four important photographs - they were requested
                       As
               nver three months ago!!!

                                                           VICK-CIIAfRMAN/ SECRETARY               TftEASUREK
   < fl/URMAN
                                                           P H*»wnond__________
                                                                                                   Mn. J.TravnOt
   T
           11 NLM ‘ y? ii)9: 5b FRUM PRbSS AMD PR SYP                                                   .   I   .

l ^l ' U                                L JU tK0HWVV4
                                                H U U . t L H U N tU tt UhSK ....
                                                                             "► 0 1* 1 4 2 5 2 3 1 5 4 S J 'U       Mr vcn     m -
              :f 7 n u : Ott   t'W   u w                                                               ~ iw ^       NL . Mb?   £?0j




           2)Sevcral fcmilies are still waiting to receive all or parts of their loved ones “bodyfilfis”

           3 )On the 24* September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
           written authority from th e relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

           4)Medical records of the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
           Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did wit exist.

           The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1st September but this had to be relaxed when it
           became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
           information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions mid-Septcmberand
           lodged others on the 25* September. Both of those documents made it dear that our efforts
           were being hampered by the painfully stow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

            Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn of the year” full consideration of newly
            disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence ii could not form part of any deliberation or
            conclusion.

            U is our behef that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control of all the
            documents/cvidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
            parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the frulh than the femilies of the deceased.

            We further submit that ft is now imperative that you extend the timescale for subflrissions and
            their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the fenulies and the
            public as fair and exhaustive.

             All of us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the M i e s implore
             vou to introduce a one or two month extension to the timescale to ensure all our concerns can
             he properly investigated and “scrutinised” It is the families view that th e is out last chance
             for justice to be done and dearly it must be “seen to be done properly*’ if faith in ^ ju d ic ia l
             process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, attended the
             justice conccrt, and wrote/telephoned the media in support of our cause.

              We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
              l erms of Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also g*ve
              m e for revision of the scrutiny programme.

              Vmtrs sincerely.



              I revor Hicks
              ( 'hairman. - UFSG




1 NfH ) 'Or? RP:
              South Yorkshire                                                      /

              POLICE                                              Richard Wells QPM,M
                                                                                    A(Oxon).CIMgt.
             J U S TI C E w i t h COURAGE                         ChiefConstable
J Straw Esq MP                                                                         12 November 1997
Secretary of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT



HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I am incensed that I should have to respond to a letter signed by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group to yourself, which I have received courtesy of the Liverpool
Echo News Desk. I do not believe that such correspondence should be conducted via the media.

We have bent over backwards to co-operate with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the
release of information to them. As you know, we are constrained by Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules
1984 and by aspects of confidentiality so far as statements are concerned which do not fall within
Rule 57. These constraints are particularly noticeable when we correspond with the author of a
statement who seeks release of documentation to the Hillsborough Family Support Group or to
other families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is fully aware of our policy. We have also been at pains to
be completely open with the Scrutiny Team, promptly supplying any documentation requested.

The letter writer is being disingenuous in suggesting that it is the fault of South Yorkshire Police
that the Hillsborough Family Support Group and individual families cannot meet the time scales for
submissions to the Scrutiny. If the Group wish more time to make their submissions, of course it is
a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in consultation with yourself. Certainly South Yorkshire
Police would not resist that proposition but we strongly object when the reason for the extension is
laid at our feet.

Neither would I object to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's taking custody and control of the Hillsborough
evidence and documents. I have made this perfectly clear to the Judge. The volume of the archive,
however, the time for its transportation and the fact that the Judge is unlikely to be able to afford
dedicated staff to access the material, will combine to make delivery of information from the
archives take more time than at present rather than less.

Moving now to the four examples used by Trevor Hicks to highlight the problems encountered:-

1.     The writer of the letter - dishonestly in my view - makes no mention of the fact that four
       important photographs received by the Group on 6 November 1997 were also accompanied
       by two that had been requested as late as 27 October 1997. Furthermore, within seven
       working days of the original request, the Group's Solicitor had been supplied with laser
       copies of three of the photographs and an original photographic copy of one of them. At this
       time it was made clear that there would be a delay in providing photographic copies, though
       we had acted in good faith in providing the best copy versions of the photographs available
       at the time.
               Police Headquarters
                                                                       Direct line: 0114 2523400
               Snig H ill
                                                                        Direct fax: 0114 2523481
               Sheffield S3 8LY                                       Switchboard: 0114 2202020
               -q ^ -01 M 376 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
2.     As to the allegation that families are still waiting to receive all or part of their relatives' body
       files - this is simply wrong. No family is waiting to receive all or part of body files. A body
       file is a complex bundle of documents varying from 30 to 100 pages, depending on the
       amount of evidence gathered, made more complex by the presence of photographs and
       ANACAPA analytical charts. Two families are waiting for actual photographs from the
       body file as opposed to the laser copies we originally sent. You should know that, within the
       last two weeks we have received no fewer than eighteen word-processed, identically worded
       requests from different families, who in the main have had no previous contact with South
       Yorkshire Police,to supply a copy of their deceased's body file to the solicitor acting fo r the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group. This figure represents 72% of the requests previously
       received during the period from April 1992 to the end of September 1997. Staff are
       presently processing these requests and the majority will be dealt with this week. If I
       indicate that some of these stereotyped requests have earlier names crossed out and new
       names written in, you will appreciate our doubts about the motives behind the demands (a
       sample is attached for your interest).

3.     Without the courtesy of further information I am unable to comment on access to medical
       records being denied to the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.

4.     Again we are not sure precisely which medical records the Hammonds have been told did not
       exist yet which have been made available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I can be certain
       however, that Mr Hammond has been supplied with all the statements from his late son
       Philip's body file, including the autopsy report supplied as long ago as 8 May 1992, which
       have been supplied to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Any purported failure to supply records
       would be patently 'out of synch' with all we have done so far.

South Yorkshire Police and its officers are as interested in the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith's Scrutiny as the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and look forward to its conclusion. We
have no wish to leave any room for doubt to be cast in future, which is why we have put so much
effort, despite some inevitable legal constraints, into providing material when we have been asked
for it.

Though Trevor Hicks has lent his name to the letter, I would be surprised if Ann Adlington were not
the author of it. It has all the hallmarks, ironically, of the delay and prevarication attributed to the
South Yorkshire Police. This is at its most obvious in the final paragraph where, at least four
months into the process of the Scrutiny, they seek to challenge its early announced terms of
reference. My feeling is that this is simply because the existing framework is unlikely to have yielded
the 'successes' of which they had built up expectations. Though the butt of allegations of 'dirty
tricks' emerging from some quarters close to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, may I
reiterate my complete commitment to openness - even if it should be to the detriment of our Force -
and to the repeated expression of my sorrow at the awful consequences of 15 April 1989. Nothing
will ever change those two aspects of my life or my relationship with the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.




                                             Kicnara wens




cc. Paul Pugh, Scrutiny Office, H O.
9 7 (WED) 1 0 : 2 7                                         TEL                    3113


                                                                                               Ho




   22 October 1997


  PC Greenway
  South Yorkshire Police
  Discipline and Complaints Dept
  Windsor Road
  Sheffield S8 8UB

  Dear Sir
                                                        Sifven
  Would you, please
                  . . . release
                            . the
                                4 bodyj—-
                                        file—
                                            of         'fe b a Bell, who died at Hillsborough to
  ,,    ° UiJ sso,lclt° r: Aim Adlington, Hillsborough Family Support Group, Pioneer Building,
  65-67 Dale Street, Liverpool L2 2NS.

  Thank you for your assistance in this matter.


  Yours faithfully
          1/9? ,             09:21
                  i >7   00:')*   )'\\   u,i      ECH0 NEWS dESK -» 01142523154 6154                        NU. tsJb r




                                          Hillsborough Family Support Group


             Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
             Home Secretary
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne’s Gate
             I/Ondcn
             SW1H 9AT
                                                                                          9thNovember 1997
                                                                                        BY FAX AND POST

             I tear Mr Siraw,

             re_: Hillsborough Scrutiny

             II is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your
             intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement of the scrutiny on the
                   June the problems of slow or non-disclosure o f information by South Yorkshire Police
             and others have continued unabated.. It is of such scale and regularity as.to render any
             arguments oJ' mistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe it is a
             deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
             outcome of the scrutiny.

             We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
             .Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
             our attempis to gather information vital to proper presentation of our case are being thwarted.

             You will recall irom our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
             Iand apparently control!!) of the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
             Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
             Rather than the spirit of “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
             of the problems of the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

             They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
             (! cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
             or delay of information.

             Examples of the problems we are encountering are:-

             I ) As late as the 6* November we received four important photographs - they were requested
             over three monihs ago!!!


<71 a i r m a n                                      VICE-CHAIRMAN/SECRETARY                    TREASURER
1                                                    P. H am m o nd




                                                                                  .

NOU '97 09:24
                                                                            01514720026           PAGE.02
           1/97'              09:21            LIUERPOOL ECHO NEWS DESK -+ 01142523154 8154                                    NO.0b?   503
          II    . :I7    «H»: 5 «   l*A.\   UI /   o -*w uvi        ...........................

 &
/■



               JJSevoal abates are still waiting to receive all or parts oftheir loved ones “bodyfles”
               ,   q     .i 24* September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
                                           relatives concerned. Access is still "being denied!
                                                                                                                      :to Lord




               information until late A ugust. The HFSG m      a d e made it clear that our effo rts
               lodged others on the 25- September. Both of those d o o m s * m d e ^ e w r ^
               L i being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South YorKstoe

                d e a r* if the scrutiny attends to report “at t o o f »         « « £ " £                             £   *
                .r.„ .JL * evidence cannot take place and hence * could not form part ol any «
                conclusion.

                   „ is our belief that Lord Justice M         Smith * «                                                         aD



                   Me further submit that it is now itnperatwe that you
                   lheir proper consideration by the Judge if the scratmy is to be accepted by t »
                   public as fair and exhaustive.

                   All Of us want this matter concluded but having




                    justice concert, and mote/telephoned the media m support of our cause.

                    v/e shall be writing under separate confidenM c o v C T ^ a j^ deep ^ ^ r ^ S ^
                    1enns of Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and tnese may
                    rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

                    Yours sincerely.



                       I revor Hicks
                       ('hairman. - IIFSG




     11 NOU ’ 9 7 0 Q : 2 4                                                                       01 S 1 /,.'7~ppoc        PQQC1. W-7
l H 0 ? ' :*7(FRl] 08:44                                            T E L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13      31 13         P.



/                       South Yorkshire
                        POLICE                                                 Richard Wells qpm,uwankcofa
                        JUSTICE        with   COURAGE                         Chit/CoteUsblt
        J Straw Esq MP                                                                               12 November 1997
        Secretary of State
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        London SW1H 9AT

                     ■W-rv-t-

        HELLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

        I am incensed that I should have to respond to a letter signed by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
        Hillsborough Family Support Group to yourselfj which I have received courtesy of the Liverpool
        Echo News Desk. I do not believe that such correspondence should be conducted via the media.

        We have bent over backwards to co-operate with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the
        release of information to them. As you know, we are constrained by Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules
        1984 and by aspects of confidentiality so far as statements are concerned which do not fall within
        Rule 57. These constraints are particularly noticeable when we correspond with the author of a
        statement who seeks release of documentation to the Hillsborough F am ily Support Group or to
        other families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is fully aware of our policy. We have also been at pains to
        be completely open with the Scrutiny Team, promptly supplying any documentation requested.

        The letter writer is being disingenuous in suggesting that it is the fault of South Yorkshire Police
        that the Hillsborough Family Support Group and individual families cannot meet the time scales for
        submissions to the Scrutiny. If the Group wish more time to make their submissions, of course it is
        a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in consultation with yourself. Certainly South Yorkshire
        Police would not resist that proposition but we strongly object when the reason for the extension is
        laid at our feet.

        Neither would I object to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's taking custody and control of the Hillsborough
        evidence and documents. I have made this perfectly clear to the Judge. The volume of the archive,
        however, the time for its transportation and the fact that the Judge is unlikely to be able to afford
        dedicated staff to access the material, will combine to make delivery of information from the
        archives take more time than at present rather than less.

       Moving now to the four examples used by Trevor Hicks to highlight the problems encountered: -

        1.     The writer of the letter - dishonestly in my view - makes no mention of the fact that four
               important photographs received by the Group on 6 November 1997 were also accompanied
               by two that had been requested as late as 27 October 1997. Furthermore, within seven
               working days of the original request, the Group's Solicitor had been supplied with laser
               copies of three of the photographs and an original photographic copy of one of them. At this
               time it was made clear that there would be a delay in providing photographic copies, though
               we had acted in good faith in providing the best copy versions of the photographs available
               at the time.
                        Police Headquarters
                        SnigHill
                                                                                   Direct line: 0114 2523400
                »■      Sheffield SH 8I,Y
                                                                                    Direct rax: 0114 2523481
                                                                                  Switchboard: 0114 2202020
                       'Feh-OIM U7CCCaa. Fax-. 01.14 252 32-13




     14 NOU ’97 09=49                                                01142963113                   3113       PAGE.01
14- NOV, ’ 9 7 ( F R I ) 0 8 : 4 4                                                   T E L : 0 1 1 4 2 9 6 3 1 13      31 13          P. 00 2



          r.



           2.         As to the allegation that families are still waiting to receive all or part of their relatives' body
                     files - this is simply wrong. No family is waiting to receive all or part of body files. A body
                     file is a complex bundle of documents varying from 30 to 100 pages, depending on the
                   . amount of evidence gathered, made more complex by the presence of photographs and
                     ANACAPA analytical charts. Two families are waiting for actual photographs from the
                     body file as opposed to the laser copies we originally sent. You should know that, within the
                     last two weeks we have received no fewer than eighteen word-processed, identically worded
                     requests from different families, who in the main have had no previous contact with South
                     Yorkshire PoIice,to supply a copy of their deceased's body file t o th e s o l i c i t o r a c ti n g f o r th e
                     H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o r t G r o u p . This figure represents 72% of the requests previously
                     received during the period from April 1992 to the end of September 1997. Staff are
                     presently processing these requests and the majority will be dealt with this week. If I
                     indicate that some of these stereotyped requests have earlier names crossed out and new
                     names written in, you will appreciate our doubts about the motives behind the demands (a
                     sample is attached for your interest).

          3.        Without the courtesy of further information I am unable to comment on access to medical
                    records being denied to the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.

          4.        Again we are not sure precisely which medical records the Hammonds have been told did not
                    exist yet which have been made available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I can be certain
                    however, that Mr Hammond has been supplied with all the statements from his late son
                    Philip's body file, including the autopsy report supplied as long ago as 8 May 1992, which
                    have been supplied to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Any purported failure to supply records
                    would be patently 'out of synch’ with all we have done so far.

          South Yorkshire Police and its officers are as interested in the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-
          Smith s Scrutiny as the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and look forward to its conclusion. We
          have no wish to leave any room for doubt to be cast in future, which is why we have put so much
          effort, despite some inevitable legal constraints, into providing material when we have been asked
          for it.

         Though Trevor Hicks has lent his name to the letter, I would be surprised if Ann Adlington were not
         the author of it. It has all the hallmarks, ironically, of the delay and prevarication attributed to the
         South Yorkshire Police. This is at its most obvious in the final paragraph where, at least four
         months into the process of the Scrutiny, they seek to challenge its early announced terms of
         reference. My feeling is that this is simply because the existing framework is unlikely to have yielded
         the 'successes’ of which they had built up expectations. Though the butt of allegations of 'dirty
         tricks' emerging from some quarters close to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, may I
         reiterate my complete commitment to openness - even if it should be to the detriment of our Force -
         and to the repeated expression of my sorrow at the awful consequences of 15 April 1989. Nothing
         will ever change those two aspects of my life or my relationship with the Hillsborough Family
         Support Group.                                                                                         J




                                                    . i- —------- Avidiai u- vvdid

         Enc.

         cc. Paul Pugh, Scrutiny Office, H.O.



        14 NOU ’97 09-'49                                                             01142963113                   3113       PAGE. 02
                                                                                                   PfiQE.006
   1'4- NOU     ’97'     8:55    F R O M S.Y.P.     CHIEF.DEPT.


                                                                     TEL                    3113              P. 002
12-flOV.'97lTO 10*27




          22 October 1997


          PC Greenway
          South Yorkshire Police
          Discipline and Complaints Dept
          Windsor Road
          Sheffield S8 8UB

              Dear Sir
                                                                   S/non
              Would you please release the body file o(           •tfofat Bell, who died at Hillsborough to
              the Group’s solicitor, Ann Adlington, Hillsborough Family Support Group, Pioneer Building,
              65-67 Dale Street, Liverpool L2 2NS.

              Thank you for your assistance in this matter.


              Yours faithfully




                                                                                           ** TOTAL P A G E .006
'    14 •NO U '’9 7               8:52        FROM S.Y.P.               CHIEF.DEPT.                                          P P G E .002
    11/11/37                 09:21                   LIUERPOOL ECHO NtWb UfcbK. •+                ou«
         >1     SIT    OOISM      l*A\   «•*'*»   " '" 'v v .

                                                                                                                 ^   boro^


         .•<y            V                                                                                      *    i . i




                                           Hillsborough Family Support Group


                Rt, Hon Jack Straw MP
                Home Secretary
                Home Office
                50 Queen Anne’s Gale
                l^fldon
                SW1H 9AT                                                                                      9* November 1997
                                                                                                            BY FAX AND POST


                 Dear Mr Straw,

                 r e j riiifehoro»i£L§£DitLnX

                  11  is with deep regret t h a t ^              g j ^ ^ T ^ o ^ e m e n t of the scrutiny onthe
                  intervention in ihe timetable for the SCI]ffwJ'      rtf information by South Yorkshire Police
                   Wlh June the probtetns of sk)w or                          ^ ^ regularity a? to tender any
                  and others have continued                      of w0rk. totally untenable. We beHeve it is a


                  outcome of the scrutiny-
                                                                                a            the nrobtems       iOJO^ t0 Lord
                      We te ,e already m *k direct                                                ^overneflts.aU
                      tustiw Stuart Smith’s team I the Hone Officehul                0f 0ur case axe being thwaned.
                      our attempts to father information ****1w prop® P*esentauoa o
                                                                         , . ...                 concern that custody
                      You will recall from                                          remain «Hb Sooth YotteW*
                      (and apparently control..) of the ev        d5saster $ central to the scrutiny.
                      Police When dearly thnrjrole m ahd f                          byNewLabourthe continuation
                       Rather than the spin! of openness sov®°™“ 7                     ^ ^ t fears.
                       „f the problems ofthe ha eight an* » “ f >“ » “            °
                                                               ,    . o . * y e see and when, if ever, we see it,

                       ; s        r e         ; x           t c     s      w         £   ^      * ^     “ ^            ' , “            ‘
                       ■>r delay of to formation.

                       Sam ples ofthe        p ro bisms we      are encountering are:-

                        n As law as the 6* November we received four important photographs - they were requested
                       over    three months ago!!!

                                                                                                                       TREASUM*
                                                                        VlCK-aiAl»MAN/SE*:*KTA*V                       Mu. i. Twytio*
          CHAIRMAN                                                      p Hv"<rioM
          1 'I;.:!.*




    11    MDiJ ’ cl'? 0 9 : 2 4                                                                    0151472002S            PfiGF.B?
 14 M.OU               ’97          8:53               FROM   S.Y.P.   CHIEF.DEPT.                                                  P A G E .003
U'li'9?                      09:21                   LIVERPOOL 5CH0 NEWS DESK -» 01142523154 8154                                   NO. 067        003
,'f l   11        IT   Hu:   0 '1    i’ A . \    u i < ; »                       ............. — -




        " 2)Scvcral lamilto aw ^ waMng to « “ *»                               I"*5 °f Uleir toTOi “““

             3 )0n the 24* September our solicit
             written authority from the revives




             2    ^     1* 3 5           ?"
             —                                  ^ M ^ L ^ T B o t h o f t l ^ S S ^ D t s ro d e t dear tb « 0 < ^ 8 brts
             'Z        S g X                    S S £ £ £ £ - M b -*                      * South Yorkshire Pobce.



                  «  4
              conclusion.

                 t i » our b tfc f that Lord Jwtice Stuart Siafch s   h  o    u     l   d   <    °     311
                 Jncuimnft/cvideMe to «fcgu»d * “                   ^ 2 * S S » * " ili" oftoe daceased.
                 panfc*. Surety, no one can have greater claim to the troth two tne Brmues

                 * e farther submit that it is now muientiw that you    ^
                 i b ^ W r consideration by the Judge if the « u * y ®» be accepted by the tammes
                 pab lic as fair and exhaustive.

                                                     **
                 All o f u a w ant th is m tt a r « ” ' d u ,*ed,                                     na ° y ^                         mb
                 you to introduce a 01* or two nwtfh extension                        _                  that this is our last chance
                 be p roperly ta v e stig a w l and                                     ^ ^          properly” if W h & tb e ja d jo a l

                                    » u                                         ofvo,OT vh? 'm U t o ^                 *B “ W     "*
                  J^kTconccrt, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

                  We shall be writing under separate eoatortW                                                                        «*"
                  Vonw of Referenda you haw setdown f « Lord to *** Swat imm ann
                  rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.




                   I revor Hicks
                   Chairman. - UFSG
                                                                                                                                                                                            1-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1


                                  South Yorkshire

                                  P O LIC E
                                 JUSTICE with COURAGE
                                                                                                                                        Date......

                                                                                                                                       Time.....

                                                                                                                                       District.....................


                                                                                 MEDIA ENQUIRY FORM



CALLER                                                                                                                         O F .....

TEL NO..................................................... DEALT WITH/BY

 iNQUIRY...                                                          lArSAWL               rfe                             .. ............................

                                                                                                                                                                . ( W & * .....

. . . W   . . . . . S^.OrtM<:..J k k f l l V ~ r f . . . . . + .                 . .. . S -U fcfiW




R E SP O N S E                    U Ia           .Ohc^ . .... C©. r:                             ......a^...<^..u<ujWit^...... ft^A....U4^.....£jwv.....W .L^......

                                                        .fcfc..        fcir&.Jk......                L K.iejf...

...1. ...i«4,e*rtr..........                                    Wl&tfSrf*\.                             ....                                              .“iLft.......... .

                                             p k & W . . .kf.^Tt                              (liwJ          IcJht/.^..............................

                                                                      OkfOsAtf                   )A.a....j.<U*Vji^j...............                       U...r>fS<^.-^r....

....e®.(U.4*                                                                                                                                                                       ..

.SSzt.                                          .....            CSK|.vu^ar?(».            .^js .C..... .( ^ .,*j. b f& . j ....Q.                              .. ^^2...!. * 4 ^ ..

                               .f b?.                                (AgasJ c             (s> 1&.£.              k\ obxU^.B. f.                                         ...........

                                         ................................................................................. ................................ m                 -m        I

                                                                      ... iM.<4>tr£&dz....7^...!^..[y^^d^....L^...L^^l^....l^LL^^>...

 jL&<£...^tel^...S>i*rJih... ..                                                            — J»vrra^£-.__.................                            W..V.....$a s m .ivM>.iJ[

 OURCES                            Mo.L.-^AJaOL                       U*L»fc             M i.. 3 ...... 0 * L d b rf....U                <*....W .? .v J J ...L d & ....* c » A * t

            V vw uJeV X ) »A_                              .           j   iX.     t^/y<^-M v^A A ,vv -€.                            (/\fisLA   CO vyA~<-/K >iO € -     p-Q


 iPRD/mediaenq.doc                                  *w         i r                             r - ^    ^   A       |s f                                       •       2May1995
