                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                   Ref:            NGB^   |
            From:          Chief Superintendent Wain               Station/Dept:   *C’ Division
        To:                Deputy Chief Constable, Mr   Hayes      Date:           g june 1990



                    SUBJECT:    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CONTRIBUTION HEARINGS
                                - contested elements of the Taylor Reports




                          The Taylor Reports (in full) have now been considered by Chief
                          Superintendent Mole, Superintendent Bettison and myself. We draw
                          attention to just six areas of the Taylor Interim Report which
                          might be contested and which have either -

                          a) Not yet been underscored by Counsel or Hammond Suddards or

                          b) Amenable to greater emphasis
m
                          I offer these points for the consideration of the legal represent­
                          atives, conscious of the fact that they may have already been
                          considered and dismissed as insignificant.




                          Chief Superintendent




    Gen/2
                           TAYLOR’S INTERIM REPORT



                     ADDITIONAL POINTS OF CONTENTION




PARA 55 - "Evidence       did    not    suggest      a    great    amount    of    alcoholic

           drink was bought (at the off licences)."




     The enquiry team remember that evidence was available of

      at   least    one    off-licence         (believed          to   be   Gateway)

      selling   out of alcoholic             drink.        No statement      can be

      found to this effect.            If this evidence is thought to be

      significant    then       it    will   be   found      - by      speaking     to

     Gateway staff if absolutely necessary.




PARA 82 - "Initially no (police) officer took charge."



       See transcript of Roger GREENWOOD'S evidence (day 12

       Page   41)   who    claims       to    have       taken    charge    at    the

       gateway to Pen 3-             Certainly this was done before the

       arrival of Chief Superintendent Nesbit at 3-12 pm.
PARAS 130 AND 135 - "Dr Eastwood had suggested (elaborate divisions

                       of    the    turnstiles)          giving   separate     access   to

                       each sub-division of the accommodation."




     Inspector Clive CALVERT, then the South Yorkshire Police

     representative         on     the    Officers         Working     Group       at

     Hillsborough had first suggested such division and gives

     evidence (see statement) that he submitted a rough plan

     to the Officer Working Group.                  The idea was formalised

     into working plans prepared by Dr EASTWOOD's firm.                        The

     rejection    of   the       plan    by   the   club    may   be   found    at

     Minutes    of Sheffield Wednesday              F.C.    22/5/85    (S.W.F.C.

     bundle).




    ^ 0 " "The police were much better placed than the stewards (in

          the West Stand)."




      Parts of this paragraph have already been highlighted

      by Counsel. . However, by way of emphasis,                     there were

      stewards in the West Stand including a Chief Steward

      (with few other duties)             who    might     have informed the

     Club's     security     or    Safety       officers,    or   indeed     the

      police who were nearby,            of     impending difficulties on

      the terrace.
    »   2




            PARA 190 -     the police should have realised that the Leppings Lane

                          turnstiles          and   the waiting areas         outside      t h e m would be

                          under strain......             (this was), in my view forseeable."




                  We      might     from        experience       have      been   expected        to

                   highlight,           and     plan    for,     difficulties        of       access

                   through    turnstiles.               The    simple      fact   is      that    no

                   previous difficulties had been reported to the police,

                  or witnessed by the police.                   This despite the regular

                  attendance of Liverpool supporters at Hillsborough for

                  League and Cup matches.




                  Furthermore,          the club had posted stewards at the 1988

                  game     (evidence           on   video)     to    monitor      and     control

                  supporters entering the turnstiles and waiting areas.

                 - They    did not        report       any problems at        that     game and,

                  indeed decided not to deploy stewards to that area in

                  1989.
m



                  Finally,        the    Green      Guide     puts   the     onus,      for    such

                  foresight       and     contingency         planning,     firmly      with     the

                  club.      See particularly paragraph 290 of the Interim

                  Report    where        Lord Justice Taylor            hammers      that point

                  home.
195 - "Even if (pre-match entertainment had taken place) it

        not have been an encouragement for many fans to enter

        early."




 Lord     Justice    Taylor     might    be     hidebound   with   the

  concept    of   local     schoolboy   penalty    competitions    and

  the   like.     For an event of such magnitude realising

 millions       of pounds    in revenue    for the F.A.     the club

 should have been encouraged to provide facilities for

 proper     entertainment:      e.g.    youth   team match between

 the Notts Forest and Liverpool clubs, skydivers, a top

 line music ian/group etc. The alternatives were a cold

 hard terrace for an extra hour or an extra hour of

 drinking etc.
 31-MAY-1990                  11:43                             HAMMOND SUDDAPDS                                     0274   737547           P.01

            -%
     <>'                                                                                                                                       ___


            H am m ond su d d a r d s ____________
                                          SOLICITORS
            ALANI.BOTTOMLEY                      IAN* SHUTTLEWORTH           MARK;W.HILTON        CONSULTANTS:              EMPIREHOUSE
            D.TREVORLEWS                         PETERC,METCALF              PAULR MANSER         ROGER W.S'JODaRDSOK       10PICCADILLY
            MICHAELE.GSEGSON                     CHRISTOPHERW.JONES          JONATHANH.WRiSHT     SiRDESMOND Hift?          BRADFORD BD1 SLR
            JOHND.DEMAN                          ANDREW R.JORDAN             STUARTA VERITY       IANW WHITSON
            MCHAELL SH'PHERD                     SIMON R.B.STELL             RONALDS.DftAKS                                 TELEPHONE(0274)734700
            PETCftN.WILBRAMAM                    SIMONR INMAN                RICHARDBURNS                                   TsLEX 517201
            J.RICHARDARCHEP                      RICHARDW.WADE-SMITM         DAVIDW.K.ARM1TAGE                              M.D.X NO. 15720
            BARBARAW.RANGE                       JOHNS.BECKETT               J.PATRICKMITCHELL
            C.NOELHUTTON                         G.N.IANGREENfCLD            CHRISTOPHER MARKS                              FAX (0**4) 7 3 7 S 4 7
            JOHNH G.HELLER                       STEPHENGALE                 MICHAELS HENLEY


            FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION
            OUR REP:
             PCM/
            TO'                                  P.AO
             P. HAYES, ESQ., DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                              -
            FAXNO

             0742 523409
            OATS:                                                                          TIMS


            N U M 3 E R O F P A S :S (IN C LU D IN G   t h is   S h = £T )

              4
           .IFTHIS■feANSMlSS'ON!$NOT fu.LVOR L£Gi3LYa£C'tv=0,Pl£a$£TEvE?HOKE (0274)7jS“00



'0            HILLSBOROUGH




              p. C. METCALF




           i£EDSOffiCiS              3R'AWiA CHAV3ERS -sSCX-QSDPlACc LSE2S LSI SAX T£l5Fho\; <0^35;MOS1 T=lEX S5'SC2 eAX                             <2•?3
                                     JOSs^hSWbll hanOvSR vvA'.K l*=SS lS3 ’
                                                                          .as T»,=e>MON£ (C532i45!»45 .EX553S5 =AX^25355
31-MAY-1990                   11:43                           HAMMOND SUPDARDS                                                                             0274 737547       P.02




         H am m ond S u d d a rd s
                                        S O L I C I T O R S
        A U N !. BOTTOMLEY
                                               PETER C. METCALF
        0 . TREVOR LEWIS                                                                   D a v id W .K .A R M IT A G 6       CONSULTANTS:
                                              CH RISTOPH ER W, JO N E S                                                                                        EMPIRE HOUSE
        MICHAEL E G R 6G S O N                                                             J . PATRICK MITCHELL                R O G E R W. SUDDARDS ca s
                                              ANDREW R. JO R D A N                                                                                             lOPIOCADttJLY
        JO H N 0 . DE MAIN                                                                 CH RISTOPH ER M ARKS                SIR DESM OND HEAP               BRADFORD BD1 SLR
                                              SIM O N R B. STELL
        MICHAEL t         SHEPH ERD                                                        M ICHAEL S . HENLEY                 !AN W. WHITSON
                                              S i m o n ft,    in m a n
       P £T gR M. WlLB^lAHAM                                                               R O SA M O N D J , M ARSHALL SMITH                                  TELEPHONE (0874) 734700
                                              RICHARD W. WAD5-SM ITH
                                                                                           PH ILIP W ..H A R U N 8
       J . RICHARD ARCHER                                                                                                                                      TELEX 517201
                                              JO H N 0 . BECKETT
                                                                                           W IU JA M N, D OW NS
       Ba r b a r a   w.France                G N IAN G RggN FiELO
       C . N O E l HUTTON                                                                  U JC C l DAMMONE                                                    D.X.NO. 11720
                                              STEPHEN GAI.E
                                                                                           ANDREW H M cD O U Q A U .
       JO H N H . G- HELLER
                                              m a r k w , h il t o n                                                                                           FAX(0274)73754?
       •AN R, SHUTTLlEWORTH
                                              r ic h a r o b u r n s



      OUR RE®              PCM/                                           Y O U P ft£ r,
                                                                                                                                            DATE
                                                                                                                                                             31st May 1990,




       Dear Peter,

       Hillsborough                                                                                                        -


      you mightebenfbl|Stort a L W?urthe^Sied Various o t t e r s which I hope
      action.  These were:        ™ r t h e r in preparation for the contribution

                      1.

                                            ^ o ^ h o i s a n r ^ fhe H ‘5 -E - estin^                                                                        of
                                      through Gate c at t h e ' s e c o n f o p ^ L g ^
                      2.

                                    relating t ^ t h e ^ logins of^th®    the evidenc®
                                    This with nar.<-4 « ^     8      e tunnel in 1988.
                                    Liverpool fan4? about ^ffere^ Ceu t0 evi<3ence from
                                    in this closure.         stewards being concerned
                    3.
                               Whcl\ht T n g tSh orf'                     B t l t s Z             afV a i .1 S b l e <:° P i e s                    P^ss
                                   on his retirement?                                                 ' lssue<3 ^y Bert Me Gee
                   4.

                                  a^comprehensivehplan8© ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ !                                                                    t0 £ rJp a r e ’


                  5.

             second   a gate
                             W
                             ^ehf?o?^L0nLS^e,?In^that^t W
                         gate m   in at
                                     at i
                                                        aa the
                                          s L f one there
                                        least        of the°ught to fences
                                                             radial be a
 PRIVATE & C Q W F m F M T T flTi
    Hayes, EsqTI              -
 Deputy Chief Constable,
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Snig Hill,
 Sheffield, S3 8LY,

 FAX: 0742 523409
L E E D S O f ftC E S :
                             BRITA N NIA C H A M B ER S 4 /5 O K P n o n n j r c              .      ____



                                            *%f« C<B*J        rvr'n-i» *w-_
                                            rn ts TOM !S 9EBU>TED eY V c LAW soaery fM rZT,
                                                                                                      —...                 i ■                         .
31-MHY-lyyQ   11:44      HAMMOND SUDDARDS                  0274 73 7 5 4 7          p. 0 :




HAMMOND SUDDARDS                                                       PA G E NO-




               when alterations were being made to the ground
               in the summer of 1985.

In connection with these matters, I have the following further comments

       1.       1 would not suggest that a lot of work is
                    done on this but if work has already
                    been carried out which casts doubt on
                    the H,S.E.: figures then I would like .to
                    know.
I
       2.        The officers who gave statements about this
                     matter to the V7est Midlands Enquiry were
                     P.O. 2981 Barnes., P.C. -205 Beardshall,
                     P.C. 78 Booth, P.C. 229 Cable, P.C. 1157
                     Castleton, P.C. 451 Cooper, P.C. 120
                     Harris, former P.S. Trevor Higgins, P.C.
                     1051 Hobson, P.C. 2528 Hughes, P.C. 138
                     Saunders, P.C. 2517 Shelton and P.C. 3017
                     Smalley.   There may be others.      It can be
                     seen that some of these officers indicate
                     that there was a cordon across the tunnel
                     and some state clearly that there was not.
                     What interests me. is the cross-reference
                     to evidence given by a Mr. Eccleston to
                     the enquiry, recorded at transcript day 6
                     page 21E and page 26E to the effect that
                     there was a joint cordon of stewards and
                     Police with, in the witness* view, more
^                    stewards than Police.    This is to some extent
                     borne out by the evidence of the witness
                     Mayhew (day 5, P. 1SO D ) ^ al tho ugh this is
                     not as cogent.   This is particularly
                     significant because the Taylor report is
                     quite critical of our alleged failure to
                     pick up the blocking of the tunnel on
                   - a debrief.   If stewards were also involved,
                     then the failure on the part of the club
                     is at least as great and if the instruction,
                     or request,to block the tunnel came from
                     stewards or from Mr. Lock then the club's
                     responsibility is correspondingly increased.
       3.        There may be something in these remarks which Is
                     of interest or which could be usetul in cross-
                     examination of the club.
      31 MAY-1990    11 =45            HhMMOND S'JDDARDS                                   0274 73 7 5 4 7   ~p.~0 4




      H am m ond S uddards
      -------- —    _ _ ---------------------------------------------------------RAGENO.                       3




           4.         ,h e " ' 2 " ! * ^  r t « » 1'     H   o              .
                                          Case that the collapse of the
                              barrier was the factor xvhich turned an already
                              serious incident into a major disaster,   it


                              of?^1^1SP
                                      dses^ ^ Ef 1Jr ir 011L;h?hJ?sence
                              there were some fatalities in pen 4. The
                                         which.we already have does tend to
                              f!?            * that much of the fatalitv occurred
 •                            in the area in front of the collapsed barrier
                              At present our evidence consists of «*he rather
                              limited plan placed before the E n q u i ^ a n f 2he
                              .   ^     statements of the officers directly
                              Mr?«        in       rescue.  My feeling is that
                              as a sinal2CeiW °Uld be stronS er if presented
                                    S1*}glf Plan prepared from the material
                          s u t t U2 L i l J h * InSUSSt* We have an Order that
                          the i-rS?         i       e receiv«<* in evidence at
                          ■r ® trial and it would be much more difficult
                                      ° ^ onen^ to attack a plan prepared
                                       fr°m        Inquest material than it
                                       ^ respect of a case dependant
                          principally on oral evidence..

          5.    The « f e r e n e e here is to a letter of 2nd May 1985
                         from South Yorkshire C.C. to Eastwoods -heir
                                          Z T J   t h   May   1985   and    finally   the*
                          of lSthC?    Jq L C , C ‘ response to Eastwoods
 #W                       l            It
                            L t letter there   isYoU  Wil3L see that
                          last                     a reference  to thein the
                          b e ? n a S i n c ? u d i ^ i0nf    * ? f e i n th e   radial   fences
                          t h r i o i s s ^ s ^ g s r p o i L e ? the request o f
Benn^ S S e S S i h S                                                           1#th      but
you wish to discuss.                                                       there are any matters which

Your’
    SPlS^ncerely.______



PETER C. METCAT.F
        i
              *
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                   Ref:           cco/N B /l
        From:     Superintendent N Betti son                      Station/Dept:   Headquarters
        To:       Deputy Chief Constable                          Date:           12 July 1990




                  SUBJECT: PREPARATION OF CASE FOR HILLSBOROUGH CONTRIBUTION HEARINGS

                  The mini-inquiry team, formed to assist Hammond Suddard in the preparation
                  of the Contribution Hearing case, has completed the tasks it was set
                  in May following your meeting with Peter Metcalf et al.

                  1.   Potential police witnesses for the future hearings have been identified
                  and circularised.

                  2.   The reports of Lord Justice Taylor were scrutinised for further
                  points of contention.  Six were highlighted (five have subsequently been
                  included by Counsel).

                  3.   The HSE figure of 2,000 plus or minus 10% for persons entering Gate
                  'C' was accepted and agreed.

                  4.   The fullest information on the closure of the central tunnel at
                  the 1988 Semi-Final was obtained and forwarded.  It was an informal initiative
                  at junior level not reported to command level.  It was performed exclusively
                  by the police.

                  5.    Although not tasked on this issue the inquiry team has provided
                  information of the joint marshalling of spectators outside the ground
                  in 1988 by both police and stewards.   The stewards were not present in
                  1989.

                  6.   Press coverage in the wake of the retirement of Mr McGee was traced
                  and provided.  The articles are unremarkable.

                  7.   The history behind the request for extra gates in the radial fences
                  by the police was recalled by Inspector Calvert who was then the police
                  member on the Officer Working Party.  Passed to Hammond Suddard.

                  8.   A body plan has been produced and shown to Peter Metcalf.

                  9.   In addition to the original tasks Belinda Nortcliffe asked the team
                  to provide information about arrangements at the temporary mortuary in
                  anticipation of this becoming an issue in the 'trauma' cases. A number
                  of statements were obtained to show that relative calm and organisation
                  (given the difficult circumstances) prevailed.

                  On 11 July 1990 I met with Peter Metcalf and Detective Inspector Cleverlev
                  who has exercised day-to-day control of the enquiries.  The following
                  points arose from that meeting.
                                                                                   Action
                  1.   Peter Metcalf is not sure how to progress the body
                  plan, it does not reveal the picture he expected.  The
                  inclusion of references to where persons were last
                  seen alive dilutes the emphasis on the failed barrier.
                  Yet, if these were omitted, it might be interpreted by
                  the other parties as 'fiddling'.  He asks that the plan
                  be photographed and the photographs sent to him so that                        |
                  he might discuss further with Counsel.                           Plans Dept.
Gen/2
2.   The evidence that emerged at the Inquiry suggested
that there was a history of good relations between the
Club and the police.  Peter Metcalf is particularly
sceptical about the relationship that existed around
1981, at the time of a crush at the Semi-Final that year.
He would be interested to know the views of the then ACC
(Operations) Mr Goslin who (he hopes) might have some
damning things to say about discussions with the Club's
officers following that crushing incident, i.e. what was
their reaction? Were they annoyed that the police had,
on their own initiative, relieved the crush by letting
people on to the pitch?  Did they express a view about the
effect the incident might have on the selection of
Hillsborough for future Semi-Finals?  Is Mr Goslin             Would Mr Hayes
prepared to provide a statement in relation to these           please make
matters? - self prepared?, to Peter Metcalf?, or to a          initial approach
member of the inquiry team?                                    to Mr Goslin

3.   Peter Metcalf is re-reading the Inquiry transcripts
in relation to evidence provided by police officers.   In
order to challenge any of that evidence at the subsequent
Contributions Hearings it is necessary to notify the
Court of that fact by 31 July 1990.  Peter Metcalf
anticipates a short list of officers who are to be asked
to 'clarify' a part of their evidence.  For example, one
or two officers talk of having a responsibility to
monitor the pens. What do they mean by monitoring?
Surely nothing more than keeping a weather-eye out.   If
this evidence goes unchallenged (unclarified) then another     DI Cleverley to
party might adduce that the police accepted a responsibility   await list and
to count people into the pens.  Peter Metcalf will compile     assign for
a list of officers with a list of points that require          completion before
clarification and forward them in due course.                  31.7.90

4.   Peter Metcalf will probably request a number of sets      DI Eggleston to
of photographs compiled from the hundreds of South Yorkshire   be put on notice
Police photographs available so that he can serve these on     at this time
the other parties.

5.   Peter Metcalf was informed that the inquiry team          DI Cleverley to
would revert to normal duties pending further requests         note and PC
which might be forthcoming from Hammond Suddard or Counsel.    Greenway to
The team would continue to be at their disposal.               continue to staff
                                                               the office
Submitted for your information.




N Bettison

Superintendent



Copies to Chief Supt Wain            ✓
          Supt Bettison (for file) *
          Det Insp Cleverley (for action)
If by the time the 'opening' has to be served which would include our
admission of negligence the Director's decision is still unknown then we
must as a matter of urgency decide what our reaction should be.

The above encapsulates several hours hard discussion during which I made
it very clear that the protection of the South Yorkshire Police officers
at risk is paramount in my mind but I understood Counsel's dilemma.



Brief

Mr Payne ran down a draft brief in which matters          of   further   evidence
requiring clarification etc., were discussed in detail.

The possible use of John Motson as a witness is of particular interest.

I specifically was asked to gather some background information concerning
Mr Douglas Lock (former superintendent of South Yorkshire Police) who gave
damning evidence at the Public Inquiry and who acts or acted in terms of
crowd safety advice for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.      In particular
we need to set out details of his experience and the involvement at Sheffield
Wednesday.  Also to describe in detail his responsibilities at those times.
To discover in hard copy form, if possible, details of briefings he heard,
sanctioned or attended especially with regard to the responsibilities of
the police to monitor both numerically and for signs of distressed spectators
in the ground, particularly at the Leppings Lane end.

There was discussion about the use of David Phillips as our expert witness;
the value of the barrier challenge;     evidence about the earlier closure
of the tunnel;   also from witnesses - other than police witnesses - in the
vicinity of the tragedy who failed to realise what was happening and of
the unrealisticness of maintaining orderly queues as were said to have
occurred in 1988 outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  These other matters
are to be considered by Peter Metcalf who will contact us further regarding
the action he requires us to take.




Deputy Chief Constable




copy to Chief Constabl*



                                     “Xo
■   1 ^   !' ’ ‘ f=r n . 1H- ka i‘, s o c r o n Ti.c :Qt4-,.C', _ * • / ' _   ,   i
  BY:                       ;19- 7-90 12:37PM ;                0274                     mill
'#■■•*v* !       B?/19   12*37             S ' 0274   735884      BBMMOtW




H a m m o n d Suddards                                                      PAGU KIO.




 difficulty,  in other words, there would be no monitoring of numbers
 in the pens per se.

  Undoubtedly, many Officers went further than this, particularly in
  cross examination.    For example, Chief Inspector Creaser at D14.33.E
  concedes a duty of monitoring numbers at the Leppings Lane terraces.
  Likewise, Inspector Darling at. D14.32.F, Inspector Calvert at
  30,2.1. c, 3Q.2b.C and 30.27.G and Inspector Sewell at 31.6. C and
  31.42.B-H.

  Inspector S e w e l l ’s evidence. in part icu la r, illustrates the
  confusion engendered t\ ■/arious C o u n s e l s ’ use of the word
  "monitoring" in different contexts          Contrast the references above
  with the evidence at 31.3C.A-B and 31.43.C - G .

  What -I ^would like to unaerstsnd is whether these Officers, on
  reviewing the transcript-, agree that it gives the true flavour of
  wriat they meant, to say.  In other words, in relation to this semi­
  final:


             Were they expecting any   o i i c e Officer to be
             chocking .he pens, not rrarei       !or individual signs
             of overcrowding, but by way of making regular and
             do.;
             deliberate assessments as to whether they were full
             with a view to closing off such pens?

             If not-, were they expecting any other body to be
             undertaking this duty?


  Our case is likely to be that nobody was expecting to have to
  monitor pens in this w a y , because the west terraces, as a whole, had
  a safe certified capacity and had been designed with gates givinq
  access from pen to pen which were- locked in an open position for
  this game.^ That the gates were in fact woefully inadequate to
  achieve this function is irrelevant if the belief itself was
  reasonable,

  I should be giateful if the Officers referred to could review their
  enquiry evidence and if, in the light of that review, they believe
  that, statements explaining the purport of their evidence can be
  given, then perhaps these could be taken by the Hillsborouqh Inquiry
  Team.   I attach a. draft format but, as long as the points are
  covered, it would be preferable if the statements were self taken to
  preserve individual style.
    BY:                           J19- 7-90   12:37PM ;           0274 ■r?3SSS,4'^
•     * -*
              r-fw     av ✓19   12:38             a 8274 735834       HAMMOND SUO0HfiD^




    H a m m o sd S uddards
                                                                                          HAtoTNO.




              lj° n?t neea to emphasise that there is no point in any
    Officii putting forward evidence which he cannot honestly sustain in
    crons exam, natron. Only if the Officers consider t h a f t L
    St " t B ^ n f „ e 2 d 2 d ? 0t- £airly        their true position is any further



    Yours sincere! y,




    Peter C. Me t c a ]f
                  ;19- 7-90   12: 38PM ;                   __
^90   S?/!9   12 13 5              2   0274   735884   HflMMOWD SUDDflRD




rther Proof of Evidence of

 South Yorkshire Police,               Smg     Hill,   Sheffield




  T make this statement further to the evidence

 which 1 gave to the Public Inquiry conducted by

 Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough stadium

 disaster.


 i was on 3.5th April,            1989 an Officer of the South

 Yorkshire Police with the rank of                                    and

 -l continue in that office,                   (cr amend as necessar


 I have re-read the transcript of the evidence

 wmch     I gave to the inquiry and confirm that the

 answers which I gave to questions are accurately

 recorded.


 Nevertheless,          the transcript gives a misleading

 impression of what I understand to have been the

 position in relation to the control of numbers

 entering m c i v i d u a l pens on the Leppings Lane

 terraces on 15th April,               1989.      I believe that

 this confusion stems from the different meanings

wlucn can be ascribed to the word "monitoring".


ior the avoidance of doubt, my understanding of

the position is as follows;


5,1     On 15th April,         1989,     I did not expect

        any Police Officer to be making a

        deliberate numerical or overall visual
          J19- 7-Qgi;,J,3;39PM ;                  0274 7358S4--* ^ .,;s
’19    12139                 2   02 74   735884      HfiMMOND S U W f t t e ;




                         -       2   -




  assessment of the numbers of fans

  entering each of the individual pens.


  Nor did I expect any other body, e.q.

  Club Stewards or anyone else to be

  undertaking this e x e r c i s e .


  This contrasted with the position at

  League games where pens would be

      f i1 ] e<3 inoividually with a view to

      leaving some pans unoccupied for the

      purposes of segregation and crowd

      control.     This exercise did require an

      assessment of the nuirber of fans in a

      pen,     because the fans had no means of

      redistributing themselves as the gates

      at the back c£ the radial fences would

      be locked shut.


      It is easy tc see now that the gates

 , at the rear of the radial fences were

      inadequate to allow for fans to re­

      distribute themselves,               but that fact

      was not apparent           before the disaster

      either to the Police or it seems to

      anyone e l s e .


      What I would expect from individual

      Police Officers and what I intended to

      convey by my evidence to the Inquiry

      was an alertness to problems in the
          * '1 9 - ;   7-90'   '"121 3 9 P M        ;          '0274 735894-S   ...   ^
      12: 40                               S       0274   735884   HBMft-OHD. SU&&QRP,/   «j




                                       _       3    -




    crowd which might: arise from ove r­

    c r o w d i n g      but might equally arise from

    fighting, hooligan behaviour or

     illness,              I have no reason to believe

     that any Of £ icer failed in his duty

     in this respect.


Between 2.4 5 and 3.00 p.n., cn the day of the

disaster I was


- off duty or net present at the ground

- on duty at the ground but without a view of

  the terraces

- on duty at the ground with a view of the

  rorraces             (describe position and give assessment
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


 FROM: Detective Inspector Cleverley
                                               DEPT: Hillsborough Enquiry
 TOs Chief Superintendent Wain
                                               DATE: 8 August 1990


            SUBJECT:      Interim Report 6: Further enquiries
                          requested by Hammond Suddards

The attached fax letter dated 19 July 1990 from Hammond Suddards
requests that certain officers who gave evidence to the Taylor enquiry
be seen again to clarify their evidence concerning police duty or
responsibility for "monitoring" the pens at the Leppings Lane end.

The officers mentioned were:

            Chief Inspector Creaser (HQs Computer Development)
            Inspector Darling (F Division Community Liaison)
            Inspector Calvert (HQs Discipline & Complaints)
            Inspector Sewell (FI Sub Division)

I have Interviewed all these officers at length, and ensured that they
re-read the transcripts of their evidence on the points mentioned In
Hammond Suddards' letter.

All officers, having considered the two questions on page 2 of the
letter, answer "yes" to 1 and "no" to 2.     In these circumstances they
do not feel able to give further statements on the lines suggested.    I
would summarise their view collectively as:         the whole of their
evidence to the Taylor enquiry, and not simply those Isolated parts
questioned, reflects accurately their Individual perceptions of the
police "monitoring" role on the fateful day.

In these circumstances I have not attempted to try and obtain statements
which would simply over complicate the issue without going as far as
Hammond Suddards might wish.




ue^ectLve inspector




6EN2                                                                 Page 1
                                                      DCC/|
                                                      21 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:


CONTRIBUTION HEARING - 2 OCTOBER 1990 - HIGH COURT, MANCHESTER



Attended a meeting this date chaired by Mr William Woodward QC, at his
Chambers in Nottingham.   Also present were Richard Payne, Barrister-at-law;
a junior barrister;     Peter Metcalf a n d Belinda Norcliffe (solicitors),
Hammond Suddards;                   Joint Secretariat;                 (chief
claims officer),              (area claims manager) and other officials from
Municipal Mutual Insurance Company.

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the best way forward from the
point-of-view of the Contribution Hearing in the High Court in October.

Peter Metcalf spoke of having met the Judge earlier this date.        The Judge
made it clear that on his reading of the evidence available to him at this
time, he was of the view that the police were clearly negligent, especially
in view of the very clear view they had over the terraces and he was
surprised an out-of-court settlement h a d not been arrived at.       There was
no balancing comment from the Judge that he saw the other parties extensively
liable although clearly he does expect t h em to make a contribution.

In view of the above the point made by the lawyers was our stand must be
realistic - the police were to some degree negligent; we are pursuing
•contribution'; the best way of doing this is to attack and not to adopt
a defensive stance;   and, the worst thing we can do is to try and defend
the absolute indefensible.     Furthermore, if we did try and be on the
defensive we would have a re-run of the Public Inquiry with a very negative
impact on the Force which will result.



Witnesses

A discussion followed on the use which might be made of the "at risk seven"
at the Hearing.

The fact they are all individually represented makes the situation somewhat
difficult in that any attempt at briefing as to the police case may be seen
as contradicting the advice given by their respective lawyers.

All have been approached and asked if they will give additional statements
expanding on their original statements and what they said at the Inquiry
as recorded in the transcripts.    Only Superintendent Murray has responded
and the rest are clearly reserving their defences.    Peter Metcalf made the
point that if called they may well try and vindicate themselves from earlier
 criticism.
The final decision was that none of the seven will be called.    With the
exception of Superintendent Murray we have no proofs of evidence and the
legal advice was it would be folly to call them without these.   They may
of course be called by the other side so the efforts to date to tell them
of likely questioning by way of supplying to them original statements,
transcripts, list of issues, David Phillips' and Brian Mole's reports, is
very sensible.

The police witnesses - in police terms - will now includes-

        Chief Superintendent Mole
        Inspector Bullas
        PS Smith (Liverpool M o u n t e d )
        PC Finnegan
        Mr Herold ) now
        Mr Goslin ) retired
        Mr Phillips (DCC, Devon & Cornwall)
        Mr I        I



Adjournment

The question of applying to the Judge                 for   an adjournment        of   this    Hearing
until after the Inquest was discussed.

It was decided not to do so for the reasons below:-

   a.   we can manage without the "at risk seven" officers;
   b.   we have absolutely no idea what they are likely to say;
   c.   as part of this they have refused to give proofs of evidence                                in
        advance of the Contribution Hearing;
   d.   the possible outcomes at (i) the Inquest and (ii) in terms                                  of
        discipline are unknown.

It may be that once these         are   known   the     attitude     of   the     witnesses could
be extremely negative.



Evidence

In terms    of   evidence   the   following     was    discussed     from   the    Taylor      Interim
Report s-

   Paragraph     55 - This was agreed.

   Paragraph     74 - Second sentence - the word "must" is not agreed.

   Paragraph     75 - The barrier is thought to               have    collapsed        circa    3.00pm
                      and this will be our stance.

   Paragraph     82 - The notion that initially no officer took effective charge
                      is not agreed as Superintendent Greenwood was there and
                      this is clearly shown on the video.
  Paragraph 166 - It   is   accepted  that   de  facto we                    had  accepted
                  responsibility for control of the pens                    and that this
                  would not be done by stewards.

  Paragraph 174 - In the first sentence the word "more" should read "less".

  Paragraph 181 - Stewards were also involved in closing the tunnel.

  Paragraph 197 - We now agree that in the crush most people had no control
                  over their movements.

  Paragraph 228 - Final sentence     -   we     agreed      that    other    actions   were
                  required.

  Paragraph 229 - Heading - we don't          agree   the    word    "blunder"   but   will
                  agree "mistake".

  Paragraph 230 - First sentence - we dispute the word "full" as there
                  is no spectator limit in the terraces nor any means of
                  counting them in - how was anybody supposed to calculate
                  fulness?

  Paragraph 246 - This was agreed.

  Paragraph 249 - The word "vital" is not agreed.


I reacted very strongly against any acceptance that the police had, even
de facto, accepted responsibility for monitoring the relevant pens if this
was assumed to mean counting in, checking for over crowding, taking remedial
action if this was likely or seen to have occurred, as this would have been
impossible.

The above reflects rather poorly a five hour meeting during which all those
concerned considered carefully the evidence available and how to present
it without on the one hand prejudicing the officers "at risk" and at the
same time to make sense of the Contribution Hearing at which we are the
plaintiffs.




Deputy Chief Constable




Copy t o :   Chief Constable
             ACC(Staff Services)
             Supt Bettison
                                                             DCC/
                                                             18 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:



HILLSBOROUGH - LEGAL/INQUEST PROCEEDINGS - PROGRESS REPORT



Spoke with Hr Leslie Sharp (Chief Constable, Cumbria Constabulary) regarding
the above.  He made the following p o i n t s :-



   1.   All the documentation used in connection with both the criminal
        and discipline enquiries is now with the South Yorkshire Police.

   2.   The general view - certainly that of himself, the Director of Public
        Prosecutions and the Coroner     - is that the ownership of the
        documentation is with South Yorkshire Police and if they are pressed
        to make available extracts they will refer the enquiry to us.

   3.   Hr Sharp and Captain Noel Taylor are willing to attend South
        Yorkshire Police Headquarters to expedite the consideration process.

   4.   Both the Coroner and the Police Complaints Authority are of the
        view that no discipline decisions should be arrived at in advance
        of the Inquest findings.    Decisions in this instance would appear
        to mean final recommendations as to discipline action or not as
        distinct from the formal hearings.    The Coroner in coming to this
        decision is aware of the questions of jeopardy.     We can expect a
        call from Mervyn Jones who, with the Coroner, is trying to determine
        how they can have essential evidence admitted without calling the
        "at risk" officers.

   5.   Regarding production, the documentation already in the public domain
        for example, the Taylor Report, transcripts, and, those videos and
        photographs used as part of the Public Inquiry proceedings, could
        be made available.    The residual documentation in total has been
        considered both in relation to the criminal and discipline process.
        In the opinion of the Police Complaints Authority and the Coroner
        is is understood none of this should be released on the grounds
        of public interest immunity.      This includes using it from our
        standpoint in connection with the Inquest proceedings and the Coroner
        is going to be extremely watchful in this regard.



        Action:

        a.   ACC(Staff   Services)     to   consider   the   question of   disclosure
             in terms of:-

                   i.    the principles to be used,
                  ii.   how specific requests will be authorised,
                 iii.   what mechanism will be used in liaison    with the West
                           Midlands Police,
                  iv.   the question of charging third parties seeking     this
                           information.
         b.     ACCtStaff Services) to arrange consideration of the reports
                together with Mr Sharp and Captain Taylor as appropriate.

         c.     DCC to inform Peter Metcalf of the above.




Deputy Chief Constable




Copy t o :    Chief Constable
              ACCtStaff Services)
              Chief Supt Wain
              Supt Bettison
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:            DCC/

    From:      Deputy Chief Constable                        Station/Dept:   Headquarters
    To:                                                      Date:
               ACCtStaff Services)                                           19   September 1990



            SUBJECT:     hillsborough - director of public
                         PROSECUTIONS/COMPLAINT FILE



            Present Position

            Immediately after the Hillsborough tragedy the then Chief Constable,
            Mr Peter Wright, asked West Midlands Police to enquire into the cause
            of the tragedy and in particular the role of the South Yorkshire
            Police.   After the publication of the Interim Report he then asked
            them to consider further the question of criminal and discipline
            culpability.   About this time it was agreed that as part of their
            investigation they would act on behalf of HM Coroner.

            These various enquiries have now been completed and the core file
            comprising some 500+ statements together with photographs, videos
            and other exhibits, is now in our possession to enable us consider
            the discipline issues.

            We are now urgently preparing our submissions for the Contribution
            Hearing in October and the Inquest in November and this gives rise
            to a significant workload at this time.

            Another issue now arises, namely that of disclosure.

            Attached for information is correspondence from Mervyn Jones (now
            DCC, Cheshire) together with a number of appendices, including an
            exchange of correspondence between him and HM Coroner.



            Disclosure

            The situation would appear to be that Lord Justice Taylor during the
            Public Inquiry told the West Midlands Police that matters used in
            the Inquiry - statements, videos, photographs etc. - were, as a result,
            in the public domain and available to anyone.       He directed that the
            unused material (which I believe comprises some 7,500 questionnaires
            and 8,000 statements) would not be disclosed until the Inquiry ended.
            At the conclusion he instructed that the unused material would not
            be disposed of until it had been considered by the Director of Public
            Prosecutions who was charged with considering the question of criminal
            culpability.   The Director of Public Prosecutions, having now come
            to his decision that     on the evidence available no criminal culpability
            lies against anyone, has no further interest in this documentation.

            The HM Coroner has expressed the view that none of this should be
            made available to anyone until after the       Inquest is concluded.
            However, in view of the fact, in accordance with the requirements
            of PACE, the core file has now been returned to the Chief Constable
            of South Yorkshire, he now takes the view that as the South Yorkshire
            Police, as one party to the proceedings, has access to this material
            then it would seem equitable that all other parties should possibly
            have similar access and therefore he has abandoned his previous
            requirement for non-disclosure.
Gan/2
                                     - 2-
Mervyn Jones,   on  the  authorities  cited,  has  until  now refused
disclosure.  He now makes the point that as the authorities no longer
exist and the file is in the possession of the South Yorkshire Police,
the question of disclosure is one for the Chief Constable of this
Force to decide. v

The relevant question now is that of public interest inununity.      To
the extent the documentation is caught by this then it may be it cannot
be released to anyone.    In view of the fact the Chief Constable in
the first stage asked the West Midlands Police to enquire into the
cause of the tragedy and the relevance to this of our planning and
decisions on the day, the statements and questionnaires obtained at
that time are possibly caught by public interest, inununity.   When the
Chief Constable later asked that the question of criminal/discipline
culpability by South Yorkshire Police officers be considered, the
same immunity provision may apply to all of this because of the
discipline consideration given to it.    Exceptions to this may arise
in accordance with the doctrine arrived at in R. -v- Hemsworth, Coroner
ex-parte Peach 1980 (2WLR 496 ET SEC) referred to in HM Coroner's
letter.   Also in relation to statements specifically concerned with
culpability of third parties such as the football club and the
engineers.

We will   require   advice  on  the   access  to  be  allowed to this
documentation by our own solicitors,       Hammond Suddards.  In this
connection of interest is the case 1980 R. -v- Commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police (Hart Levington) which seems to give authority
for such access provided this is used only as background material
and not directly in evidential terms.

As you are dealing with the core file from the discipline standpoint
I would like you to deal also with the question of disclosure.

I have asked                  (Secretariat) to advise on this and he
together with Mervyn Jones will attend Police Headquarters at 11.00 am
on Monday next, 24 September, to discuss this with you, particularly
with regard to the mechanics of copying, releasing and charging for
documentation etc.

As already stated, at this time I am currently much concerned in
liaison with our legal representatives at both solicitor and barrister
level with regard to the many evidential problems, not least concerning
jeopardy which have to be dealt with in relation to the forthcoming
Contribution and Inquest Hearings.     I will continue to concentrate
on these but liaise with you on matters of disclosure and would
appreciate it if you would adopt the converse position so that in
the absence of either one of us the other can advise the Chief
Constable, our legal advisers, the Police Authority or others, as
appropriate.




      7
Deputy Chief Constable

Copy t o :   Chief Constable
             Chief Supt Wain
             Supt Bettison
                               (Secretariat)
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                               Fowler Street
Police Headquarters                                 Birmingham B7 5DA
Chester CH1 2PP                                     Telephone: 0 21 -3 5 9 3332
Telephone: 0244-350000 Ext 2091                     Fax: 021-359 6735

CONFIDENTIAL                                        Your Ref:

R B Wells Esq Q P M                                 Our Ref: JMJ J      [184
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                              Date:   18 September 1990
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY                                                      South Yorkshire
                                                                       13*1
                                                                  .1 9 SEP 1990


              /r\Ar        ^ d ilU


RELEASE OF DOCUMENTATION COLLECTED FOR THE
HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

You will no doubt recall that 1 mentioned on the telephone to you a difficulty
that could emerge if the Coroner chose not to require me to withhold the release
of evidence on his behalf until the conclusion of the Inquests. B y now you
should have received a copy of a letter sent to me by the Coroner indicating his
policy for the future. (I have enclosed a copy of this letter for your reference
- Appendix ’A 1).

It would now seem that the justification for me not to release no longer exists.
As I see it the future policy to be adopted will have to be determined by
yourself, given that the investigations carried out by Mr Dear and later
concluded by Mr Sharp were on behalf of you at the express wish of your
predecessor.

I would be grateful if you would consider this matter and indicate how we are to
proceed from here. The issues to be addressed as I see it are: -

(1)   The policy on disclosure as it affects:-

      (a)   Current requests for copy statements, photographs, etc. (See sample
            at Appendix 'B').

      (b) All previous requests for similar material which is at present on file
          and to which we have responded by saying non-disclosure until the
          investigations have been concluded when the policy will be reviewed.
          (See Appendix ’C 1)-

(2)   Who will respond to requests and make the decisions                  as     to   the
      appropriateness to disclose to a wide variety of parties.

(3)   Who will process those decisions to action.

(4)   The form of words to be used in response.

                                                                I Continued

 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT           Chester
In m y view (1) is clearly now your responsibility and therefore (2), (3) and (4)
naturally fall to you or ydur legal representatives and administration. Having
said that, subsequent discussions between ourselves hopefully will produce the
most efficient and cost effective method.

As the civil proceedings (2nd October) and the Inquests (19th November) near
the requests for disclosure continue. In the meantime I have declared an interim
policy of non-release until you make your decision(s) known. Consequently your
early advice would be appreciated.

If you or your staff require more detailed information please do not hesitate to
make contact with me personally or with the Incident Room staff at Nechells,
Birmingham, under the charge of Detective Superintendent Beechey.

Because there could be resource implications for West Midlands Police which have
not been catered or budgeted for, I have taken the liberty of copying this letter
to Mr R Hadfield.
CONFIDENTIAL                                                      JMJJ   f!62

Dr S L Popper                                                   12 September 1990
H M Coroner
South Yorkshire (West)
Medico/Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ES




HILLSBOROUGH CORONAL ENQUIRY - PROGRESS REPORT

As you know, as was always intended, I have now formally resumed m y role as
your Coroner's Officer following the announcement of the the Director of Public
Prosecutions not to tpke any further action in the criminal courts arising out of
the events at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989.

I have had a telephone discussion with Mr Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, and in addition to him agreeing m y continuing role as
defined by his predecessor, he has made it quite dear that I will act as the link
between you and him and vice versa. Mr Wells also stated that it is proper for
the West Midlands Police to continue to support your Inquests until their
completion.

I have had discussion^ with Mr L Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria, and
have agreed a smooth transition between criminal/disciplinary investigations and
the coronal enquiry. Mr Sharp maintains his responsibilities for these aspects
until such a time that he and Mr Wells have agreed that there is nothing further
to be considered. I do not intrude into that process or into Mr Sharp's
responsibilities, I have also re-taken charge of the evidence gathered by the
West Midlands Police team, the bulk of which was initially gathered jointly for
yourself and Lord Justice Taylor.

Strictly speaking the product of the investigation is the property of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police who, about the same time as did the Home
Secretary, requested the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police to carry out
the investigation. After the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report,
the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire asked the Chief Constable of West
Midlands Police to investigate possible criminal and police disciplinary aspects, a
process which I started and which was ultimately completed by Mr Sharp.

                                                              /Continued . . .



                                          Chester
                                          - 2 -

Mr Sharp has now passed the Director of Public Prosecutions file and related
disciplinary papers to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police who, I
suspect, through his Deputy is considering the disciplinary aspects, if any.
Ultimately a decision will be made and later announced as to whether any police
officer should face any disciplinary charges. I am not aware of the timing of
that decision, the related announcement, or the likely outcome.

A n important point which now needs to be addressed is the policy on the release
of documents and photographs to interested parties. It will come as no surprise
that throughout the investigations we have been inundated with requests for
information from a wide variety of people including the families, Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield City Council, Eastwoods Engineers, and their
respective legal representatives. In addition, South Yorkshire Police have also
been desirous for some of the information we have obtained. The policy on
disclosure, which has been subject to constant review, has been as follows.

Lord Justice Taylor agreed that anything that had been "heard" was in the
public domain and could be released. However, that material which had not been
heard would not be released. At the conclusion of the public enquiry hearings
and the announcement by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police that
there would be a criminal/disciplinary investigation mounted by West Midlands
Police, Lord Justice Taylor stated that he had no further interest in the unheard
material and that should become the property of the criminal/coronal/ disciplinary
investigations. Thereafter we continued the policy of non-release given that we
continued with those criminal and coronal investigations. Clearly it would have
been inappropriate to release anything during that process to any party,
including at that time the South Yorkshire Police, some members of which were
also being investigated. This policy of non-release was continued by Mr Sharp
on taking over the criminal/disciplinary investigations from me early in April of
this year.

The criminal and disciplinary investigations have now been completed and, as I
indicated earlier, the files passed to the South Yorkshire Police. The
protection of non-disclosure afforded by the existence of the Director of Public
Prosecutions investigation has now disappeared and it is appropriate at this
stage to consider what the future policy will be on release of documents. I
might add at this point that we are still receiving a considerable number of
requests for the disclosure of information. Consequently, the interim policy is
to sustain non-disclosure.

It occurs to me, and Mr Sharp agrees, that the policy on disclosure is initially a
matter for yourself and secondly for the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
Police, if you do not intend to sustain the current policy.

Normally, as I know you appreciate,     we would not release any material until such
a time that your Inquests have been     completed. Consequently before I raise this
matter, if I have to, with the South    Yorkshire Police, I would like you to
indicate whether you would wish the     West Midlands Police Coronal team to sustain
a policy of non-disclosure until your   Inquests have been concluded and verdicts
returned.

I have taken the liberty of copying this letter to Mr Wells and also Mr Sharp so
that they are aware of the issue.
                                                                                                           1   H£JUi^i


                                      o m c e OF K M . Om ONBR FOR           MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                             WATERY STREET
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                     (West District)
                                                                             SHEFFIELD
                                                                             S3 7ET
   S T E F A N L P O P P E R . U .B .. B M EU .So., B.M , B.S.. M .R.C-&P.
                                                            CORONER


                                 Tefephons. SHEFFIELD 107*3] T3BT21          — •14th-Sef>t'^afeer-— 19 -90--



SLP
JMJI     11 6 2.




Mr. M. Jones,
Deputy Chief Constable,
Cheshire Constabulary,
Police Headquarters,
Chester- CHl 2PP.


Dear Mervyn,

KTT.LSBOROTJGH CORONAL ENQUIRY - PROGRESS REPORT.


Thank you for your helpful and clear letter o£ the 12th of September 1990 the
contents of which X have noted.

With regard to the question of the release of documents and statements, you
are of course quite right that apart from those which were already in the
public domain, it had been my view that these should remain confidential
until after the conclusion of the D.P.P. 'inquiry {which has now happened)
and the Inquests.

The position with regard to the release of copy statements was explored in
R - v - Hemsworth, Coroner ex parte Peach 1980 (2WLR496 et sec). The
statements in the Hillsborough Disaster were of course obtained by West
Midlands Police who acted for various parties at different stages of the
investigation.

On the assumption that the restrictions outlined in the case of Blair Peach
apply to these statements, I would have no authority to order the disclosure
of the statements to third parties.

However, it is my view that i n respect of at least those statements which
have been disclosed to one of the interested parties, fairness would require
that the same information is made available to other interested parties by -
the people or organisation who have control and custody of the statements.

It has been suggested to me that the statements have been made available to
South Yorkshire Police solely for the use in disciplinary proceedings, but
even if this is in fact so, it does present the recipients with a very major
problem of ensuring that information supplied for one purpose is not used for
others. Even if they were able to achieve this, there is still a problem of
persuading other parties that this has taken place.

The statements which are currently held by West Midlands Police fall I think
into three categories:-
17 (.19   au   13:4^      ^yitjua               cuK U N tns                        ussiuui


                                    -   2   -




               1.   Those which ar? contained in the D.P.P. file and which have been
                    furnished to S«u.t_h. Yorkshire Police.

               2.   The additional statements in the body files which have been
                    furnished to me but have not, as I understand it, been released to
                    South Yorkshire.

               3.   The large number of statements which have not been released to
                    anybody. The reason for this category being that it is considered
                    that the contents of these statements add nothing material to
                    the information which is already available.

               On the assumption that Category 3 statements referred to above are as
               described, I think it would be difficult to argue that they should be
               kept confidential if the relevant statements in the D.P.P. file are in
               fact released.

               This only then leaves the statements in the body file and it seems to me
               that there really is not very much point in trying to keep just these
               statements confidential until after the conclusion of the Inquest if
               everything else is going to be available for release.

               In the circumstances, whatever my authority might be with regard to ordering
               release, I feel that it would be improper for me to maintain my request that
               the copy statements should not be released to interested parties and in the
               circumstances as far as I am concerned, I have no further objection to their
               release.

               Whether or not you or indeed anybody else have the capacity to make copy
               statements available, bearing in mind the vast numbers, and whether or
               not these have to be supplied on a free of charge or chargeable basis is
               not a problem I can help you with but obviously one that will have to be
               addressed.

               The difficulty of supplying copies of course is compounded if one
               applies this to photographic and/or the video evidence*

               Whilst I entirely agree with you that it is sensible that you should act
               as a link between me and Mr- Richard Wells, for the sake of convenience
               I am copying this letter to him and to Mr. Leslie Sharp.


               Yours si




                c.c. Mr. Richard Wells, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police.
                     Mr* Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable, Cumbria Police.
H am m ond Su d d a rd s
                           S O L I C I T O R S
ALAN I. B O T T 0M l£Y          PETFR C- M ETCALf             DAVID W. K. ARM ITAGE      CONSULTANTS:                   BffPKUE HOIME
D TREVOR LEWIS                  CH RISTO PH ER W. JO N E S    J PATRICK M ITCHELL        RO
                                                                                         R OGGER
                                                                                               ER W
                                                                                                  W SUODARO
                                                                                                     SUODARDS Cm u t    1 0 PIC C A D IL L Y
MICHAFI E Q R EQ SO N           ANDREW R. JORD A N            C H RISTOPH ER M ARKS      SIR DESM
                                                                                         SIR DESMOONNDD HEAP
                                                                                                        HEAP            iB A O H X tt 8 0 1 3L R
JO H N 0     DE MAIN            SIM ON R. B. STELL            MICHAEL S. HENLEY          IAN W. W HITSON
M ICHAEL L. SH EPH ERD          SIM ON R. INMAN               RO SA M ONO J . MARSHALL SMITH
                                                                                                                        TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
PETER N . WIL8RAHAM             RICHARD W WADE SMITH          PH IU P W. H ARU N G                                      TELEX 5 1 7 2 0 1
J . RICHARD ARCHER              JO H N 0   BECKETT            WILLIAM N . DOW NS
                                                                                                                         D.X N O . 1 1 7 2 0
BA RBA RA W FRANCE              a    N . IAN GREENFIELD       LU CCtO A M M O N E
C N O EL HUTTON                 STEPH EN GALE                 ANDREW H. M cDOUOALL                                      FAX (0274) 737547
JO H N H . G . HELLER           MARK W. HILTON
IAN R . SHUTTLEW ORTH           RtCHARD BURNS


O U R REF.                                        YOUR REP         jwi.
                                                                      tt ?/                            cwW:h September 1990


           Dear Sirs

           Ret          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

           We refer to our recent request for copies of photographs and
           enclose a copy of your response thereto of 22nd August.

           He do have in our possession a copy      of West Midlands Police
           Composite Album 2, and a member of the South Yorkshire Police on
           the 6th September did contact a member of your office to obtain
           confirmation that it was in order for the South Yorkshire Police
           to reproduce further sets for us by way of prints from prints,
           which copies are of course required for the Contribution Trial
           to be heard at the beginning of October.   We understand that the
           South Yorkshire Police were advised copies by them could only be
           authorised if we obtained official consent from you and we would
           ask you to take this letter as that request.

           We await hearing from you.

           Yours f/ithfullv
           HAMMOffP^SUDDARDS




           Chief Superintendent M.J. Foster
           Nechells Green Police Station
           Fowler Street
           BIRMINGHAM    B7 5DA




LEEDS OFFICES:           BRITANNIACHAMBERS 4/5OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632) 444921 TELEX 557208 FAX 444794/421199
                         JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532)450645 TCLEX 55365 FAX 426866
                                     THIS H f* A IS HECULATEO By THE LAW SOCIETY M W E CONDUCT OF UnNESTMFNT WJSINFSS
IIL'wllLLL v1                               ILL-     U/IOO^OfOO                              i«.ua<au            iuoi           n o   .u u i       r.uo



                                                                                                                 E-A D
                                                                                                                   E D W A R D S

                                                                                                                 A     B    R     A     M      S

                                                                                                                   D O H E R T Y

            The Detcctive Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                                                                                                   S O L I C I T O R S
            West Midlands Police HQ
            P.O. Box 52
            Lloyd House                                                                                            125 / 127 niCTON «OAH

            Colmore Circus                                                                                       I IVt-HWX)i I I 5 4hG
            Queensway                                                                                            TELEH IONE 0 5 I 7 3 3 33H!<
            BIRMINGHAM                                                                                             FAX 051 73 4 4 3 3 9
            B4 6NQ                                                                                               UX 1091 0 ALLERTON




                                         YOUR REP   N11360                                        PLEACE AOK FOR


                                                                                                          3rd September 1990



            Dear Sir

            Hillsborough Pisaster - Our client -

            Me refer to your letter of 8th August 1990.  Now that the
            Director of public Prosecuitlons has made a decision in this
            matter we should be grateful if you would release Mr
            statement.

            We look forward to hearing from you.


            Yours faithfully




                     ,N                     CARb           —



                    3)                                              Q        f9 J                        .



       PARTNERS-JONATHAN EnWAKfMS GARRY ABRAMS THOMAS D O H F R ! Y IAN SEE CHARLES OOULTON GADY LE5IN DAVIS STevi-N C A M fftF l I
                        CONSULTANT: BRIAN M ORRIS ASSOCIATES: DIANE ROSK1N PAMELA S M A II FY f-.KAl-Mk WMWSON
                                                     PARTNERS! |tr* SCCHI- T AWY: HIJCH KENNY
                           FINANCIAL &ERVICFS M A N A O H. DANNY CRYER. PROPERTY 5ERVICES MANACFR- Jl.il IAN Oh I IS
                            CM- ► iC£S AT. WAVERTRCC: OLD SWAN: KFNKINC.TON, WAL f ON AND LIVERPOOL CITY CTNTRE
                             THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THCI AW SOCIf I r IN THE CONDUCT OT INVESTMENT BU5INFR5
11 ^   < II                                l I— I— *   V ^ . X ’X - ' w ' ^ ' w U V w '                    JL ©   > <J 2   > 2<w1   JL < J   • w » JL   1HU   . < w " J JL   r   .




                                 Silver man •Livermore
                                 S • O             • L         • r               C        1   •T          O       •R          : S
                                                 11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool 1*2 5QQ
                                  Telcplwne: 051 227 1871.          DX: 14190.        Fa*; 051 255 0 2 16

                                                                                               Our ref:                             SPEAREIT
                                                                                               Your ref:
              D.C.S. Poster,
                                                                                               When catling please ask Tor:
              Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
              West Midlands FOlioe,
              Nechels Green Police Station,
              Ffcwler Street.
              Birmingham B7 5DA.



              12th September 1990.

              Dear Mr Foster,

              1ft; Adam Spearett Deceased

              Many tlianks for your letters of 10th and 22nd August Which I have just seen
              foilowing uy return from holiday.

              In view of the recent decision by the D.P.P. is the position relating to the
              statement from P,C.             any different?
              Yoiirg




                        A.F. FA HR AND I t. B , C.P. STf.BIIINO LI-.*, t M. S H fl.V E Y U * . I> * F * * S T R . J.I.. W A I.K D t I I
                              A bo   RutUnd llaw e Mall, Shopping Ci»y, fcttnCrtfB WA^ * * • T«t: M M 714121. F»»; M B 71*11*
                                        1J7 L n tlw n U » , H«tc»,>,x1. L 2 t 0TS. T«l: 05M M O U t/J R»k 05M W 279J
                                And In AtsocUlloa will) tA M W R T <i A S S O tltS R-1180 L t Avenue D tfr* 14 Btxiswls 1W*lu<«,
                                       Ttils ft,iu b ta iW lic d by the I »w S«Iet> In ih t conduct of Investnwfl' BhiIkcm.
                                                                     V a T Re« No I«4 4312*1
                                                                                  UPflMDiX.'C1
 H ILLSBO ROU G H   INQUIRY   IE A M                 FURNIVAL HOUSE
                                                     Furnival Gate
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                              Sheffield S1 4QN
PO Box '■> Itoyd House                               Telephone; 0 74 2 731546
Colmorb ..ftcus Quccnsway                            Fax:        0 7 4 2 731483
Birmingham B4 0NQ                                    M id lc o Legal Centre
Telephone: 021-626 5000, extn. 2025                  Telephone: 0 74 2 726105
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                        Fax:       0 7 4 2 726247
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                    Your Ref;
Telephone; 021-369 3332 extn. 6912
                                                                   BN/
                                                     Our Ref:

                                                                   MJFj
                                                     Date:

                                                                   22 August 1990



  Hammond Suodards
  Solicitors
  Empire House
  Piccadilly
  Bradford
  BDl 3LR


             -/                        •                r' '

  Dear S

  BILLSBORQPGH INQUIRY
    /
  1 refer to your letter of 20 August 1990 requesting copiesof WestMidlands
  Police composite Album I and 2.

  Although these photographs and other documents and statements were available
  for the Public Inquiry of Lord Justice Taylor the situation changed at the
  commencement of the criminal investigation.

  That investigation, supervised by Captain E N Taylor of the Police Complaints
  Authority is still on going and all relevant material is subject to that
  investigation-

  1 am not therefore m a position to release these photographs at this time.
  However, if the situation changes I will of     course contact    you.

  Your*! faithfully




       \
  M J FOSTER
  DETECTIVE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFtCE AT
. **.
 b
                                            Dooley and Co
                                                               SOLICITORS

                                                   COMMISSIONERS FOR OATHS

                             P.O. Box No. 5,122 Cherryfield Drive, Kirkby, Merseyside 0 2 8AA.
                      Telephone: 051-548 9911 Fax: 051-549 1061 Emergency Telephone No, 0831 311693

                                                                                                                                        10th September 1990
          Your ref.                                                Our ref.

FIRST OASS

Inspector Beikins
Nechells Police Station
Fowler Road
fiLrmtagham
 B7 5DA
Dear S ir,

Re:
We act cn W a if of the eforancntionwJ in amnectim with 8 claim for danagps, personal Injiry and
consequential loss a risin g out of the Hillsborough Disaster ® 15th April, 1969. Our clien t states
that he provided you with a statement following the disaster and we look forvard to receiving a copy
o f h is statement as soon as ever possible.


Yours faithfully,                                                                                                                          Ac ic    CAeo
Docm&oo.,
                                                                                                                                           W   l



                                                                                                                               L

                                Kuvln A - D , m d J. T«yW . Thonuu M Murphy. Jmn** R                           K tc W l ft. C m h i .
                                                                 Pfttriclt ]• Mrl.itughlift, JohftPM Cfidinw
                              A k>»»: l 4 6 Q ufcn»r>riv#,).ivciiK «t.M cr»-ys'‘l‘, i n O A L . T e l051-2S6 7722 F»» O S l-M tU M S
                                                      DCC/]
                                                      12 September 1990


NOTE FOR F I LE ;



HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION/INQUEST/
DISCIPLINE HEARINGS



Arranged meeting this date at Police Headquarters when Peter Metcalf (Hammnnd
Suddards) had a discussion with the seven "at risk" offir^ra
       who declined the invitation to attend) concerning earlier questions
raised by that group on the day the Director of Public Prosecutions' decision
was announced.  Action — DCC to speak with

The "list of issues” to be used at the Contribution Hearing, and agreed
by  all  parties,   together  with Chief   Superintendent Mole's   additional
statement of evidence to be used at the same hearing, was circulated.

Reference was made to the report of Mr David Phillips         (Deputy Chief
Constable, Devon & Cornwall) and it was agreed, subject to Mr Phillips'
consent, that report will also be made available. Action - DCC to circulate.

Mr Metcalf explained in some detail the intended police response to the
list of issues.   He made specific reference to the lack of certified crowd
capacity numbers for the individual Leppings Lane pens; the ineffective
escape routes; the radial fences; the ineffective barriers; incompetent
signing; the failure to close the tunnel; non-ticket holders; the recognition
of overcrowding; and, other matters.

The list of police witnesses for the Contribution Hearing will probably
be Chief Superintendents Duckenfield, Mole and Nesbit;       Superintendents
Greenwood, Marshall and Murray;  Inspector Bullas; Sergeants Gutcher, Morgan
and Morton; and Constable Finnegan.

Once this list is finalised there is a need to inform those officers likely
to be called of that fact and also to write to those officers previously
communicated with (down to inspector level) informing them the probability
is they will not be called.    Hopefully this information will be available
soon but if there are problems between the parties regarding the witness
list it is likely that the Judge will insist on a final decision by Tuesday
25 September.  Action - DCC to write letters as above.


Evidence

Mr Metcalf explained that the Taylor Report, less those parts objected to
by the parties, is to be admitted as evidence of what occurred on the day.

The police witnesses will be called to identify their transcripts which
will then be in evidence.      In terms of their behaviour thereafter, ie,
whether they will receive the leave of the Court not to give further evidence
on the grounds of self-incrimination, will be a matter for the Judge to
decide on the day.    The Judge, of course, may instruct that the police
witnesses will answer all questions put to them.
The offer was made to the officers present to submit any further statement
within 24 hours if they wanted to go beyond their transcript.     No such
statements have been received.



Inquest

The forthcoming Inquest Hearing (the likely start date being 19 November)
was discussed.   I confirmed that the Chief Constable will be asking the
same lawyers to represent him at the Inquest as have done so to date.

Mr Metcalf explained that whereas at the Contribution Hearing separate
representation would not be possible in that individual officers are not
a party to the proceedings having       the  status of witnesses, separate
representation would be possible at the Inquest.

In terms of police evidence that is a matter for HM Coroner to decide.
We can of course try and influence his decision but have no further powers.



Logistics

Another matter still to be determined are the logistics in respect of the
police witnesses at the Contribution Hearing.     It would seem sensible in
view of the number attending to arrange transport centrally.

The question of wearing uniform or civilian clothing was discussed and the
majority favoured civilian clothing at the Contribution Hearing and uniform
at the Inquest.' Action - DCC to consider this further.


V   ..




Deputy Chief Constable




Copy t o ;   Chief Constable
             ACC(Staff Services)
             Chief Supt Wain
             Supt Bettison
                                                     DCC/
                                                     14 September 1990



NOTE FOR FILE;


HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION HEARING


This 'Note for File' should be     read in conjunction with my   earlier   'Note'
dated 12 September 1990.

Spoke with Peter Metcalf this date regarding those officers who may be called
as police witnesses at the Contribution Hearing.    Set out below is a list,
which has been categorised into priority, identifying the officers involved:-



        Very Likely to be Called

        Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
        Chief Superintendent Mole
        Superintendent Greenwood
        Superintendent Marshall
        Superintendent Murray
        Inspector Builas
        Constable Finnegan



        Not Very Likely to be Called

        Chief Superintendent Nesbit
        Sergeant Gutcher
        Sergeant Morgan
        Sergeant Morton



        Unlikely to be Called

        Chief Inspector McRobbie
        Chief Inspector Purdy
        Chief Inspector Bennett
        Chief Inspector Waring
        Chief Inspector Creaser
        Inspector Millett
        Inspector Ellis
        Inspector Selwood
        Inspector Woodward
        Inspector Darling
        Inspector Sykes
        Inspector Delaney
        Inspector Purdy
        Inspector Hand-Davis
        Inspector Harvey
        ex-Inspector White
I



                                                           - 2-
    The question of documentation being made available to officers in advance
    of the Contribution Hearing was then discussed and the following was agreed:-

                  The officers very        like]v      to be       called will    receive personal       copies
                  o f :-

                                                                                               Ll s I"   O '-   .
                           b.    the expanded list of issues ---
                           c.    Chief Superintendent Mole's additional statement
                           d.    David Phillips' report (subject to      approval being                   given
                                    by Mr Phillips)

                  Note - Messrs    Duckenfield, Mole, Greenwood, Marshall and Murray
                  are already in receipt of items     a. and c.   Inspector Bullas and
                  Constable Finnegan have not as yet received any of the documents.

                      Additionally, consideration will be given to these officers receiving
                      a copy of their original transcripts.


                      The officers not very likely to be called will not receive personal
                      copies of documentation but a room at PHQ will be made available
                      whereby the officers in this category may spend time perusing the
                      following:-

                            a.   the expanded list of issues
                            b.   the core bundle of documents
      -                          the three main videos (TV/video equipment               to be provided)
      */                         photographs to be used in evidence                                                 ^ ^   ^
      s         kL<         e.   Chief Superintendent Mole's additional statement
           4                f.   David Phillips' report (subject to approval being                        given
                                    by Mr Phillips)

                      Additionally, consideration will be given to these officers receiving
                      a copy of their original transcripts.


           3.         Once it has been determined that those officers categorised unlikely
                      to be called as correct, obviously there will be no need to provide
                      them with any documentation.

                                               C   &   n   Q   -   r   '   cJ-~




     Deputy Chief Constable




     Copy t o :            Chief Constable
                           ACC(Staff Services)
                           Chief Supt Wain
                           Supt Bettison
                                                      Dccyl    I. W
                                                      30 May 1990



NOTE FOR FILE



HILLSBOROUGH - CONTRIBUTION ACTION



Had meeting this date with Peter Metcalf (Hammond Suddards) with reference
to the letter attached dated 25 May 1990 on the subject above.

We, the South Yorkshire Police, are suing certain other parties including
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,     Eastwoods  Consulting Engineers and,
possibly Sheffield City Council and the television companies, for their
part of the compensation already paid and to be paid by ourselves.

The following action is required:-



1. Action Team

The Action Team will be re-activated, probably on a smaller basis than
previously and possibly in the early stages organised on a part-time basis.

The Team will prepare a report for my signature addressed to Superintendents
Murray, Greenwood and Marshall together with all officers of inspector rank
upwards who on 15 April 1989 had responsibilities at the Leppings Lane end
of the ground from the pitch, through the concourse including the turnstiles
and also the outer perimeter area where management of the crowd approaching
the ground was a responsibility.

The purpose of the report will be#_^t£inform them that the contribution action
is scheduled to commence on                October 1990 and will outline in
broad terms the intention of the proceedings, namely, to determine degrees
of liability between the parties involved.

Further that whilst at this stage it is impossible to say who in terms of
police witnesses will be called it may be that a number of officers will
be required to give evidence in support of the police case.       It is also
possible that the other parties may call police witnesses on their behalf.

Once more precise information is available all concerned will be notified
so that those both attending and not attending will be aware of the position.
Officers should avoid taking     annual leave   during the month commencing
1 October and if any leave is already booked then we need to know in order
to inform our solicitors.



2. Taylor Report

The Taylor Report will be used at the Trial and its findings accepted as
evidence except where the various parties have indicated they do not wish
this to occur.   Attached is an abstract from the Interim Report which has
                                    - 2-

been marked as to the areas where we do not agree judicial notice of the
contents.  This decision has been arrived at after long consultation between
Mr Woodward and Peter Metcalf.

We are asked to consider the same document to see if there are other parts
which we would advise be not admitted in evidence.      The lawyers make the
point that this is in no way a brain-storming exercise.       The purpose of
the contribution action is to apportion liability between the parties and
it is therefore very different from a normal civil action.

The Action Team will consider the abstract and if they can identify any
area where additional judicial notice should not be agreed then they will
indicate that area with reasoned argument as to their decision.

Peter Metcalf is sending a copy to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall for them to make comment
before the final version is served.    The service date is 22 June and our
considerations must be completed well before this date.

Once a consolidated abstract is available which identifies those parts
thereof with which we do not agree together with those other parts which
the other parties also disagree, then it will be sensible to circulate these
to the police witnesses we will call and to hold a meeting to discuss the
logic of our disagreement so that in evidence they can take this into
account.

Additional tasks for the Action Team are:-

       To decide if it    is sensible for us to agree with the          HSE
       calculation that   circa 2,000 fans entered Gate 'C' on          the
       second opening.

        1988  tunnel closure   - ex-sergeant Higgins has given a
        statement to West Midlands Police saying in essence in 1988
        just before the kick-off he "received orders to close the
        tunnel because the pens were full".

       Other officers have said they remember the same instruction
       being given but none of them by whom.

        It is believed that none of the      above   was   actually   given
        in evidence at the public Inquiry.

       Two Liverpool fans - Peter Metcalf to supply names - have
       given statements that they saw stewards and police sealing
       the gate and in fact there were more stewards than police
       officers.

       The above needs to be pursued.      Who was on duty at that
       end of the ground in 1988?     What do any of these officers
       remember of the tunnel closure and alleged verbal order
       to do that?    It may be that the instruction to close the
       gate came from the Club.     If it can be shown that many
       stewards were involved then    the Club   through their agents
       (stewards) should have known of this and their arrangements
       subsequently, ie 1989, seemed to have failed to take account
       of the 1988 experience which increases their liability.
3. Press Cuttings

These need to be recovered,   particularly the comments made by Mr Bert McGee
on his retirement.



4. Body Plan

Peter Metcalf has been informed by West Midlands Police that they do not
have such a plan.    We need to collate the evidence given to the recent
Inquest and to prepare a plan, possibly colour coded for ease of reference,
showing the location of the 95 deceased before the crushing and afterwards
highlighting movements through the crowd whenever appropriate.



5. Summer 1985

There is evidence of correspondence between County, the police and Eastwoods
concerning new fences and of the police asking for an additional gate in
the radial fences.  Copies of any correspondence on this issue by all parties
to be recovered and highlighted together with any information we have as
to why the police made this request.




       i
Deputy Chief Constable
H am m ond Su d d a rd s
                       SOLICITORS
ALAN I.BOTTOMLEY           PETER C METCALF            DAVID W. K ARMITAGE CO N SU LTA N TS:          EMPIRE HOUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS            CHRISTOPHER W. JONES       J PATRICK MITCHELL  ROGER W. SUDDARDS CBt      10 PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON         ANDREW R JORDAN            CHRISTOPHER MARKS   SIR DESMOND HEAP           BRADFORD BD1 3LR
JOHN D. DE MAIN            SIMON R. B. STELL          MICHAEL S HENLEY    IAN W. WHITSON
MICHAEL L SHEPHERD         SIMON R INMAN              ROSAMOND J MARSHALL SMITH                      TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
PETER N. WILBRAHAM         RICHARD W WADE-SMITH       PHILIP W. HARLING                              TELEX 517201
J. RICHARD ARCHER          JOHN G. BECKETT            WILLIAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                     D.X. NO. 11720
BARBARA W FRANCE           G. N. IAN GREENFIELD       LUCCI DAMMONE
C. NOEL HUTTON             STEPHEN GALE               ANDREW H McDOUGALL                             FAX (0274) 737547
JOHN H. G. HELLER          MARK W. HILTON
IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH        RICHARD BURNS


OUR REF          PCM/                      YOUR REF                                   date        25th May,         1990



Dear Peter,

Hillsborough

There was a further directions hearing before Mr. Justice Rose on
24th May, when an Order was made fixing the commencement date of
the trial of the contribution action as Tuesday, 2nd October.  The
trial will take place in Manchester.

For reasons to which I shall refer below, neither I nor Counsel yet
know which South Yorkshire Police Officers we shall wish to call as
witnesses.  It may well be that the trial is largely concerned with
expert evidence and legal argument, with the factual background
being either agreed or put in by reference to statements or
transcripts of evidence given to the Inquiry.  Nevertheless, I
think that it would be prudent to warn those Officers who are most
likely to be called.  David Duckenfield is an obvious candidate
but, as he is suspended from duty, I think that I should write
direct to his Solicitors.  Officers who might be warned via
yourself would be Bernard Murray, Roger Greenwood, Roger Marshall
and I would suggest all the Officers of Inspector of Chief Inspector
rank who were stationed or had responsibilities in respect of the
sectors between, say, the north end of Leppings Lane and the pitch
perimeter fence to the Leppings Lane terraces.  As we are
effectively the Plaintiff in the case, our witnesses will be heard
first and the likelihood, therefore, is that the relevant time will
be the first three weeks in October but, obviously, if anyone is
away on annual leave or secondment, it should be possible to fit
them in at another time.




P R IV A T E     & C O N F ID E N T IA L
P . Hayes E s q .,
Deputy Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD S3 8 L Y .

LEEDS OFFICES:     BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                   JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
                                                                                    RAGENO.    2
    H am m ond S udda rd s _______•                                        —        -



                    for my not being able to sa¥                ^   greed^A^mechanism
      r n r r „ S « f?hem5xte„t to W h i c ^ f a c t s                 ^   party is to
      for agreement has now interim and £inal Baylor reportsJ->y                   fQr
      under lining^those ^aspect s^of^the^report^wic^ ean.f i nd ^ a n y t h i n g ^ a



      good deal               report with « * • £ “ “ «*            j£l
                                                           'have many other
      enC-iri oropose to make. Apprec1^     from leave, I should be most
•      hltlful i f y o u c S u l f c o n s i d e r t h i s d r a f t ^ ^ e ^empr eparedh?oeX

       E
       ?
       d i s c u s s th
                                  s-sr:^»; s rs ix “
               e« the detail with you, it
                          reasons for haste.    Fir   '
                                                        w ~ irst
                                                        and practically, I am
                                                           week hoiiday in
                                                                                        °,..
       unfortunately,        F r iday, 1st June for a   _   underlined draft
       leaving the office           has suggested that tte J a     ific
        ^v^nld*be copied to the Officers who are subject     |n£leldf
        criticism f ^ h e report                         =an have a„
        Bernard Murray and *°jer   before a final version 1S
.M/     opportunity of           ^o put that in motion a s . ^ x^ Jhese
                          in S ^ ° t L t the date for serv.ce of
           documents ? T s e t 9at 22nd June.                                   ^   ^     ^


           c£ P2 = ? and X indicated that, at that                     ,tems are now coming
           ^ 1 1 T i m e Officer or tea^of M f  ^                you separately and, if you
           S S ' & i i   can be                    ^ - f t o S f b f o f   gre^t a^i.ta nc e .
                              ITJciss this also next wee*.


            Yours sincerely,




                                                    f the report with underlining.
                    I have only copied those pages of the repo
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                       Ref:            JTW/
From- Chief Superintendent Wain, 'C' Division          Station/Dept:   Rotherham
To:   Chief Superintendent Mole,   'B' division        Date:
                                                                       1 June 1990
      Superintendent Beal, B2 Sub Division


      SUBJECT:
                         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

      On 31 May 1990 Mr Hayes, Acting Chief Constable, summoned me to his office
      to ask that I re-activate the Hillsborough Enquiry Team on a smaller and
      part time basis to assist Peter Metcalf and Counsel representing the South
      Yorkshire Police in the preparation of an action to sue certain other
      parties, i.e. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Eastwoods and others, for
      their part of the compensation that has already been paid by ourselves to
      some victims of the Hillsborough Disaster.

      I enclose a copy of Mr Hayes' summary and two letters received from Hammond
      & Suddards, together with an abstract from the Interim Report by Lord
      Justice Taylor.

      It is intended by the Trial Judge that the Taylor Report will bis accepted as
      it stands unless the parties indicate otherwise.   The important
      consideration at this moment in time is to ascertain your views on any
      points we should be telling Counsel not to accept from within the Taylor
      Report.   You will note in the abstract that certain parts have been
      underlined and it is intended that these will not be accepted by ourselves,
      however, Peter Metcalf is of the view that although he and two senior
      Counsel have prepared this abstract that there may well be something
      "blindingly obvious to members of the Enquiry Team that they have
      overlooked".

      It needs to be stressed that the purpose of this trial is to apportion
      liability between the parties concerned and you need, therefore, to be quite
      clinical in your approach.   Bear in mind the enclosure is an abstract
      prepared by Counsel and you need to have a copy of the Interim Report for
      your deliberations.

      I would ask that you treat this matter as confidential for the time being
      and because there is a need to serve an agreed version of the abstract by
      the 22 June 1990 I should be pleased to have your views by Wednesday, 6 June
      1990.

      I should be pleased to discuss the matter with you should you feel it
      necessary.




      Chief Superintendent
   Subsequently, d u r in g th e hearing. I further a cco rd ed representation to:
         (viii) T rent R egional Health Authority., for the South Yorkshire M etropolitan Am bulance Serv ice
                (SYM AS).
  and    (ix)   D r W E astw o od , consultant e n gineer to Sheffield Wednesda> Football Club.

      9. Since the c irc u m sta n c e s o f the disaster raised urgent questions o f safety, especially at football grounds,
  you indicated at th e o u tset that you would w elcom e any recom m endations, even o f an interim nature, which I
  might be able to give in advance o f the new football season due to commence in m id-August 1 9 8 9 .1 therefore
  a n n o u n c e d at th e p relim in ary hearing o n 28 A pril th a t I would conduct an oral hearing with all possible
  exp ed itio n as th e first p h a se o f the Inquiry to discover the facts a n d causes o f the disaster and enable m e to
  m ak e any im m e d ia te inte rim recom m endations necessary in the short term.

      10. T h e West M id la n d s Police investigation began on 24 April. A “ Freephone” n u m b e r was advertised to
  enable m em b ers o f th e public, especially tho se w ho had a tte n d e d the match, to offer their evidence to the
  Inquiry. Initially th is n u m b e r was available for three days on 28 different lines. T he response from the public
  was such th a t th e lin es were continued for a fu rth e r three days by the end o f w hich 2.666 calls had been
  received. T here w ere also m any written offers o f help. Som e 440 West Midlands officers were deployed on the
  Inquiry. To serv ice th is operation, special police offices were established in Birm ingham . Liverpool an d
  Sheffield and c o m p u te r technology was used to the full. In all som e 37"6 statem ents were taken. T h ere were
  also som e 1550 le tte rs to Ministers, to th e Inq u iry a n d to m e personal!) all o f which I read. T h e police,
  Sheffield W ed n esday Football Club and th e BBC had video cam eras filming at the ground on 15 April. In
  aggregate, they re c o rd e d som e 71 hours o f film covering th e period before, during a n d after the disaster. T hus
^ th e m aterial g a th e re d a n d potentially available for p resentation at the oral hearing was enorm ous. From this
  m ass it was essential to select only sufficient good a n d reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
  causes o f the d isaster.

     11. W here it se e m e d likely that any allegation o r criticism might be made o f the conduct o f any person or
  party, th e T reasury Solicitor, after consultation with Counsel for the Inquiry, wrote to the party concerned
  setting out the likely g ro u n d s for com plaint. T h is followed the practice established by th e Royal C om m ission
  on T ribunals o f In q u ir y (the Salmon C om m ission).

      12. T h e h e a rin g began on 15 May. It co n tin u e d , sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 Jun e. In
  th a t period, 174 w itn e sse s gave oral evidence. C ounsel's subm issions were delivered in writing on 7 July and
  on 14 July I h e a rd th e ir b r ie f oral subm issions supp lem en tin g the written argument.

      13. W itnesses w ere n o t sworn. Since th is is a d e p artm en tal inquiry, there was no power to a dm in ister the
  o a th b u t there w as n o instance o f any w itness giving evidence which I considered might have been different
  h a d he o r she been sw orn.

     14. T h e w itnesses called were only a sm all fraction o f those from whom statements were o r could have been
  taken. N evertheless, I a m satisfied that they were sufficient in n u m b e ra n d reliability to enable m e to reach the
  necessary conclusions. T o have called m ore w ould have prevented m e from presenting an interim report in the
  required tim e a n d w o u ld not have added significantly to the relevant evidence. I have, however, been able to
  take into account m a n y w ritten statem ents in a d d itio n to oral testimony.

      15. A p art fro m th e evidence called by C ou n sel for the Inquiry which was drawn from statem ents taken by
  th e West M idland s Police a n d others volunteered by individuals, each of the represented parties was given full
  o p p o rtu n ity to p u t fo rw ard any witnesses they c onsidered should be called. A final submission was m ade by
  C ounsel for the S o u th Yorkshire Police th a t since the investigation by West M idlands Police is still continuing,
  all the evidence h a s n o t been assembled a n d it would be unsafe for me to m ake findings o f fact. I should
  therefore make cle a r th a t the investigation co n tin u e s principally to furnish as m uch detail as possible to HM
  C o ro n e r for the C ity o f Sheffield as to th e cause o f death, the precise position at death and the care and
  m ovem ent o f each o f th e 95 victims individually. I am assured by C hief Constable D ear and Assistant C h ief
  C onstable M ervyn J o n e s that it is most unlikely any fu rth er evidence gathered will significantly alter o r ad d to
  the history o f events w hich emerged at the hearing.

      16. I should like to thank all those w ho m a d e it possible for the oral hearing to take place so soon after the
  event a n d for e v id e n c e to be efficiently presen ted a n d tested so as to give a full a n d fair account o f what
  h a p p e n e d in all its asp e c ts w ithout irrelevancy o r duplication. 1 pay tribute particularly to the West M idlands
  Police for their sp e e d a n d dedication in gathering the evidence and to all those responsible for processing it.
                                                        CH A PTE R 4

                                                     T H E D ISA STER

    71. T he initial influx through gate C. augm ented b> e n tra n ts via the
w ith great m om entum . F ans spoke o f being swept through, feet oflfthe ground. T h e in gra i
t h e i r progress. U p o n reaching th e crow ded pens, some w ished to go back b u t were unable to_dc>so. T h e n e
a rriv a ls found them selves p ushed forw ard a n d the pressure becam e intense. At -.5 4 pm , shortb after th s
in flu x began, the team s c am e o n to th e pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. Man>-w*r«no
a c u te ly uncomfortable a n d som e were in distress. The mass seethed a b o u t b u t vdumao movem em b an
in d iv id u a l was difficult: h a n d s dow n c o uld not be raised a n d som e fans found it h a rd to breathe. Still the flo
c o n tin u e d through th e tunnel causing fu rth e r surges forward. T h ere were shouts for help an d for ther gates to b
o p e n e d to the pitch. Police officers on th e perim eter track d id not im m ediately r e a c t .In ' ^ a f e m r i g noise
 fro m chanting and shouting they d id n ot at first recogntse the problem . R ealisation cam e at different m om e
 to different officers in different places.

   72. G ate 3 sprang open u n d e r th e inten se pressure from w ithin. An officer quickly d o sed it. Shonl>
afterw ards, it sprang again; officers tried to shut it. These seeking to escape were urged and pushed b a c k d a t e
4 w as opened by a p olicem an w ho n o ticed th e crushing. People began to spill ou t through it and were d *rcctc
to th e wing pens w here there was still a m p le room. Mear-while. gate 4 was closed again and then re-open .,
g ate 3. a Constable, now alive to the crisis, followed s:rictly his w ritten o rd ers a n d radioed for permission to
o p e n that gate. Receiving n o reply, he to o k it upon him self to open it.

    73. Just before 3 p m , th e m atch k ic k e d off. At the same tim e, gate C. which had been closed a t 2.57 pm ,
 w as reopened and a steady trickle c o n tin u e d to enter through the tunnel.

  - 74. To escape the crush, fans began clim b in g the radial fences out o f pens 3 a n d 4 into pens 2 an d 5. Others
 trie d to get over the front p e rim e te r fence b u t were at first tu rn e d back by police w ho feared a pitch in 'a sio n .
 N e a r the front, fans, m ostly youngsters, w ere weakened :o the p o in t o f collapse a n d in som e inslances d « t h but
 th e y were held upright by p ressure all r o u n d . Further rack , m o st were so preoccupied w i t h h e p a i n o f being
 pressed a tainst barriers a n d w ith b re a th in g problems that they saw nothing o f th e game. But at the rear m ere
 w ere m any who. although c ra m p e d , w ere w atching the football unaware o f th e distress at the Iront.

     7 5. At 3.04 pm , Beardsley for L iv erp o ol struck the crossbar a t the K op en d . T h e re was a ro a r from the
 L iverpool fans and a t the sam e tim e a pow erful surge forwards in pen 3. T h e several surges w i c occurre
 th e influx from gate C carrie d th e p ressu re dow n the pens tow ards the pitch. T h e force^became:s uch as to twist
 a n d break two spans o f a crush b a r r ie r towards the front o f pen 3. T h e evidence does not establish with
 c e rta in ty when this h ap p en ed . P ro b a b ly it w as triggered by th e surge a t 3.04 pm . But I am s u re 11
 th e influx from gate C so greatly increased th e pressure in th e penTw hen the b a rrie r broke those                    111j
 su p p o rted were projected tow ards th e p e rim e te r fence. M a n y fell and th e inv o lu n tary rush           th °
 pressed them down. T he crush in g force was transm itted a n d dispersed so th a t all along the front o f pen
 w ere pressed hard u p against the low wall a n d the wire mesh o f the fence a b o ' e it.

     76. In pen 4 no b a rrie r broke. N ev ertheless those at the fro n t w ere crushed against wall and fence. F urther
  b ack , twx> barriers were bow-ed a n d so m e individuals succum bed to the pressure a ro u n d t em.

      77. Surges on terraces are c o m m o n . Usually, they go forw ard, then recede. H ere, with the
  n u m b ers, there was no receding. T h e pressure stayed and for those crushed breathless by it, standing o rp ro n e ,
  life was ebbing away. I f n o relief c a m e in four m inutes th ere would be irreversible brain damage, iflonger.
  d e a th .
     78. In the control room no-one n o tic e d th e overcrowding o r any thing am iss in p en s 3 and 4 until the first
  fan s spilt out onio the p erim e te r track ju s t before kick-off. T h e n , ihe officers in com m an d
  w as a n attem pted pitch invasion. T h e y called u p r e s e n e serials w aiting in the gym nasium and all available
  officers elsew here to go to the piich. A re q u e st was made to H Q for dog handlers.

     79. Superintendent G reenw o od , th e G ro u n d C om m ander, was by the players’tunnel at ^ k i c k - o f f He
  n oticed fans on the track a n d w ent to th e west end behind the goal. As he a pp roached, he did not think the pens
  overcrowded until he was very close a n d saw those pressed against the fence. Even then, he ih °u g m m e
  situ atio n “retrievable" if those higher up th e pen relie% sc the pressure. He clim bed on the wall below the fence
  a n d signalled wi;h boih h a n d s to th e s e b eh in d to m c-e back. O-.her officers join ed him . It was impossible.
  T h c s e 'f a r s who would h ^ e w ished 10 com ply were p e e r l e s s to do so. Behm d them , there were still many
    practice, police officers have regularly a tte n d e d in large nu m b ers at football grounds, it has somehow been
    assum ed b> the clubs that the responsibilitv for control o f w hat goes on inside the ground has passed from
    th e m to the police. A police presence is th ere to assist in th e enforcem ent o f law an d order. Those responsible
    for organising a private function, however, have th e p rim a ry a n d continuing obligation and responsibilitv to
    en su re reasonable safet> for those w ho are invited on to th e ir premises.” M r Justice Popplewell ended that
    section as follows: “ It cannot be too strongly em p h asised th a t it is upon the club, o r the occupier o f the ground
    w h o is putting on the function, that the p rim a ry a n d c o n tin u in g obligation rests."

        165. There remains, however, the q u e stio n w h e th e r th e re are some grounds o r parrs o f grounds where the
    d u b may need to rely upon the police (w hom they pay to a tte n d ) to control filling o f pens a n d m onitoring them
    fo r overcrowding. In other words, w hilst th e d u ty in law to ensure safety rests u p o n the club, they may need,
    a n d by agreement be entitled, to em ploy th e police to a ct as th e ir agents in certain circum stances. This very
    difficult and grey area as to club and police responsibility will need to be reviewed in greater depth at stage two
    o f th is Inquiry.

    Arrangem ents at Hillsborough
       166. What is clear, however, is th at de facto th e police a t Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for
    co ntrol o f th e p e n s a t the Leppings L a n e e n d . T he evidence o f th e senior officers w ho had been concerned with
    p olicing at Hillsborough over the years was all one wav on th is point. O nly M r D uckenfield. w ho had not
    policed 2 t Hillsborough tor some 16 years p rio r to 15 A pril, took a different view.

^       167. M r Lock is now security officer at Sheffield W ednesday an d was form erly a police Superintendent at
    H illsborough m atches occupying M r M u rra y 's role. H e claim ed there had been a form al although unwritten
    agreem ent between the Club and the police in a b o u t 1982, w hereby the police agreed to steward the Leppings
    L an e end o f the ground. Such a formal agreem ent is den ied by o th e r senior officers and I d o not accept that any
    fo rm al agreement was reached. N evertheless, a p ractice o r a rrangem ent did develop which was known and
    accepted by both G u b and police. Its effect was th a t th ro u g h o u t the ground the stew ards were responsible for
    m a n n in g exits an d entrances, for controlling e n try in to th e stan d s, for assisting spectators to their seats in the
    sta n d s and for helping to control the exits after the m atch . T h ey were also responsible at the Kop end on the
    terraces for keeping gangways clear a n d helping to c o n tro l the crowd w hich usually consisted o f home
    supporters. At the Leppings Lane end. however, th ere w ere no gangways on th e terraces and the crowd
    consisted usually (and always since 1987) o f away su pp o rters. M r Mole an d o th e r senior officers accepted that
    it would have been unreal and unreasonable to expect stew ards to go onto those L eppings Lane terraces. They
    w ould not have been effective there; m oreover, th ey could well have been in som e d an g er from hostile away
    supporters. The police accepted, therefore, th a t th e p r o p e r filling o f the pens a n d m onitoring them for
    overcrowding could and would not be c arried o u t by stew ards. Many stew ards have tended to be either
    extrem ely young or somewhat elderly, j hey are p a id only a m o dest sum (£9 at H illsborough) and they are not
    su itab le either by physique o r by train ing to cope on a crow ded terrace with n o gangways.

    C ase for the South Yorkshire Police
       168.       Notwithstanding the overw helm ing evidence from se n io r police as already m entioned and from the
    G u b , Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police c o n tin u e d th ro u g h o u t the hearing to con ten d that the Club and
    n ot th e police were responsible for filling a n d m o n ito rin g the p e n s and that this was well known to both parties.
    H e m aintained that the police were there essentially to secure a n d preserve law an d order. Q uite apart from the
    p olice evidence to the contrary at this Inquiry, the official stance o f the South Yorkshire Police has not always
    b een to that effect.

    H arris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited
        169.      In March 1986. the South Yorkshire Police A u th o rity obtained a ju d g e m e n t against Sheffield U nited
    Football Club for money due for police services pro v id ed at Sheffield U n ited ’s m atches. T he defence had been.
    inter alia. that the police were n o t p rov idin g “ special police services". T h e y were doing no m ore than
    p erfo rm ing their normal police duties o f securing a n d preserv in g law and o rd e r am ongst a crowd. The police
    a rg u m en t was that they had additional duties. In his ju d g e m e n t. Boreham J su m m arised the instructions for
    policing as providing fon-

     “(a) the m aintenance o f enforcement o f law and order:

      (b) the enforcement o f the Club's ground regulations, m an y o f which are concerned w ith law and order.

      (c) the safen and comfort o f the spectators, officials an d players."


                                                                 29
  He referred to the argum ent o f Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police as follows:-

     “Thirdly. here the police were not discharg.ng their own duty to the public: the} were in fact discharging the
     C lub's duties to the spectators w hom the C'. ub invited to the ground. T he C lub chose to invite large n um bers
     to their private prem ises: it was the Club's d u t\ to provide for th eir safety, health and comfort. They could
     have employed a security firm as banks ar.c others have to d o to protect th eir interests: they chose to request
     the police to perform those duties knowing th at the police expected paym ent. Fourthly, the police within the
     ground provided services w hich it was no: w ithin the scope o f th e ir public duty to perform. For instance,
     they assisted in crowd m anagem ent and ir. the enforcem ent o f such ground regulations as refused entry to
     those who tried to e n te r w ithout paying or prohibited spectators encroaching on parts o f the ground which
     th eir entry fee did not en title them to enter. It may be. subm its M r Bentley, th a t the m aintenance o f law and
     o rd e r was the p re d o m in a n t aim but there were other serv ices perfo rm ed ."

  T h e learned Judge found:-

     “ In addition to what m ay be called their law and o rd e r role the police were expected and did take part in
     crowd managem ent, ensuring the safety of spectators, the enforcem ent o f th e Club's regulations and to be on
     h an d to assist in the event o f some emerge* cies such as fire o r accidental inju ry."

  Police Practice at the L eppings Lane End
     170. At League m atches at Hillsborough. :he police practice was to decide in advance how m any and which
  pens would be used. If a m odest crowd was anticipated only one o r two pens m ight be needed. It was b etter to
  confine the fans to lim ited spaces (a) to pre -ent them running about a n d (b) to reduce the num ber o f police
. required. T he practice was then to fill the per.: one by one. This involved m aking a judgem ent as to when a pen
  w-as full. There would th en be a police decisi:?. to close th at pen and fill another. It was regarded as im practical
  and unsafe for police officers (just like stewards) to go onto the Leppings Lane terraces with away supporters.
  T his m eant that m o n ito rin g the num bers ir. any pen had to be done from vantage points outside it. Here, the
  police were much b e tte r placed than the re w a rd s. T here was a good view from the control box a n d the
  television screens there. T h ere were officers on the perim eter track. N o stewards were placed there because
  having both police a n d stew ards interfered with the viewing. T h ere were also police in the west stand who
  could look down on the pens. Intelligence ir :m all these sources could give the police a good appreciation o f
  the state o f the terraces. W hen it was necessary to shut o ff access to the pens officers on the concourse could be
  inform ed by radio an d could take the necessary steps.

  “ Find T h eir Own Level"
     171. At Cup semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened from the start an d the
  policy was “to let the fans find th eir own lev*;- . This phrase was repeated again and again by police officers at
  the Inquiry; W hat it m e a n t was that no specific direction was given to fans entering through the turnstiles.
  T hey were free to go w herever they wished on the terraces. If they b ecam e uncom fortable or wished for any
  o th e r reason to move th e ir position, then theoretically they could move elsew here. In this way it was hoped that
  the fans on the terraces w ould level themselves out and that d istrib ution would be achieved w ithout police
  intervention. On these occasions, the gates a: the to p o f the radial fences w ere locked in the open position. It
  was sought to argue, therefore, th a t there w as freedom o f m ovem ent from o n e pen to another enabling fans to
  “find their level".

     172. T his argum ent w as bad both in theory and in practice. In theory, th e whole object o f the radial fences
  had been to achieve even distribution by directing fans into desired positions. To say then that they could move
  freely from one pen to a n o th e r would defea: the object and enable fans to go from a less popular to a more
  p opular area w ithout in h ib itio n. In practice 'h is did not happen because th e position and size o f the gates was
  such th at once a substantial nu m b er o f spectators were in, the gates were unnoticeable and inaccessible
  especially to those tow ards the front who might have m ost need o f them .

    173. T he same argu m ent was deployed tc suggest th at individual m a x im u m capacities for individual pens
  need not be assessed since the presence o f the open radial gates still m e a n t that the terrace was one area. In
  practice this simply was not so. The photograph at Appendix 5 taken from the north stand at 2.59 pm shows
  very clearly the congestion in pens 3 and 4 contrasted with the sparseness in pen 6. This gives the lie to the
  suggestion that the fans could, i f uncomfortable, “ find th eir ow n level".

    174. T he effect o f this policy was that w hereas at League m atches th e police had to make a positive decision
  when to close one pen a n d open another, at stnni-finals. where overcrowding was much more likely, the police
left it lo the fans : herr.se! ves to “ find th e ir own level". Effectively. the> were left to m on ito r their o»n com fort
a n d safet> so as to avoid overcrowding. T h e police would onl) in te n ene when th ere was some over. 5:cn that an
area was “full”.

W hen is an Area “ Full**?
    1*5. Over the years, spectators on terraces have com e to accept c o n d itio n s which are often very
uncomfortable and" not infrequently d o w nrig h t dangerous. T hey are subjected to buffeting and squeezing to
get in and out o f the terraces. They are p a c k e d tightly and exposed to surging a n d swaying during :he m atch.
T hey put up with these conditions b ecause they are devoted to the gam e a n d because there is little *jey can do
a b o u t them. They believe the d iscom fort will pass and n othing very untow ard will happen. Usual!) th at is the
case and they are reassured by it. M ost c lu b s have not. until very recently, consu lted th e ir supporters as to their
grievances or suggestions. T he practice h as been to pack them in on th e assu m p tio n th a t if they are prepared to
p u t up with it the conditions m ust be tolerable. Although crowd figures at football grounds have been reduced
in recent years, this has been du e p rin cip ally to the increased p ro p o rtio n o f seating as against standing
accommodation. Terraces have still been packed.

   176. It is said th at m any fans enjoy th ese features o f terrace viewing. C learly close p rc \i~ i:v . shared
discom fort, weathering sways an d surges to gether and c h an tin g the sam e songs a n d slogans en mi:sc do evoke
good hum our and have p roduced a spirit o r cult o f the terraces which m any enjoy. Equally there ar; m any who
sim ply endure these things for the football, for a cheap ticket o r indeed for th e ch an ce o f getting in at all. And
before Hillsborough m ost fans on th e terraces, even if they enjoy th e hurly-burly, had not realise; :he narrow
margin o f safety between an u n c o m fo rta b le crush and a fatal one.

    177. The Green G u id e sought to im p ro v e safety a n d co m fo rt by laying dow n criteria fcr m axim um
capacity, ie defining w hat is “full". T h e stan d ard set was 54 persons p e r 10 sq u a re metres ir. favourable
conditions but fewer, down to 27. in less favourable conditions. T h e ten d en cy m a y have been i: aim o ff too
little from the higher figure for sh o rtc o m in g s in the layout. C ertain ly the figures considered appropriate in
pens 3 and 4 at Hillsborough were to o h igh , as already indicated.

   178. Even taking th e highest figure suggested in the G reen G u id e , th e pro b lem remained that those
supposed to be m onitoring pens visually h a d an d have little idea o f w hat 54 p ersons p e r 10 square metres look
like. M r Duckenfield's opinion was th a t w h e n a pen was full to capacity, th e spectators would be 'sh o u ld e r to
shoulder and chest to back". T h a t view m a y derive from seeing th e sort o f d e n sity crowds regularly endure
w ithout injury resulting. But it is m uch m o r e dense than the G reen G u id e m a x im u m .

    179. The South Yorkshire Fire Brigade provided the Inquiry with p ho tog rap h s o f people standing in an area
o f 10 square metres a t various d ensities o f packing. Together with m y Assessors a n d others. I u o k part in a
sim ilar experiment at th e H ealth a n d S afety Executive's Sheffield laboratory. We stood in a room of measured
area a t densities o f 54. 80 a n d 100 p er 10 square metres. It was clear fro m th e photographs and from o u r
experim ent that the m ax im u m d ensity se t o u t in the G reen G u id e left c on sid erably m ore room than those
m onitoring the terraces would have left b efo re declaring an area “full” .

    180. The tendency has been to allow t h e pens to fill until th e fans com p lain o r show signs o f discomfort. If
th e density at the front appeared less th a n at the back, th e T annoy would invite th e fans to mo'-e forward to
m ake room for more. T h e evidence b efo re th e Inquiry an d m any anecdotal letters I have received rlearlv show
th ere have been frequent occasions w h e n th e packing on terraces, n ot only a t Hillsborough, has caused
discom fort and som etim es, for b rie f p e rio d s, fear. Usually th e surge recedes, th e sway returns. :he pressure
eases and the incident passes u n reco rd ed.

   181. After the crushing at th e 1981 sem i-final. Hillsborough was not chosen again by the FA. until 1987.
T h ere was evidence th a t the central pens w ere uncom fortably overcrow ded on th a t occasion and again at the
1988 C up semi-final, although e n try to th e tunnel was blocked o ff by police sh o rtly before kick-off in 19SiT
because the pens were deem ed to be " f u ll**.

Fear of Hooliganism
   182. Over the last few years, ho o lig an ism at and associated w ith football m a tc h e s has strong!;, influenced
th e strategy o f the police. In th e ir plans a n d m anagem ent they have c o n c e n tra te d on averting cr containing
threats to public order. T his is u n d e rsta n d a b le and indeed co m m e n d a b le . But it has led to an im balance
between the need to quell a m in ority o f troublem akers a n d the need to secure th e safety and cim fort o f the
majority. In the police O peration al O rd e r, the emphasis was upon prevention o f disorder and .n particular
prevemion o f access to the field o f play. T h e re was no express re q u irem en t th a t officers on the    meter track
o r in the west stand should keep watch for any possible o \e rc ro w d in g on the terraces. Indeed, the view was
expressed in evidence th a t packing fans close together o n the terraces assisted in controlling the unruly since
the less room they had the less scope there was for m isbehaviour.

Summary
    183. Although the police had accepted de facto responsibility for m onitoring the pens, their policy on the
d a y was to leave tans to “ lin d th eir own level" a n d to co n c e n tra te th eir own atten tio n on possible disorder.
^..h|lst in theory the police would in terv en e i f a pen b ecam e “ full", in practice thev permitted the test o f
fullness to be what the fans would tolerate.

   184. By 2.52 pm when gate C w as op en ed, p en s 3 a n d 4 were over-full even by this test. M any were
uncom fortable. To allow any m ore in to th ose p ens w-as likely to cause injuries: to allow* in a large stream was
co u rtin g disaster.
                                                     C H A PT E R 10

                                     T H E BL ILD-L P A T T H E T L R N S T IL E S

    185. The decision to open ga:e C. a n d subsequently gales A and B too. was forced on to the police by the
crow d conditions which developed o u tsid e the turnstiles. The crush was so severe that injuries were being
suffered and death s were feared unless the pressure could be swiftly relieved. Why the crowd pressure had built
to such intensity was one o f the principal issues during the hearing. The suggested causes m ust be considered in
tu rn .

The Physical Layout
    186. I have already described and illustrated the approach to th e turnstiles (Appendices 1 an d 2). At
P en isto ne Road a n d at many other grounds, turnstiles are in a straight line, adequately spaced a n d w ith a
sufficient waiting area for queues to form . N o t so at Leppings Lane. T he building line, the bridge over the D on
a n d th e bend in th e road, left a *edge-shaped approach to perim eter gates set in an arc. and across a short
forecourt, to tu rnstiles also set ir. an arc. T h e pairs o f turnstiles were close together an d the forecourt, especially
as div id ed by the m etal fence, provided little space fo ra waiting crowd.

T h e N um ber of Turnstiles
   187. The decision to fill the whole o f th e n orth stand from the Leppings Lane end required the 23 turnstiles
there to ad m it 24,256 spectators. O f th ose, the seven turnstiles (A to G) serving the terraces had to adm it
10.100. ie an average o f just ur.der 1,450 through each turnstile. At the Penistone Road end. 29.800 were
served by 60 turnstiles, or just ur.der 500 p er turnstile.

    188. The G reen G uide recognises (paragraph 47) that the rate at which spectators can pass through
turnstiles dep en d s on a varie:;> o f local circumstances but states “ in general based on observation and
experience, it is unlikely that th ; m ax im u m notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 per hour". Since the
sem i-final was an all ticket m a u h req u irin g no cash transactions, the G u b considered that a higher rate o f
a b o u t 1.000 per h o u r per turnsv.le could be expected. Even at this higher rate, which assumes the turnstiles
w orking at m a x im u m efficiency non-stop, it would have taken nearly I ft hours to adm it all those with terrace
tickets. At 750 p er hour, it would have taken nearly two hours.

   189. T he G reen G u id e provides (paragraph 44):-

  “T um stiles sh ou ld be o f such num bers as to a dm it spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
  kept waiting fo r a d m is sio n ..

   190. T he O fficer W orking Par.v h ad discussed in 1985 the need, a nd D r Eastwood's various schemes, for
im provem ent o f th e turnstile arrangements. T he m athem atics are elementary. Both the police a n d th e Club
should have realised th at the Leppings L ane turnstiles and the waiting area outside them would be u n d e r strain
to a d m it all th e Liverpool supporters in tim e . Success depended on the spectators arriv in g at a steady rate from
an early ho u r a n d upon the m axim um tu rn stile rate being m aintained. In fact neither o f these requirem ents,
w hich are inter-linked, was fulfilled. T h a t th e y might not be so was in my view foreseeable.

The “Late" arrival of Liverpool Fans
   191. Between 2.30 pm and 2 .-0 pm th e crowd waiting for th e turnstiles swelled to over 5.000 and becam e
unm anageable. T h e case made for the police was that large num bers o f Liverpool su p po n ers arrived late: a
high p roportion o f th e m w«re c.*unk a n d unco-operative: a high proportion had no tickets: all o f them were
hell-bent on getting in on time. They say th is was unforeseeable and explains why they lost control.

    192. W hether th o se who arrr-ed betw een 2.30 pm a nd 2.40 p m were “late” was m uch debated. T h e ticket
sim ply requested its holder “to take u p [his] position 15 m inutes before kick-oflT. T h at may have been
in te n d e d to persuad e those wi:h stand tickets to take their seats, but it would not be unreasonable for a
stan d in g spectator to arrive at the turnstiles between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm . W hether they were “late" o r not.
however, there was certainly a large c o n cen tratio n o f Liverpool fans arriving at about 2.30 pm and after.

Traffic Delays
   193. It is unlikely that traffic conditions had any significant effect on this. True, there were delays on the
Liverpool traffic routes. There .-ere roadw orks on the M62 which was the recom m ended route. At various
p oints the carriageway was r e d .:e d from four lanes or three lanes to two. but no serious delays were reported.
  O n the M6.' me*; were longer delays due lo a contraflow and a i iis jun ctio n with the ^560 there was hea\>
  congestion c u e ;; volume o f traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were clear b> 2.20 pm and these w itnesses
  w h o complainec ;• de!a>sen route had nevertheless m anaged to be in range o f the ground in ample time.

  Fine Weather and Drinking
      194. The Iikel.es: explanations for the sparse Liverpool a tte n d a n c e in the ground before 2.30 pm were four­
  fold - the warm * rather, drinking, disinclination to e nter the g rou n d early and prolong the standing, a n d a
  te n d e n c y of Li\ errool supporters to cut it fine.

      195. T he police em phasised that at the 1988 semi-final th ere w as no com parable build-up o f “laie” arrivals.
  T h e y claim, therefore, that they had no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988. although the w eather
  was fine, it was 11! F cooler than in 1989. 15 April was the sort o f fine spring day w hich tem pted fans to sit o r
  s ta n d a bout in the sun with a drink. I f you had a ticket it would seem m ore pleasant and sensible to relax in th a t
  way th a n to enter the ground early an d stand on the terrace for an extra hour. Pre-m atch entertainm ent in the
  g ro u n d had been advertised but did not take place. Even if it h a d , it m ay not have been an encouragement to
  m a n y fans to enter so early.

  W as Drunkenness a M ajor Factor in the C risis at the Turnstiles?
      196. O f those who arrived at 2.30 p m o r after. very m a n y h a d been drinking at public houses o r had
  b ro u g h t drink fr:m hom e o r an off-licence. I am satisfied o n th e evidence, however, that the great m ajority
  were not drunk nor even the worse for d rin k . T he police w itnesses varied on this. Some described a high
  p ro p o rtio n as drunk. as “lager-Iouts” o r even as “anim als”. O th e rs described a generally normal crowd with an
  u nco-operative rr.inority who had drun k too much. In my view som e officers, seeking to rationalise their loss
• o f control, overestimated the d ru n ken elem ent in the crowd. T h e re certainly was such an element. There were
  youngsters influenced by d rin k an d bravado pushing im patiently at the r e a r o f the crowd thereby exacerbating
  th e crush. But the m ore convincing police witnesses, including especially Detective Superintendent M cK ay
  a n d C h ie f Inspector Creaser as well as a n u m b e r o f responsible civilian witnesses, were in my view right in
  d escrib in g this element as a minority. Those witnesses a ttrib u te d the crush to the sheer numbers o f fans all
  a n x io u s to gain entry. T here was no criticism o f the crowd by any o f the witnesses in the period up to 2.30 pm
  o r even 2.35 pir.. W hat happ ened then was not a sudden d eterio ra tio n in the m ood o r sobriety o f those
  a ssem b led there. No do ub t those com ing b eh in d would have had m o re to drink a n d would have included the
  u n ru ly minority. 3 u t the crisis developed because this very large crowd becam e packed into a confined
  tu rn s tile area and Its very density ham pered its passage through th e turnstiles.

      197. Superintendent M arshall a n d o th e r officers criticised th e crowd as unco-operative because police
  e x h o rta tio n s to stop pushing and to ease back were not heeded. H ow could they be? In that crush most p eople
  h a d no control over th eir m ovem ents at all. Two incidents involving police horses illustrate the point. O n e
  h o rse was found afterwards to have cigarette burns on its ru m p . Clearly that was the despicable work o f a
  h o oligan w hether in drink o r not. However, there were also eyew itness accounts o f a horse being physically
  lifted ofT its feet by the crowd. T h a t occurred, as the police accepted, w ithout malice o r intent but as an
  in v o lu n ta ry consequence o f crowd pressure which those by th e horse's flanks could not resist anv more than the
  h o rse itself.

  Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
      198. T he labelling o f the turnstiles in th e o rd e r A. C. B was confusing. A fan w ith a B ticket who w ent by
  m ista k e to the wr: ng side o f the metal fence would have had the greatest difficulty in getting back and roun d to
  th e correct side. The colour coding was inefficient because the coloured wooden panels were affixed to the
  tu rn s tile walls so !:•* that they were not easily visible through a crow d. T h e inform ation on the ticket printed by
  Sheffield Wednesday Football C lub was m isleading and its layout unhelpful, as M r Mackrell frankly conceded.

     199. T he result was that in the early stages, police officers were pestered by fans for help as to where they
 sh o u ld go. Later, as the crowd becam e m ore dense, fans were presenting their tickets at the wrong turnstiles.
 T h e re were also L:-.erpooI supporters who had acquired tickets for the Kop end but sought entry at Leppings
 L a n e . T hey caused delays in th e turnstile operation when e n try was refused and after a while the police
 in stru c te d the operators to let them through. There was fu rth e r delay because the crush m ade it difficult for
 fans to get into the turnstile entrances. O nce there, the pressure from behind was such as. on occasions, to ja m
 th e m in the doorway o r against the paddle o f the turnstile. Finally, th ere were fans w ithout tickets who sought
 to e n te r by offen.-g paym ent, by seeking to go over or u n d e r th e p ad d le o r by sliding through with a ticket
 holder. All o f these activities slowed down the turnstile rate w hich at the worst period was o n h about 600 per
 h o u r p c r turnstile The waiting crowd therefore expanded a n d as the m inutes passed frustration grew. Visitors
 m ig h t not expect to be allowed :r.. even for paym ent. Secondly, no trouble o f the kind alleged was encountered
 at the 1988 sem i-final when Liverpool visited H illsborough. Thirdly. Liverpool visited Hillsborough again in
 Jan u ary 1989 w itho u t any troupe. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 15 April apart from three crude
 photocopies.

 N o Conspiracy
     208. I haye already found thr. there was not an ab no rm ally large num ber o f fans without tickets on this
 occasion. W ith o n e o r two exceptions, the police witnesses themselves did not subscribe to the “conspiracy"
 theory. I am satisfied that the large co n centratio n at Leppings Lane from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm did not arrive
 as a result o f any concerted plan. There were. I accept, sm all groups without tickets who were willing to exploit
 a n y a d v en titiou s chance ofgetting into the g ro u nd . They, together with the m inority who had dru nk too m uch ,
 c e rtain ly aggravated th e problem faced by the police. But that main problem was simplv one o f large n u m b e rs
 p ack ed into the sm all area outside the turnstiles.

 T h e Police O peration at Leppings Lane
    209. T h e O p eratio n al Order :br 15 April followed closely that laid down for the 1988 semi-final. T h e
 em p h a sis was on m aintaining Is- and order. Side road s were to be blocked off to prevent damage in residential
 areas. Pairs o f officers were to patrol streets to prev ent “ clash o f rival supporters". Officers were to watch public
 houses, shops a n d superm arkets "where looting could take place". O utside the turnstiles, officers were to ensure
 su p p o rte rs entering did not hav* banners, w eapons, m issiles o r alcohol.

   210. U nfortunately, hooligan behaviour has m a d e all these steps necessary. But the only written provision
a im e d at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was o n e enjoining officers “to ensure orderly queues are
fo rm e d . T h ere was no provision for controlling th e e n try o f the crowd into the turnstile area.

   211. As long ago as 1924, the Departm ental C o m m itte e on Crowds statedt-

    T h e control o f crowds should begin at a point som e considerable distance from the entrance to the ground.
   T h e advantages o f an arrangement o f this k in d a r e ... in preventing congestion at the entrances to grounds."

T h is was p articularly important at Leppings Lane w here the turnstile area was so small an d awkwardly laid
o u t. I f a large crowd was permitted u n c on tro lled entry through the perimeter gates, the forming o f queues at the
tu rn stiles an d control by officers, whether on foot o r m o u n te d , would become impracticable. Those w aiting at
th e turnstiles would becom e a single growing m ass. O n ce that happened, it would be difficult to retrieve^he
situ a tio n .

   212. W h e th e r steps were taken and what steps to avoid this happening was left to oral briefing and ad hoc
in stru c tio n s on the day.

Previous Experience
    213. T he senior police officers said it had never h a p p e n e d before so there was no reason to foresee it. In fact,
the o n ly two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole o f the north
a n d west sides o f th e ground were at the two sem i-finals, in 1987 and 1988. In 198 7, the match was on a Sunday,
sch edu led for 12 noon, and kick-off was po stp o n ed for a q u a rte r o f an hour because o f late arrivals.

Policing in 1988
    21 4. As to 1988. there was a j e r y iarge an(j con sistent b o dy o f evidence that, on the day. the police in
L eppings Lane co nd u cted an emcient filtering exercise designed to keep away those without tickets a n d
c o n tro l the flow o f fans towards the ground. I do not believe th at so many witnesses w ithout either o p p o rtu n ity
o r reason to put th e ir heads together could be m istaken abo u t what they experienced on that occasion. Vet. the
p o ice m a in tain that no filtering exercise o th e r th a n on a ran d o m basis was conducted in 1988 and that their
policy a n d practice then were no different from th o se o f 1989.

   2 15. T h e answ er to this confkct must, I th in k , be th a t whilst the policy may have been no different, in
p rac tic e the policing in 1988 was more efficient a n d was not p ut to thesam e test and strain as a vear later. T here
was n o t so large a swell in numbers a p p ro ach ing th e ground from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm as in 1989.
» evenheless. there h a d been warning signs in 1988. D etective Superintendent McKav gave the followine
evidence:
 an y p a n in the South Yorkshire Police p lan s. H ad the latter been inform ed o f th e history contained in the
 d ossier and sum m arised above it m ay w ell have influenced police strateg> in L eppings Lane.

   220. There is presently a proposal th a t a national computer-based police football intelligence system should
 be set up to make the necessary in fo rm a tio n readily available.

 Police Intelligence on the Day
    2 2 1. The unfilled space in the L iverpool areas inside the ground, the figures for e n try available from the
 C lu b ’s com puter an d observations o n th e v id eo screen should have enabled th o se in the control room to
 m o n ito r the numbers arriving and still to a rriv e at Leppings Lane. R adio contact w ith m o bile (Tango) patrols
 detailed to m onitor licensed prem ises in th e d istrict could have indicated the n u m b e rs still to come. But at 2.30
 p m when M r M urray told M r D u ck en field they would “get them all in by 3 o ’clo ck " he seems not to have
 appreciated that in a d d itio n to those visible at the turnstiles there were m any m ore still to com e. Certainly. M r
 M arshall outside the turnstiles was n o t to ld a n d could not otherwise have known th a t th ere were still manv
 Li verpool ticket holders to arrive.

M r M arshall and M r Greenwood
    2 - 2 . The division o f com m and betw een these two officers did not help. M r M arsh all was in charge o f the
serials outside the perim eter gates in th e Leppings Lane area an d in the roads beyond. In practice he operated
in sid e and just outside the turnstile area. M r G reenw ood’s area as G ro u n d C o m m a n d e r extended from the
p itc h to the perim eter gates. He in fact sta tio n e d h im self near the players’ tunnel. H e was wholly unaware o f the
grow ing problems at the turnstiles a n d was in n o position to exercise control over his officers w ho were under
pressure there. No-one in the control r o o m th ou g ht to tell him .

Control Lost
    223. In the result, the large con ce n tra tio n o f arrivals from 2.30 pm to 2.40 p m pressed unrestrained into
the turnstile area through the p erim eter gates which were fully open. W hen th a t a re a was full. later arrivals
swelled the crowd out to the forecourt a n d even into the road. As already recounted, th e foot officers at the
turnstiles became trapped and endangered a n d retired through the turnstiles. T h e m o u n te d officers could not
o p erate am idst such a dense crowd in a co n fin ed space. They cam e out o f the tu rn stile area. T here were then
th e belated attem pts to close the p e rim e te r gates an d prevent m ore fans join in g the m ass until it had a chance to
d im in ish through the turnstiles: still later the a tte m p t to put a cordon o fho rses across th e entrance.

    224. Despite knowledge o f the difficu lt layout, the very large num ber o f fans to b e got through so few
turn stiles and the tendency o f fans to a rriv e in the last ha lf hour, no contingency p la n s were m ade to avoid a
crush such as occurred. Even on the dav. th e need to close Leppings Lane to traffic befo re 2.30 pm and the
o th e r available intelligence already s u m m a rise d , should have prom pted those in c o m m a n d to take precautions
against such a crush. I f some o f the p e rim e te r gates had been closed and cordons o f m o u n te d a n d foot officers
h a d been placed a little distance from th o se gates, the flow o f fans into the tu rn stile a re a could have b e i n '
controlled before that area becam e ejig u lfe d . jt was Jjie crush itself,which pro d uced th e frustration and th e*
p a n ic a n a brougnt o u t thg worst in th o se .who had dru nk too much. Earlier c o n tro V o f e ntry would have
p re v e n te d the crush and m aintained th e good m o od which had prevailed until 2.30 pm.                 " ~

   225. It should moreover have been o b v io u s by 2.40 pm . if not earlier, that a large p a rt o f the crowd could
n o t be adm itted until well after 3 pm . H ad a decision to postpone kick-offbeen m a d e a n d announced m uch o f
th e frustration and with it the im p etus cru sh in g the crowd would have been re d u c e d . A com bination o f
controlled filtering an d a postponed kick-off would probably have obviated the need to o p e n the gates.

Postponement of Kick-off
    226. At various stages in his evidence. M r Duckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
p o stp o n e kick-off. O nce it was that on e o f th e team s had already com e on to the pitch. T h e n it was that a group
o f photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the team s were co m in g o u t. Finally, he did not
know why he thought the team s were co m in g ou t. They did not in fact com e on to th e p itch until 2.54 pm. two
m in u te s after gate C w as opened. Police C o n sta b le Buxton had asked for a p o stp o n e m e n t o f kick-off before
gate C was opened. It should not. however, have needed a police Constable in the thick o f the crowd (and there
were others o f like m ind) to think o f p o stp o n in g the kick-off. T he need should have b e e n clear in the control
room .                                                                   ......................... .......            .............

        The truth was that Mr D uckenfield ap p lied inflexibly the policy he had discussed w ith Mr Murray.
K ick-off would not be postponed unless th e re were some m ajor cause for delayed arriv a ls r ? a ja m on the
m otorw ay or fog. 1 accept ihat ihe th in k in g behind this policy was not callous o r punitive. If kick-ofT is
postponed w henever a proportion o f fans choose to leave th e public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-ofT times would become meaningless. But. a c o m m a n d e r m ust deal with the problem o f the day. Faced
w ith a situation which was becom ing dangerous, crowd safety should have been his p a ra m o u n t consideration.
Kick-ofT should h a\ e beer, delay ed.

Summary
   228. T he layout o f the turnstiles and the n u m b er they were required to serve left no m argin o f safety against
an uneven flow o f fans. Because police strategy in advance a n d on the day-did_not ca te r for it. the arrival o f a
large num ber o f supporters between 2.30 p m and 2.40 pm created an unm anageable crush, l'he presence o f
a substantial m in o n ty o f fans w ho had d ru n k too m uch aggravated that problem . H av in g lost control a n d
rejected the option o f postponing kick-off. the police were faced with a serious d an g er o f deaths or injuries.
T h ey were left therefore with no a lternative but to open th e gates. Superintendent M arshall was right at that
stage to ask for it and M r Duckenfield was right to agree. But th e p ossible effects o f so d ra m a tic a step required
o th e r action.                                               ~
                                                     C H A P T E R 11

                                  T H E B L I N D E R O N O P E N I N G T H E CATES

    229. T h e decision to o rd er the opening o f th e gates was not accompanied or followed by any o th er o rd e r to
deal with the consequences. \ \ hen gate C w as o p e n e d , a steady stream o f about 2.000 fans poured through it
over som e five m in u tes. Clearly they were going to go in to the ground someu here an d unless they were d i\ erted
th e ir likeliest route was through the tunnel for reasons already given. No warning was issued from the control
ro o m that the gate was to be opened. Serials o n th e concourse were not alerted. N either the Club control room
n o r th e C h ie f S tew ard at the Leppings L ane e n d was warned. Not even M r G reenw ood, the G ro u n d
C o m m a n d e r, was inform ed. From 2.47 p m w hen M r M arshall m ade his first request until 2.52 pm when M r
D uckenfield acceded to it, there were five m in u te s in which orders could have been given as to how the influx
was to b e absorbed. It was not done. In evidence. M r D uckenfield began by saying that no officer m ade any
w ro n g decision b u t he later conceded he h a d e rred in this regard. He said he did not consider w here the people
w ould go when the gate opened. Even after it o p e n e d , when he could see the influx on the television screen, no
o r d e r was given to steer the fans to the w ing pens. M r Duckenfield said it did not cross his m ind to detail
officers on the concourse to shut ofTthe tu n n e l. T h o se officers could not have known from their position how
full pens 3 and 4 were. T hat was a m atter for the co ntrol room to m onitor froir. i:s ow n observations and using
intelligence from a ro u n d the ground.

    230. Since pens 3 a n d 4 were full by 2.50 p m . the tun n el should have been do sed o ff w hether gate C was to
be o p e n e d or not. T h e exercise was a sim ple o n e a n d had been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was
for a few officers to act as a cordon at th e e n tra n c e to th e tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
1988 closure seems to have been unknow n to th e se n io r officers on duty at the time. It did not figure in the
d e b riefin g notes. It therefore had no influence o n the p lan n in g for 1989.

   231. Planning a p a rt, however, it should have b een clear in the control room where there was a view o f the
pens a n d o f the crowd at the turnstiles that th e tu n n e l had to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect
w hen gate C was o p en ed , the fans could have been directed to the empty areas o f the wings and this disaster
could still have been avoided. Failure to give th a t o rd e r was a b lun d er o f the first m agnitude.

    232. Significantly, w hen perm ission was given to o pen gate A. M r Duckenfield d id o rd e r serials to go to that
p a rt o f the concourse to m o nitor the influx tow ards th e n orth stand. He did this because he feared that if fans
w ent to the north sta n d w ithout tickets, th ey w ould not get seats and. there being no p erim eter fences at the
n o rth side, they m ight invade the pitch. T h is illustrates again the preoccupation with avoiding pitch invasion
as against safety a nd th e risks o f overcrowding. B ecause those entering through gate C could not get onto the
p itc h , it was not thought necessary to alert officers to m o n ito r them . The possibility o f overcrowding simplv
was not considered.
 periods, the interval between app lication s to be as shon as possible. A record has to be kept of the am ou n t of
deform ation during each loading a n d o f the perceniage o f reco'-ery. If ihe recovery is less than 50% after the
th ird application o f force, ihe b a rrie r has failed the test. If recovery is betw een 50% a nd 75 V there must be a
re-test. The question is: 50% o r 75% o f whai? Is ihe recovery to be in relation to the position o f the barrier
before the first application o f force o r before the third? If the fo rm er, a sp an o f 124a recorded 53% at the 1988
test an d should have been re-tested. I f the latter, it recorded 100% a n d passed. U nfortunately the G reen G uid e
is unclear as to the correct interp retatio n . D r Eastwood to o k th e la tte r view a n d so passed the barrier. He
ju stified his interpretation in evidence. He said failure to recov er to th e o riginal position could be du e to a
“shake-down" effect related to som e giving in the ashes un d e r th e con crete o r to som e o th e r extraneous factor
ra th e r th an to any defect in the m aterial o f the barrier itself.

  239. I think, after consulting Professor Maunder, that safety o u g h t to have d ictated recovery should b e by-
reference to the position o f the b a rrie r before the first ap p lic a tio n o f force. I accept, however, that the G reen
G u id e is am biguous an d D r E astw ood’s interpretation is te n a b le . It has som e sup p o rt from the British
Stan d ard s tests on steel structures. Clearly, however, for the fu tu re , th e U re e n G u id e should be clarified o n this
point.

Corrosion
   240. Inspection o f barrier 124a, a n d indeed o th e r b a rrie rs at H illsborough, by the HSE showed
considerable corrosion o f the m etal at vulnerable points w here w a te r could accum ulate. D r Eastwood agreed
th at i f a significant degree o f corrosion was observed on visual in sp e c tio n , a b a rrie r should be condem ned.

  2 4 1. T h e G reen G u id e does not specifically refer to corrosion. P arag rap h 39 provides, inter alia:

  “C rush barriers and balustrades should be examined for d e fo rm a tio n o r any o th e r overt sig n so f weakness".

Paragraph 6 o f Annex C provides:

  “ I f d uring any test, even though th e b a r r i e r ... satisfies the abo v e lo ad in g requirem ents, doubt should arise
  for any reason (including such m a tte rs as cracking o f the te rra c in g o r d isto rtio n o f connections) as to the
  safety o f the b a rrie r... a detailed investigation should be c a rrie d o u t. U nless the results o f this investigation
  rem ove the dou b t as to safety o f th e b a r r ie r ... (it) should be d e e m e d to have failed the test".

  242. Since corrosion is a likely cause o f deterioration, a rev isio n o f th e G re e n G u id e should make soecific
reference to it.

Causation
  243. Tests d one by the HSE suggest that although barrier 124a passed th e lo ad in g test in 1988 and probably
would have been able to sustain a force which did not exceed th e test load, it was unable to resist the load
im posed upon it by reason o f th e n u m b e rs in pen 3, the excessive gap in the b a rrie r higher up the pen and the
absence o f b arrier 144. C orrosion probably played a p art, b u t th e effective cause o f the collapse was the
excessive and u nanticipated pressure to which the barrier w as ex po sed.
                                                       C H A P T E R 13

                                       T H E C R U S H IN G N O T R E C O G N IS E D

Observation from Control Room
   244. A sth e stre a m fro m g a te C flowed through th e tu n n e l, the officers in th eco ntrol room could be expected
to keep a close watch on pens 3 a n d 4. T hey had a direct view o f them from an elevated position through th e ir
window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was th e zoom facility on the T V cam era. T he radio was by
th e n working again a n d although reception was difficult d u e to crowd noise and possibly excessive air traffic
on channel 25. atte m p ts could have been m ade to alert officers on the perim eter track to watch for
overcrowding and report their observations. In the event, p ens 3 a n d 4 became more and more crowded, surges
took place, fans were showing a n d signalling distress. N o n e o f this was seen o r recognised in th e control room .

Officers on the Track
  245. T he 20 officers detailed to th e perim eter track were distributed round the pitch so that som e five
officers were at the west end. T h e ir w ritten instructions m a d e no reference to the avoidance o r detection o f
overcrowding. The sam e applied to th e officers in th e west stand. M r G reenw ood adm itted th at his oral
briefings also contained no m en tio n o f m on ito rin g the pens for overcrowding.

   246. The O perational O rd e r for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone “access to the track from the
terraces w ithout the consent o f a senior officer (except to receive m edical attention)". At the end o f the 1988
semi-final, there was a m in o r p itc h invasion. Accordingly, th at prohibition was em phasised in th e 1989
O peratio nal O rder by being p u t in to capital letters. T h e c o m b in atio n o f no instructions as to overcrowding a n d
a strong prohibition on opening th e gates was likely to m a k e police recognition o f crushing slow a n d th eir
response reluctant. Small w o nd er th a t th e growing pressure a n d congestion between 2.:>U pm a n d 2.59 pm
w ent unheeded o r certainly u nrem ed ied . Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

   247. “Senior officer" m eant an officer o f Inspector rank o r higher. The Inspector in charge o f the 20 officers
o n the track was M r Darling. H e stationed h im self by th e players’ tunnel, th e most central position for
superv ising his men. In evidence he said:

  “ I would only take action i f I th ou g ht crowding had got to such a stage that the fans were in danger. I‘d then
  inform ground control and I w ould expect som eone deployed to the back o f the stand."

    T h a t underlines th e inhibition against opening p e rim e te r gates. So did the evidence o f one C onstable w ho
said it had been so d ru m m e d into officers not to open th e gates that when he saw' distress in pen 4, he “debated "
w ith h im self before opening th e gate, thinking: “I f I’m wrong. I’m going to get a right bollocking for this."
Naturally, one would hope that c o m m o n sense and h u m a n ity would make some officers cut through the rules
a n d open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

   248. This is w hat happened, b u t not until officers recognised the distress and even then not immediately.
H ence, gates 3 and 4, having been o p en ed , were shut again before they were finally opened an d at first those
seeking to climb out over the fence were pushed back. T h is reaction o f the police did not go on for as long as
som e witnesses believed. They pro b ab ly m isinterpreted th e h a n d m ovem ents from M r G reenw ood and others
aim e d at persuading fans to m ove b ack a n d relieve th e p ressure as a ttem pts to stop those clim bing out at the
front.

  249. Nevertheless, there was a p eriod durin g which th e failure to recognise the problem an d the inhibition
against tackling it caused vital tim e to be lost.
                                                           C H A P T E R 14

                                             T H E R E S P O N S E O F T H E P O L IC E

     T h e Officers in Command
         250. Even when realisation o f the problem cam e to officers on th e track, it was som e minutes before it
     reached the control room . W hen spectators first appeared on the track, th e im m ed iate assum ption in the
     co n tro l room was th a t a pitch invasion was th reaten ed . This was unlikely at the beginning o f a match. It
     b e c a m e still less likely w hen those on th e track m a d e no move tow ard s’the pitch. M r M otson, the BBC
     com m entator, recognised a n d said, well before th e m atch was stopped, th at the trouble seemed to be
     overcrowding and no t m isbehaviour. Still, th e a ssum ption to the contrary persisted in the control room. U ntil
     M r M u rray radioed for a fleet o f am bulances, a bo u t 3.06 pm , M r Duckenfield continued to treat the incident
     as a th reat to the pitch a n d to public order. T he message calling up all available officers m entioned a pitch
     invasion. O peration S u pp o rt was initiated an d dog handlers were requested.
         251. U ntil C h iefS u p erin ten d en t N esbit arrived, there was no effective leadership either from control o r on
     th e pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. N o orders were given for officers to en ter the tunnel and relieve
     pressure, Some officers d id this on th eir own initiative, Apart from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no
     a tte m p t was m ade to clear a n d m ark o f t a casualty area where first-aid could be given w ithout hindrance by
     fans a n d photographers m illing about between the bodies. T here was no co-ordination o f the early provision o f
     first-aid o r o f stretcher parties o r o f the rescue effort through gates 3 a n d 4. N o request for help was broadcast to
     d o c to rs an d nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was to o late. Probably, there was little that could
     have been achieved in m ost cases however soon doctors had been su m m on ed , but there were marginal cases
     w here earlier attention m ight have m ade a difference.
*     252. T h e plight o f those behind the fencing an d th e existence o f injuries were known to officers at the scene
    fro m 3 p m . But the M ajo r D isaster Plan was not started until 3.06 p m at earliest when the am bulance service
    was called. No request for cutting gear o r for the fire brigade was m ad e until 3.13 p.m . Again, it is unlikely that
    these services could have saved lives if they had been called prom ptly, bu t it is possible.
    Police on the Pitch
        253. Despite the initial lack o f leadership, m any officers did all they hum anly could to rescue and revive the
    victim s. Many supporters w ho gave evidence paid trib u te to these efforts. It is also fair to say that the n u m b er
    o f officers who could at first be usefully involved at th e two open gates was necessarily limited.
        254. C h ie f Superintendent N esbit's action in deploying a line o f officers across the m iddle o f the pitch has
    alread y been m entioned. I can well u n d erstan d th e resentm ent it caused. However, the police assertion that a
    ru sh by som e fans tow ards th e Kop end raised fears o f conflict are well borne out by th e video tape. In my
    ju d g e m e n t, C hief S uperin ten d ent Nesbit was well justified in using som e o f th e m any officers called up
    p u rsu a n t to O peration Support to prevent possible violence. To have had open fighting in a ground where
    so m e 90 spectators already lay dead would have been an unthinkable an d obscene development.
    F ans on th e Pitch
       255. M any fans w ho escaped o n to the pitch alive were in a state o f collapse o r close to it. Most o f those w ho
    re ta in e d their strength strove magnificently to assist th e victims. T hey helped pull them clear, they helped with
    first-aid; they helped carry the improvised stretchers.
       256. There were fans, however, who were d istraught, angry, dru n k , o r all three. T h eir conduct in abusing,
    assaultin g and spitting at th e police was disgraceful, th e m ore so since earlier police failures had little to do
    w ith th ose officers now doing th eir best for th e injured. In ad d itio n , there were abuse and assaults on
    a m b u la n c e men an d firem en in th e course o f th e ir rescue work. T h is was probably because their sim ilar
    un ifo rm s caused them to be m istaken for police. However, although th e abuse was widespread, the num ber o f
    assaults an d spittings was on the evidence com paratively small. In deploring them , one must recognise the
    u n iq u ely horrifying experience which those responsible had ju st suffered and were still suffering.
    False Reports
              ®5forc        iHQuiry began, there were stories reported in th e press, an d said to have em anated from
    police officers present at th e m atch, o f “ m ass drun k enn ess". It was said that drunken fans urinated on the
    police while they were pulling the dead and injured o ut. th at others had even urinated on the bodies o f the dead
    a n d stolen their belongings. N ot a single witness was called before th e Inquiry to support any o f those
    allegations although every op po rtun ity w as afforded for any o f th e represented parties to have any witness
         • u T r , the> w‘s*lc<^- As soo7 as the allegations I have m en tio n ed were m ade in the press, M r Peter
       right. C h ie f Constable o f South \o rk sh ire . m ade a dignified statem ent dissociating h im self from such grave
    a n d em otive calumnies. T hose w ho m ade them , an d those who dissem inated them , would have done better to
    hold th e ir peace.
                                          PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                                       C H A P T E R 16

                                           B R IE F S U M M A R Y O F C A U S E S

   265. T he im m ediate cause o f th e gross o v e r c r o w d i n g an d hence the d isaster was th e failure, when gate C W2 s
o p en ed , to cut o ff access to th e central pens w hich were already o v e n uii.

  266. They were already overfull because no safe m ax im u m capacities had been laid down, no a ttem p t was
m a d e to control entry to individual pens num erically an d th ere was no effective visual monitoring o f crowd
density.

   267. W hen the influx from gate C entered pen 3. th e layout o f th e b arriers th ere afforded less protection
th a n it should and a b arrier collapsed. Again, th e lack o f vigilant m on ito rin g caused a sluggish reaction and
response when the crush occurred. The small size an d n u m b e r o f gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So.
in th e initial stages, did lack o f leadership.

   268. T he need to open gate C was d u e to dangerous congestion at th e turnstiles. T h a t occurred because, as
bo th Club an d police should have realised, th e turnstile area could not easily cope with the large num bers
d em an ded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy perio d . T h e O p eratio nal O rd e r and police tactics on
th e day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival o f large n u m b ers should that occur in a short
period. That it might so occur was foreseeable and it d id. T h e presence o f an unruly minority who had drun k
to o m uch aggravated th e problem . So d id th e C lub’s confused a n d in ad eq u ate signs an d ticketing.




                                                               47
                                                         C H A P T E R 17

                                            T H E FA s C H O IC E O F G R O U N D

      269. T he FA were s.ronely criticised by th e Football Supporters' Association a n d o th ers for having
  im p o sed the Hillsborough venue on Liverpool for a second year running. T he L iverpool su pp o rters had to
  travel m uch further to Sheffield th an th e ir N o ttin g h a m rivals. T he police required th a t if th e m atc h was to be at
  H illsborough at all, Liverpool would have to have th e west and north side a c c om m o datio n . T h e disadvantages
  o f t h a t a n d the disparate num bers o f h o m e su p p o rters o f the two clubs have already been set o u t. Liverpool had
  h a d to knuckle under to the arrangem ent in 1988. T hey resented having it imposed in 1989. To hold the m atch
  at O ld TrafTord would have been a perfectly good an d acceptable alternative. Indeed, th e FA n o m in a te d Old
  T rafio rd as the venue forthe replay should th e re be a draw at Hillsborough.

      270. M r Kelly, the FVs C hief Executive, sought to give reasons for preferring H illsborough, b u t the only one
  w hich seemed to have any validity was th a t th e 1988 m atch had been considered a successfully m anaged event.
  H e a d m itte d that a telephone call from th e C h ie f Executive o f the Liverpool C lub p ro testin g an d putting
  L iv erp oo l’s case had not been m en tio n ed to th e FA com m ittee which finally d ecid ed th e venue. M r Kelly
  fr a n k h conceded that th erew asan elem ent o fu n fa im e s s ” to Liverpool in choosing H illsborough for a second
  tim e. I th in k the decision was ill-considered. N o dou b t in future the FA will be m ore sensitive a n d responsive
  to reasonable represen;a:ions.

    2 7 1. However, it was not suggested th a t th e choice o f venue was causative o f this disaster. T h e only basis on
  w hich th a t could be said would be that, because o f its layout, the Leppings Lane en d w as incapable o f being
• successfully policed for this semi-final. I d o n o t believe th at to be so.




                                                               48
                                                   C H A P T E R 18

                                                      P O L IC E

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. There was m uch bitterness am ongst L iverpool supporters that the> had to make do again for the
second year with the Leppings Lane end. But. cogent as th e ir com plaints w ere. they am ounted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. G iven H illsborough as the venue. I th in k th e police were right to
allocate the sections o f th e ground as they d id . T h e directio n o f arrival and ;he need for segregation m ade it
sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangem ents w ould have m ad e for confusion. As w ith choice o f venue. I do
not consider choice o f ends was causative o f th e disaster. H a d it been reversed, th e disaster could well have
occurred in a sim ilar m a n n e r but to N ottingham supporters.

Police Planning
   273. The O perational O rd er for 1989 left m u ch unsaid. A part from the lack o f any provision for late o r
congested arrivals, o r any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a n u m b e r o f
o th e r omissions. For example, there was no specific d e p loy m ent o f officer? :o m an th e perim eter gates. T he
O rd e r did not detail th e duties o f the m ounted officers deployed at the Lep?:ngs Lane entrance, who included
Liverpool officers to assist in m arshalling th e ir own fans. T he duties of Superintendents (especially M r
Greenw ood and M r M arshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring m obile (Tango) patrols to assist th e em ergency services was o m itte d from the text.

   274. The 19S8 O rd e r was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the n u m b e r o f officers deployed in
shopping areas an d to em phasise in capital letters th e e m bargo on fans havir.g access to the pitch. Satisfaction
w ith the 1988 event led to com placency. T h a t j o m e thoug h t th e pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
closed o ff on that occasion did not tigure iiTorInfluence tn e plan lor l vsy.

   275. M r D uckenfield was prom oted and pu t in charge o f F D ivision only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress u n d e r M r M ole w ho had been in c o m - a n d both in 19S7 and in 1988. It
m ight have been wiser to have left M r Mole in charge o f this operation. O n the other hand, it is quite
u nderstandable that M r Duckenfield should have been expected to take com m and o f events in his D ivision
from the date o f his prom otion. In view o f his lack o f experience at Hillsborough a n d o f a semi-final m atch,
however, it was im perative that he be fully briefed a n d th a t he should also b rief himself.

   276. He was not inform ed o f the crushing incident in 1 9 8 1 nor did he rcake inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did no t know the arrangem ent as between C lub and police for m onitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before ap p ro v in g the Operational O rder. Although he attended a
m atch on 2 April, th ere was only a small crowd p resent a n d he left control o f the gam e to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
   277. O ne o f the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enorm ous expenditure o f
money, tim e and effort in employing large n u m b e rs o f police all over the country to guard against the sort o f
d iso rd er and m isbehaviour which have becom e e n dem ic. Police m anagem ent o f a game o f football has become
a m ilitary operation. T he problem s faced an d th e responses received must be disheartening and m ay have
tended to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.

   278. It is fair to state that over m any years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problem s sensitively a n d successfully at a large nu m b er o f football games
including m ajor m atches, during strikes in the coal in d u stry a n d the steel industry, and in other contexts.
U nfortunately, their policing o n 15 A pril broke dow n in th e wavs already described and, although there were
otfler causes, the m ain reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control

   279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at th e Inquiry. Sadly I m ust report that for the most
part the quality o f th e ir evidence was in inverse p ro p o rtio n to th eir rank. There were many young Constables
w ho as witnesses were alert, intelligent a n d open. O n th e day, they an d m an \ others strove heroically in ghastly
circum stances aggravated b> hostility to rescue a n d su cco ur victim s. The> inspired confidence and hope.

  280. By contrast, w ith some notable exceptions, the se n io r officers in com m and were defensive an d evasive
witnesses. T heir feelings o f grief and sorrow were o b v io u s a n d genuine. N o doubt those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had o ccurred under their m anagem ent. But, neither their
handling o f p ro b lems on the da> nor th eir account o f it in evidence showed ihe q u alities o f leadership to be
expecied of their rank.       .....              .............
   2 8 1. M r Duckenfield leant heavily on M r M u rray 's experience. Between th em the> misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles a n d d id little about it u n til they received M r M arsh all’s request to open the gate. They did not.
for example, check the turnstile figures available from C lu b control o r check w ith"TSngo"units as to the
num bers still to com e. They d id not a lert M r G reenw ood to the situ atio n at the fringe o f his area o f com m and.
T hey gave no instructions as to the m an a g e m e n t o f the crow d at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-otl.           .............................        -...... - ......           .....................

  282. W hen M r M arshall s request cam e. M r D uckenfield’s c a p acity to take decisions and give orders
Seemed to collapse. H aving sanctioned, at last, the op en in g o f t h e ' gates, he failed to piv<» n<»r<mary
consequential orders o r to exert any control w hen the d isaster occurred. H e m isinterpreted the emergence o f
fans from pens 3 a n d 4. W hen he was unsurtTrfflFproEIcfiTTfnTTenTothers down to “assess the situation"
rather than descend to see for himself. H e gave no inform ation to th e crow d.

   283. Most surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly a n d others to th in k th at there had been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was n o t only untruthful. It set o ff a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence a n d distress. It revived against football fans, a n d especially those from
Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationw ide b u t from Europe too. I can
only assum e that M r D uckenfield’s lack o f c a n d o u r on this occasion was out o f character. He said his reason for
not telling the truth w as that if the crowd becam e aware o f it there m ight be a very hostile reaction a n d this
might im pede rescue work. He d id not wish to divulge what h a d h ap p en ed until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell M r Kelly th e truth d id not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant C h ie f Constable Jackson was at hand. M r D uckenfield d id not disclose the truth to him
until m uch later.

  284. The likeliest explanation o f M r D uckenfield’s co n d u ct is th at he sim ply could not face the enorm ity o f
the decision to open th e gates an d all th at flowed therefrom . T h a t w ould explain w hat he said to M r Kelly, what
he did not say to M r Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd a n d his failure to take effective control o f the
disaster situation. H e froze.

T he Police Case at the Inquiry
        J t is a m atter o f regret that at the hearing, a n d in th e ir subm issions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in w h at occurred. M r uu ck en field , under pressure o f
cross-examination, apologised tor oiam ing tne Liverpool fans io r causing the deaths. But. that apart, the police
case was to blame the fans for being late a n d d ru n k , a n d to blam e the C lub for failing to m onitor the pens. It was
argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an u nrealistic ap p ro ach gives cause for an x iety as to w hether lessons have been learnt. It would
have been more seemly an d encouraging for the future if responsibility h ad been faced.                         .
                                                        C H A P T E R 20

                                           T H E C L U B A N D DR EASTW OOD

     289. It should be recorded th a t in general the Club has over the years a d o p te d a responsible and
 conscientious approach to its responsibilities. It retained the services o f D r Eastw ood as consultant engineer
 a n d abid ed b\ his advice. For his part, D r Eastwood is skilled an d experienced in this field, as alreadv
 tu            ?       sought 1 have no d o u b t to act efficiently an d professionally in his a dv ice a n d practical work.
 T h e C lub also retained M r Lock w ho had a c q u ired great experience and knowledge o f Hillsborough during his
 p o n c e service. A num ber o f witnesses described Hillsborough as a very good g ro u nd , “on e o f the best in the
 S?u " t,ry • T he P °llCe a®reed »*!« relations betw een them an d the Club were good. O v e r the last four vears. the
 C lu b had spent some £ 1'/■. million on g ro u nd im provem ents.

     290. Nevertheless, there are a n u m b e r o f respects in which failure by the G u b c o n trib u te d to this disaster.
 The> were responsible as occupiers a n d invitors for the lay-out an d structure o f the g ro un d . T he Leppings Lane
 e n d was unsatisfactory a n d ill-suited to a d m it the num bers invited, for reasons already spelt out. The Club was
 aw are o f these problems a n d discussed solving them in various ways between 19 S 1"and 1986. In the result,
 there rem ained the same n u m b e r o f turnstiles, a n d the same problems outside a n d inside them. The plan for
 th is semi-final, involving as it d id the loss o f 12 turnstiles for the north stand a n d large num bers to be fed in
 fro m Leppings Lane was one agreed betw een the Club an d the police. T he C lub knew best what rate o f
 sw am ped”                 “ COuld m anage a n d ought 10 have alerted the P °lice 10 the risk* o f the turnstiles being

   2 91. T h e alterations inside the turnstiles a n d on the terraces clearly affected capacity, but no specific
allowance was m ade for them . In th at respect, b o th D r Eastwood and the C lub sh o uld have taken a more
positive approach. Either a scheme such as one o f those Dr Eastwood put forward should have been adopted
g i\ mg m ore turnstiles a n d total separation o f areas o r at the very least the capacity o f th e new pens a n d o f the
terraces as a whole should have been treated m o re cautiously. The police view in 1981 th a t 10.100 was too high
a figure was known to the Club (although D r Eastwood says not to him). Yet. despite th a t a n d the sub-division
in to pens, the figure rem ained.

   2 9 2 . ^ 1 ^ the police h a d a ssu m ed responsibility for m onitoring the pens, the C lu b had a dutv to its
           S     n IU           J    J0Ugh] 10 have alerted the p ° lice 10 the grossly uneven d istrib u tio n o f fans on the
               r       ° u Cr!. r " i L       e closed circuit television and the c om pu ter totaliser. Liaison between
o n S j r l !!° «ce °,u A U             10    ? the Iatter 10 the num ber Of Liverpool su p p o rte rs still to come. The
o n u s here was on the G u b as well as on the police.

n r2i 3; , T heJ em? val o f ^ f r i e r 144 was the responsibility o f the G u b although it clearly acted on the advice o f
D r E astw ood an d the Advisory G r o u p w hich in this instance was misguided.

re m e d ie d 1^ " 156 ^   breaches o f the G reen G u id e were m atters which the Club sh ou ld have appreciated and


th 3 ! ^ QLA Sll>‘ alread>' >n d >cated, the p o o r signposting on the concourse tended to p ro d u ce under-filling o f
                 and 0' er-r>lling o f pens 3 a n d 4. Poo r signposting ou:side the turnstiles a n d the unhelpful format
or the tickets also led to confusion aggravating the build-up in the turnstile area.




                                                            52
                           PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS

                                          C H A P T E R 23 - IN T R O D U C T IO N

Lim ited Objectives
    304.. It is im p o rtan t to stress the lim ited objectives o f the interim recom m endations I can make in this
R ep o rt. My purpose is to propose instant m easures capabie o f being im plem ented forthwith a n d w here
possible before the co m m en cem en t o f the 1989/1990 season. They are designed to prevent overcrowding a n d
cru sh in g on terraces in the sh o rt term a n d to improve safet> procedures. They do not a n d cannot m eet all the
p ro b le m s or address all the issues o f post-Hillsborough football. W ider issues such as membership schem es,
id e n tity cards, all-seater stadia, super-stadia a n d long term recom m endations fall to be considered in m y F inal
R e p o rt. So do a n u m b e r o f o th e r specific m atters such as a com prehensive review o f the Green G u id e , the
p ro b le m o f excessive pre-m atch drinking, fans w ithout tickets a n d ticket touts. I m ention these m atters lest it
b e th ou g ht I have decided no reco m m en d atio n s need be m ade concerning them . I have not. But before
d e c id in g what if any reco m m en d ation s to m ak e a b ou t these a n d o th er m atters, m ore evidence a n d stu d y is
req u ired .

   305. Accordingly, th e m ain thrust o f these interim recc rr.mendations. as a holding exercise, is to reduce
n u m b e rs on the terraces, to increase vigilance a n d to ach.eve a p roper balance in crowd control betw een
p rev en tio n o f diso rd er a n d m ain ten an ce o f safety.


P e rim e te r Fences
   3 06. It would be im practical a n d unwise to recom m end works o f construction o r radical structural changes
now, before com pleting the extensive study a n d consultation which will form stage two o f this Inquiry. H asty
in te rim recom m endations o f th at kind m ight well prove to be ill-judged after further study an d require to be
ch a n g e d in a m a tter o f m onths.

   307. In particular. I do no t at this stage m ake any recom m endation as to removing perimeter fences or
replacing them w ith structures o f different design. Understandably. there was a wave o f popular feeling against
such fences in the im m ed iate afterm ath o f Hillsborough. The horrifying spectacle o f people being crushed
ag ain st the fencing focussed blam e for the disaster on the fences themselves. There were pleas to d ism an tle
th e m a n d em otive references to the fans being treated like "caged an im als” . Some clubs removed their fencing
straightaway. It was therefore very tem pting to consider at an early stage m aking a recommendation th a t the
fences should be removed. I confess to being so tem pted.

   3 08. Regrettably, only a m o n th after Hillsborough, there were incidents which showed that violence a n d
hooliganism are still liable to erupt at football grounds. On 13 M ay at Selhurst Park, Birmingham C ity
su p p o rte rs invaded the pitch a n d fought w ith supporters o f the hom e club, Crystal Palace. Five police officers
a n d 16 supporters were injured a n d required treatm en t at a local hospital. On the same day at a match bet ween
B ristol C ity and Sheffield U n ite d , spectators spilt o n to the pitch a n d there was fighting on the terraces. At the
C u p Final between Liverpool a n d Everton on 20 May, there was a pitch invasion, albeit a com paratively
b en ig n one.

  3 0 9 . Even the Football Supporters* A ssociation (FSA) felt it necessary to say in their final subm ission,

        “ With some reservations, the FSA accept that perim eter fences are necessary for crowd control."

   3 10. Bearing in m in d those m atters, a n d th e need to consider fu rth er expert evidence. 1have decided th a t it
w ould b e unw ise a n d p rem atu re for me to m ak e any recom m endations now either to remove or to preserv e o r
to a lte r the structure o f perim eter fences. I shall m ake recom m endations about them in my Final Report.

    311. For the present. 1 w ould em phasise th a t, although the fencing prevented escape, the real cause o f the
H illsborough disaster was overcrowding a n d it is against that danger that my interim recom m endations are
p rim a rily directed. W hilst declining to reco m m en d the removal o f the fences. I*do consider that the gates to the
p itc h should be kept open whilst the terraces are occupied. T his will have. I hope, three beneficial effects.
O bviously, an open gate is a m ore ready escape route th an one which has to be locked. Secondly, the sight o f
o p e n gates w ill be reassuring to spectators on the terraces. Thirdly, the existence o f gaps in the fencing by
re a so n o f the open gates will con cen trate th e m in d s o f police officers o r stewards on the track to the need for
carefu l m onitoring o f ihose on the lerraces.
