                                                                                                  M I R . 15



                                                                                                                              a
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised                                        Number
                                                                               ft >oq>:7      ■




Title                                                                                               qcct^e)             f<&
(Include source and a n y document num ber i f relevant)
                                                                                              7
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No       /C .        ^                      m
                                                                                                                              Receiver
                                              f?    & /9 & 1     cl ^ L iu   C'- e tc .             hZl                       *7 “ 7
                                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                              Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                                          CTS -   !
                                                                                                                          S li^dikerS
Further action No(s)                                                                                                      IN 2 % %**
                                                                                                                          *s 1 i I
                                                                                                                          k       I rfw*s !N »
When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
,J MERVYN JONES MSc                                          MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 Watery Street
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M             Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                          Telephone: 0742 726105
                                                          Fax: 074 2 726247
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                       KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway                        \eowM®       Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                            Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                        Telephone: 051-449 3871
Fax: 021-233 3256                                            Fax: 051 -4 49 2976
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                           JMJ/VSC
                                                             Our Ref:
Telephone: 021 -3 59 3332
Fax: 021-359 6735
                                                             Date:          29 August 1989




            Essex




            Dear

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

            I refer to your letter of 20 August in which you         made comments in
            respect of Hillsborough and Police training.

            I have noted the contents of your letter which      I have passed on        to the
            Secretary of the Inquiry at the Home Office.

            May I thank you for taking the trouble to write.

            Yours sincerely




            Assistant Chief Constable
            (Hillsborough Inquiry

                                                                            g -j




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T
Investigating Offr,
Hi ].Isborough Inquiry                                     Essex
W, Hid» Police H.Q.
                                        20 August   1989

       Dear Sir
                 I am writing to you as I have recently heard that
criminal proceedings  may be brought against some of the officers on
duty at Hillsborough  on the fateful day.

       I am not a fan of the police, but I recognise that they have a
near impossible Job to do on occasions? however voluntarily they may
have entered the profession.

         The Sheffield Police have been present at major sporting events
at Hillsborough for as long as I can remember, being a native of the
city, and they have done a sterling Job, but in the present climate of
appeasement to the football fan, who has taken a lot of stick for
violent behavior in recent years, the police have been taking a lower
profile than might otherwise have been the case, and at many other
sporting venues than Sheffield,, I can remember an occasion in the
recent past, although 1' cannot recall the date, or the particular
occasion, except that it was football match at Hillsborough involving
particularly partisan fans similar to the Liverpool fans reputation,
when the police presence was particularly effective in keeping fans
without tickets well away from any of the? approach roads, let alone
turnstiles, (including escorting some back to the railway station, and
laying on special trains to return them whence they came).
Unfortunately the police action on this ocasion caused disruption to
the local population who had no interest in the football, by
increasing the amount of road traffic on the neighbouring major
thoroughfares) and was bra.nt.1ed by some as excessive "big brother"
tacti cs.

        My first reaction after hearing of the disaster was that the
situation was set up deliberately to cause trouble, although the
outcome was not intended to be as serious as that which ensued, a view
which was hardened if not confirmed by learning that the fans had
arrived late, ostensibly because of traffic holdups on the H62. But
has anyone asked at what time those? late arriving fans left Liverpool,
or wether the coach operators had performed the elementary task of
checking on anticipated traffic conditions before they left, (the M&2
road works had been in progress for a considerable period prior to the
semi final). It has been reported that the Liverpool Supporters Club
had only allowed ticket holding fans access to their travel
arrangements, (and presumably made arrangements to get them there with
time to spare), so what about the activities of the fans themselves,
did those who made their own travel arrangements give themselves
sufficient time to arrive before the start of the game, or the fans on
official coaches who left the immediate area of the ground after
dismounting from the coaches with the intention of returning at a more
conveni en t t im e „
            My own experiences in attending football matches is that the
vast majority of the fans are inside the ground before kick-off, and
that once the game has started, marshal Iing teams tend to relax. If a
major influx of people suddenly descends on them at this time, then
a n y o n e in v o .1.v e d w i t h m a r s h a 1 ling, in a n y u.iay, is g o in g t o h a v e
difficulty controlling the situation, an awareness of which can lead
to advantage being taken of the situation by anyone who wants to
create trouble,, I am also aware that the authorities are informed of
approaching traffic, to enable them to take the necessary action to
cope when it arrives, if this information was not available, did the
late arriving fans take a less well defined approach route, the M62/H1
route may be the most convenient, but it is also the longest, and
there are several at:cess roads from the Ml in Sheffield which are
convenient for Hillsborough,, There are also three convenient routes
across the Pennines, from Manchester, or Chester, some more arduous
than others, but I have never found them to take a longer journey time
than the M62» There is also an alternative route leaving the M62 north
of Huddersfield, and then approaching Hillsborough from the north, by
several interlinking routes, thereby creating doubt as to the? final
destination of anyone travelling on them,

        I also wonder what the reaction of the Liverpool population
would have been, or the media coverage of the after events, if the
fans who were killed had been Nottingham supporters. So could the very
publicly declared sorrow be an act of atonement to cover delinquent
behavior, a not unknown reaction, however cynical it may be to voice,,

        I also feel that the activities of all other involved parties
should be borne? in mind, people such as the coach operators, who,
knowing that the fans probably d i d n ’t have tickets, still brought
them, because it was profitable to do so, and not their responsibility
what happened once the fans were in Sheffield,, Maybe the coach
operators can be? made to be more responsible in future.

        It takes a long time to train a police officer, as it does any
skilled individual, and the learning process goes on beyond the formal
stage, as experience often hammers points home? in a way that desk
learning cannot, I would not like? to think that the sort of
experienced officers on duty on that day, having learned an even
greater lesson during those fateful events, were going to be
discharged, simply to salve the consciences of thee masses,
particularly in view of some of the doubts which I feel can be
attributed to the activities of other members of the community. If
discipline is felt to be required, I hope that common sense will be?
used in dispensing it.


                                Y ou rs fait h f u 11y ,
