  FOR COURT USE ONLY
                             a
 Regina -v-..................

 E x h ib it No...................................................
 S i g n e d ..........................................................
 Ju
  * stice o f the Peace/Clerk to

(M agistrate’s Court)
D a t e ...............................................................   }

 FOR POLICE USE ONLY
— —



Police Force.                                                         j
D iv i s io n .......... . ...........................................|
D escrip tion o f Item
      .O.VA^....                                ......................
...
      iu!). . . . . . . . . .          * . . . . . . . .    i. . . .


Identifying Mark ...

LAB. REF.


            517/IC
                                 o
                    C .J .A ct VMM, s 9 ;
                M . C . A c t 1 9 8 0 , s 102;
               M.C. R u l e s 1981, r 70.
        I identify the exhibit described
      o v e r l e a f a s t h a t r e f e r r e d to in t h e
     s t a t e m e n t m a d e a n d s i g n e d by me.
                   S i g n a t u r e _________I       D ate

•                                                 w   -A/H




Dd 8 0 7 9 2 3 4    1 1 / 5 3 7714
r
to




P    r; v5
                 rJ i t ^




Lancashire                                                26 April 1989




pt pt m m    P isasg R
I am writing this account out of frustration at the needless loss of life
and in the hope that my observations and opinions will, in some small way,
assist in your enquiry and help prevent any future occurance. I have
resisted writing until now in the hope that I will pen more objective views
but I readily acknowledge the emotiveness of the subject.

No apologies are made for repeating what you will have heard many times by
now and that is the senseless allocation of tickets by the Police. This
distribution should have taken into consideration the glaringly obvious
differential in average attendance plus the well known fact in footballing
circles of the fanaticism of the Liverpool fan and the Clitics ticketless
travelling support.

I can possibly see the feeble logic of the Police in wanting to place the
bulk of the supporters in the end of the ground to which they approach.
However, having worked and commuted to Sheffield for 12 months. I , like
many other people, realise that one of the quickest and most pleasant
routes is via the Snake Pass which produces quite the reverse of what the
Police intended.

This is the route that I and countless others took. Together with my 12
year old son I parked my car at approximately 1.45 p.m. and, along with
other Liverpool supporters, approached the ground from the south side where
mainly Forest supporters were congregated. Having no idea where the North
Stand was situated I circled the ground anti-clockwise until I found the
South Stand and then proceded further round only to encounter Police
manning barriers obviously to segregate the fans. I was then about 50
yards from my destination but was turned back and had to retrace my steps
then walk past the back of what I later discovered was the North Stand and
then tramp about one mile past the ground passing side roads blocked by
barriers manned by Police preventing access to our entrance. From
initially reaching the ground at 2 p.m. and being 50 yards from my
turnstile I finally reached the total confusion which was doubling for a
queue at 2.35 p.m. Prior to reaching Leppings Lane I saw many confused
Liverpool fans going the wrong way and whilst the police were extremely


Continued
                                    si
2



curteous the lack of direction and organisation was becoming apparent. On
actually reaching the ground the situation was just chaotic and the Police
presence was conspicuous by its absence. In 40 years supporting at various
grounds I have never witnessed a scene of such disorder. People were
milling about every where as more people streamed towards the ground. I
remeirber seeing one mounted policeman and one or two others. I am sure
others were there, but I was struck by their lack of nunbers, by being
allowed to push in through the main gates without any ticket check or
funnelling and by the haphazard attempt at queuing at I think, about 4
gates at entrance A. Cne officer was strategically positioned in between
them/ utterly nonplussed.

Holding two, £14.00 stand tickets we shambled and jostled along in this
throng and all my instincts told me a crush was about to ensue and it
surely did. No doubt started by some mindless idiots at the back, but
within minutes we were a heaving mass. Despite trying to protect my son he
was forced from my grasp, had difficulty breathing and received injuries to
his neck. But for the kindness of two fans ahead, who forced him through
the turnstile I wonder whether he too would have ended up a statistic.

On reaching him inside the ground I found a boy suffering physical hurt,
severely distressed and in a state of shock. Having witnessed the scenes
outside and seemingly not being in the worst place i.e. entrance B, I
understand the Police decision to alleviate the pressure and open that gate
but, that such a decision had to be taken was nothing short of disgraceful.

I was not sufficiently well positioned to quote authoritively on many of
the events inside the stadium as we were seated between the halfway line
and penalty area at the Kop end. When events began I thought it a minor
pitch intrusion, but it was soon obvious that it was something more serious
as several of the people the Police tried to eject from the pitch were in a
state of collapse. Incredibly a massive new Police presence then appeared
from the corner of the Kop and North Stand and positioned itself shoulder
to shoulder in front of us in the North Stand, presumably in the belief
that I, as a 48 year old and my 12 year old son were about to scale 20 rows
of seats, launch ourselves across the pitch and hurdle a 12 foot high
railing withough thought to our lower abdomen and set about 20,000 Forest
supporters who, like the Police, had not yet understood the severity of the
situation. To then witness of scores of Liverpool fans ferrying the
injured, dead and dying in constant streams across the pitch while the
majority of police stood aimlessly by frantically searching for the odd
hooligan wasy to say the least, a painful anf frustrating sight. Let ire
add that when the police either received some repsonsible direction or
indeed, used their initiative/ they performed in a commendable and caring
way. I cannot speak too highly about some of their individual acts to save
lives. It was as if they suddenly realised we were all human beings
together, without a hooligan in sight, and we all needed each other.




Continued
3



Both my son and myself have had strange reactions after Hillsborough,
mainly the usual guilt in my case at both having been spared and being so
bloody useless on the day.

No doubt there were drunks in the crcwd as there are each game but I did
not see any, nor did I witness any misbehaviour by the supporters.

I am at pains to point out that I am no Police "basher", in fact quite the
contrary. I have every admiration for the difficult and dangerous job they
perform. Nor, on this occasion, do I apportion any individual blame to the
few curteous hapless officers I encountered. But somebody, somebody in the
higher echelons of the force definitely got it oh so tragically wrong.




Original to;-                              Copies toj-

Geoffrey Dear                              Radio Merseyside
Chief Constable                            Liverpool Echo
West Midlands Police                       Liverpool Supporters Club
Lloyds House                               The Daily Hail's Chief Arsehole
Colmore Circus                                        - George Gale
Queensway
Birmingham.
