SALLIE ELAINE PRIESTLEY



Detective Constable 3211



Headquarters Drug Squad



On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I commenced duty in full uniform at Police

Headquarters, Sheffield.     I then attended at the gymnasium at West Bar

Police Station for a briefing at 9.00 a.m.

After the briefing I walked to the Midland Station, Sheffield, to take

up duties as part of West Bar serial number 16.      On arrival at the

station I was engaged in the control of football fans alighting from the

trains.     Both Liverpool and Nottingham Forest fans arrived at the

station and were segregated and directed through separate exists and on

to P.S.Vs, which were waiting to take the fans to the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground.

At approximately 2.30 p.m., together with the rest of my serial, I

travelled to the ground on a P.S.V.
                            \       o \n V \            vPv
At approximately 2.'15 p.m. the -bus I was -on was-driven-dowR Leppings

Lane.     A-t-this-t-ime I noticed there appeared to-be a large crowd of fans

still outside the ground, and a large number of people walking from the

direction of Halifax Road along Leppings Lane towards that entrance.

On our arrival at Penistone Road, I alighted from the bus and walked

into the ground via the main police access road.

Together with the other officers from my serial I went to the gymnasium

where we were to report for standby duties.      Almost as soon as we had

arrived, our serial was instructed to go to the perimeter track in front

of the West Stand.     I understood that there was a problem with the crowd
                                     -   2   -




but I did not know exactly what.

I walked onto the track in front    of the WestStand.       Inoticed that the

football players were on the pitch, although I cannot say whether the

game had in fact started, or if it was a pre-match warm up.            At this

time I was not aware of anything    untoward.     I continued   round the track

until I got to the centre of the West Stand. That         was when I noticed

that the people directly behind the fencing were screaming and shouting

at us to do something as they were getting crushed.

T was spat at by a number of fans.       I saw that the people at the fencing

were being crushed up to the fence and a young girl aged about 15 years

old was extremely squashed.    She was crying and obviously distressed.           I

bent down to her and told her not to panic it would be alright.            The

people round her were trying in vain to push back away from her.            She

 was in pen no. 3 area to my left of the railing, which divides pens 3

 and 'I.   There was no way of getting to this girl.      I initially

 to the crowd to push backwards, but I realised immediately that this was of

 no use.    A youth aged about 16 years old climbed up onto the fencing.          I ctwteei

 get onto a metal bar in front of the fence and helped him over.           Once on

 the track I told him to stay there and he did, as requested.           Other fans

 followed suit and I helped them climb over the fence and onto the

 perimeter track.    I was then joined by a number of male officers who

 also started pulling people over the fencing.        As they were taller and

 stranger than I, I moved out of the way, thinking they would get more

 people out quicker and relieve the crush around the girl.         There was

 nothing more I could do at this point so I went to gate number K, which

 had been opened.
 Some fans were climbing over the railings which divided pens 3 and *.            I

 was assisting them out of the gate.         It was at this point that one

                                                       ~S>C ^2-W   .
supporter who was standing at the gate in pen no. 'I'ref used to move out

of the way.   He became abusive and continually swore at me, saying he d

got out of the crush and was watching the match.     I realised the game

was still being played.     I had to forcibly move this man out of the way

onto the perimeter track.    I assisted other fans out of this gate.

People in pen 3 were hindered by the centre railings and had difficulty

climbing over them in order to reach gate '1.

I saw that some of the perimeter fence had been pulled down, people were

being carried out and laid on the pitch.     As other officers had joined

me at the gate I left in order to see if I could help anyone else.

I made sure that everyone laid on the pitch had someone helping them or

rendering first aid.

I assisted a fireman who was giving the kiss of life to a heavily built

man aged approximately 25 years, and- who was wearing black track suit

bottoms and trainers.  We were subsequently joined by a doctor who took
                                                 c o r \o e u e o
over until an ambulance arrived and the man was             away in that.

At one point a couple of fans on the pitch were becoming aggressive

toward fans in the North Stand.     I spoke to them, eventually calmed them

down and they left the pitch area.     Police Officers and fans carried

other injured people off the pitch to the gymnasium.     I went to the

gymnasium and in that area saw a number of ambulances.     I helped clear a

route for them.   I subsequently went, as directed, onto the North Stand

for a debrief, following which I attended at the casualty bureau at

Ecclesfield Training Centre and carried out duties there.


                                                \ C_^U\
