* i . r
" jS fttiif Document Fora                  Date and time raised
                                                                  to-


   Title_
                  U " ic.      s»:     4#..
   (Include source and any document number if relevant)


   Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No



   Document registered/indexed as indicated
   lifs> of   actions raised

   Statement readers    instructions



   Indexed as indicated
   No(s) of   actions raised

      mined - further action to be taken                                                                     0/M 1   S10



                                                                                                      ■y*i

   Further action no(s)

   W hen satisfied ill actions Taiseil Office Manager to endorse other Document Master PJumbtr Form
                                       it 'if r e U a j P d& vi*

                                       7 fh




                      SOUTH Y O R K SHI RE PO LICE


FROM; De tective Inspector Clev erl ey
                                                           DEPT: Hillsborough Enquiry
TO: Chief Su pe rin te nde nt Wain
                                                           DATE: 2 July 1990


               SUBJECT:     INTERIM REPORT 3
                            RE SULT OF E N Q U IRI ES
                            RE Q U E S T E D BY HA M M O N D S U DD ARD

Following my reports of         18 and        19     June 1990          the following      "tasks"
remained to be completed:

4            Further enquiry into the c l o s u r e of the tunnel                 in 1988

This enquiry is complete.    A summary is attached showing the result of
these enquiries, inconjunction with (8) below.

6            Obtain c o mp reh en siv e body plan

The plan preparation is in hand.       A s u mm ary is attached showing the
action taken so far, and outl ini ng furt her evidential lines which might
be available on the question of barrier 124a.

7              Further enquiry into extra radial fencing gates

This enquiry is complete.         A su mmary is attached.

8            Further enquiry re control of turn sti le entry                     in 1988

This enquiry     is complete,    and the r e su lts                are summarised with     task 4
above.

I request that a copy of this report and the attached su mmaries and
other do cuments is fo rwarded to Me ssrs Hamm ond Suddards for the
information and attention of Mr Peter Metcalf.




                    or




GEN2                                                                                       Page 1
                      DOCUMENTS




ITEM

Note to Counsel 1989 no 11

Note to Counsel 1989 no 20

Summary and appendices re video tapes 1-1, 1-2 (new version)

Co rr esp on den ce and plans from "Documents Circulated to
Parties" file, 20 June 1989

Extract from tr anscript of Coroner's Inquest: evidence of
Inspector Michael LAYTON

Album of stills from video tape MAP 7

Extract from Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor, page 18

Letter 51 from Su bm ission by SCCs SYCC to Ea stwoods 2 . S . 85

Letter 52 from Su bm ission by SCC: Eastwoods to SYCC 8.5-85

Letter 53 from Su bm iss io n by SCC: SYCC to Ea stwoods 10.5.85

Further st atement of Inspector Clive CALVERT 27.6.90

Extract from tr anscript of Taylor Enquiry: CALVERT
                                   SUMMARY

                     CLOSURE OF TUNNEL 1988 (TASK*)
                CONTROL OF TURNSTILE ENTRY 1988 (TASK 8)
                    -INVOLVEMENT BY STEWARDS OF SWFC

The remit was to enquire further into the circumstances under which the
tunnel was "cordoned off" to prevent entry to pens in the 1988 Semi -
Final.     It naturally followed that where filtering and control of
spectators on Leppings Lane turnstiles on the same occasion had been
alleged, further enquiries should also be made into that aspect.    Both
lines of enquiry were to be made sp ecifically to show what tnvolvment,
if any, there had been by the Club's stewards, and whether the
instruction to close the tunnel off had come from them as opposed to the
Police.   The results are as follows:

THE TUNNEL

This question was covered at the time of the Taylor Enquiry, and I would
refer first to the Note to Counsel no 11 made at that time (DOCUMENT 1).
Nothing has been found to alter the basic conclusions of that enquiry,
namely that officers had acted on their own initiative to close off the
tunnel at a critical time when the pens were becoming full.   There were
apparently two types of control.

We have interviewed again the officers who closed the gates.        The
instructions to do so came from police sources, not the club so far as
they knew.    No stewards were involved.   The op eration seems to have
been simple and low key, with not much more than three officers
involved, and not lasted longer than the full surge of incoming
spectators before the start of the match.

When the match began other officers who had been ovi the turnstiles were
no longer needed because the flow of spectators had diminished, they
also went to the tunnel and stood inside near the pens.    (They probably
hoped to see a little of the match from there!).       The gates were no
longer closed off at that time.       They could see that the pens were
full.   As late comers tried to get in down the tunnel to the pens, they
were turned back by those po licemen and directed to the side pens.

No evidence has been found of club involvement.

LEPPINGS LANE AND THE TURNSTILES

Again this question was cove red at the time of the Taylor Enquiry, and I
would refer first to the Note to Counsel no 20 made at the time
concerning a video tape of the 1988 match (DOCUMENT 2).

The tape recording has been scrutin is ed again with particular emphasis
on the question of a filtering cordon, and stewards' involvement.      A
more detailed summary on these points is attached (DOCUMENT 3).
It is clear that stewards controlled the service road (leading to gate
“C") by the perimeter gates.   Gate "C" itself was protected by further
barriers manned by police and oc casionally stewards.    Fans were only
allowed through onto the top of the service road when large crowds from
the right on Leppings Lane, pr evented crowds from the left, bridge
route, filtering into the crowded tu rnstile "funnel".       Fans were
directed away from gate "C".

As for a Police filtering cordon on Leppings Lane itself, the film shows
clearly that no such cordon existed.      However, a number of officers
were detailed there, on the roadside nearest to the turnstiles, and
statements from those officers make it clear that their instructions
were to check for alcoholic drinks, and make sure ticket holders only
were allowed into the turnstiles.   These were general instructions, not
an organised operation.     No doubt they did direct fans to the right
tu rnstile if approached.   The crucial factor is that the crowds were
never so ov erwhelming that those officers were swamped, and they could
always be seen by spectators.

There was no involvement by club stewards       in   police crowd   control
operations on Leppings Lane itself.

Most officers seen again have not given further reports.    Some officers
who were not seen in 1989 have been seen now, but cannot assist further.
Additional st at ements have been taken from some officers, but are
negative in respect of the involvement of the club and are not forwarded
for this reason.    They are retained on file at the incident room.




Detective Inspector
3 July 1990
T   ) o   u   m   ^   N   T   1
                         'c**-C c i U s v v i & C — c-£c m /^




1988 SEMI-FINAL - LIVERPOOL/NOTTINGHAM
THE CENTRAL TUNNEL TO TERRACES, LEPPINGS LANE



You will already have been advised verbally by Chief Inspector Bettison
that police officers appear to have exercised some direction over the
control of fans using the central tunnel giving access to the terraces at
the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Enquiries have been made of the
following officers

      PS 13^1 CRAWFORD
      PC 1278 LANG
      Ex Sergeant HIGGINS
      Inspector Raymond HOOLEY
      Inspector Raymond WALKER

Sergeant CRAWFORD was in charge of Serial 13 which had responsibility for
the West Stand in 1988. Part of that duty would include officers in the
Leppings Lane enclosure supervising the stairways to the West Stand
seating area. He recalls receiving an instruction, from whom or how he
does not recall, that there were to be no more fans allowed into the
central pens, and therefore the wooden gates at the rear of the tunnel
were to be closed, denying access. The actual task, according to him,
was undertaken by PC LANG.

PC LANG was a member of Serial 13 and was responsible for the stairway
giving access to the seating area in the West Stand, this stairway being
at the South end of the Leppings Lane enclosures. PC LANG confirms that
he received an order to close the gates at the top of the tunnel which
gave access to the central pens, he closed the right hand gate and
directed fans to the wings.

Ex S e r g e a n t HIGG INS was in ch a r g e o f S e r i a l 14. He co n f i r m s that be c a u s e
of the large nu mber of fans in pe ns 3 ana 4 he r e ce ive d an i n s t r u c t i o n ,
ag a i n there was no i n d i c a t i o n as to h o w or from where, to close the
ga te s, and th e r e a f t e r d i r e c t fans to the two outer pens.

Inspector Raymond HOOLEY was in charge of Serial 13 with responsibility
for the West Stand. This officer has norecollection of any events
relating to the tunnel gates. So far as he is concerned, they were open.

Inspector Raymond W A L K E R was in charge of Serials 14 and 15, with respon­
sibility for the Leppings Lane terracing. He has no recollection of any
actions being taken to shepherd fans to any particular part of the ground
nor any problems with fans in the tunnel. He recalls passing through the
tunnel himself on several occasions.

You will recall that Chief Superintendent M O L E was not aware of any
policy or instructions in relation to the filling of the central pens.

Superintendent MURRAY, from the control box, also has no recollection of
such action being directed.

It seems therefore that officers have acted on their own initiative to
exercise control and direction of the tunnel. They are, of course,
expected to use initiative and take iflMilependent action as circumstances
dictate, which were the very matters we were discussing in respect of
command structure last week. It doeSigeem, however, that the hierarchy
were not made aware of this independent action.

It also seems likely in the light of events to date, 5 June, as revealed
by Chief Inspector CREASER, that we exercised some control over that
tunnel in 1987. West Midlands have already asked for the 1987 Oper­
ational Order, and I anticipate that we shall have requests for state­
ments from serials working at the Leppings Lane enclosures. I do not,
therefore, at this moment in time, propose to initiate our own enquiries
unless you yourself indicate you would like some early indication of what
is going to be said.
'2 ) o   c   o   * €   »   r   2
NOTE FOR COUNSEL             _     /***« 2 c .




On Tuesday of this week we received from West Midlands, copies of the
video recordings of the 1988 semi-final. They have been perused and
a precise is in the making.

T h e co n c l u s i o n s d r a w n f r o m the v i e w i n g s are a p p e n d e d h e r e t o and
c l e a r l y the s c e n a r i o in 1 9 8 8 w a s c o m p l e t e l y d i f f e r e n t to th at of
1989, p a r t i c u l a r l y w i t h r e g a r d to the b e h a v i o u r of fans. It is quite
cl ea r that there w a s a s t e a d y , c o n t i n u o u s f l o w w i t h w h i c h the t u r n ­
st il es coped w i t h o u t a p p a r e n t d i f f i c u l t y , and the b a c k u p n e v e r
e x t e n d e d a gr ea t d e a l b e y o n d the o u t e r p e r i m e t e r gates.

The mo st s i g n i f i c a n t f e a t u r e to e m er ge is the fact that f r o m ea r l y
on in the afte rno on , 1 . 1 5 p m time, st e w a r d s did p l a c e a p o r t a b l e
b a r r i e r across the p e r i m e t e r g a t e s g i v i n g a c c e s s to t u r n s t i l e s A - G
l o o k i n g from those t u r n s t i l e s out t o wa rds L e p p i n g s La ne > this
p o r t a b l e b a rr ier w a s on the e x t r e m e left. L a t e r in the a f t e r n o o n
these same st e w a r d s are s e e n to a c t u a l l y cl os e the p e r i m e t e r gates,
le a v i n g only the e x t r e m e r i g h t ga te o p e n (again l o o k i n g f r o m the
tu rn sti le s towards L e p p i n g s Lane).

In effect, t h e r efo re , all the fans u s i n g t u r n s t i l e s A - G w e r e
fu n n e l l e d do wn the s i d e o f the st ee l cl ad fencing.

I am h a vi ng the r e l e v a n t v i d e o co p i e d and w i l l a r r a n g e fo r it to be
d e l i v e r e d some time l a t e r today.




Chief Superintendent
omwr 3
                         SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                       SUMMARY OF 1 9 8 8 S O U -F IN A L

                          V id e o t a p e s 1 - 1 , 1 - 2


These tapes viewed to ascertain position of portable barriers and
stewards. To ascertain if stewards were involved in any control of the
crowd in Leppings Lane.


TAPE 1-1

Initial views show the outer perimeter gates closed with one exception - a
small gate near to the riverside and leading to the service road, which
appears under the control of stewards wearing tabards and other persons.
They have control of persons entering the service road.

1123 hrs    -    temporary barriers being placed across the service road
near to Gate 'C1, by a Police Officer.        Stewards in control of the
opening in the outer perimeter gates leading to the service road.

1153 hrs    -   views of the service road with 3' high portable barriers
across which isolate gate 'C' (see Appendix 'A').        Groups of Police
Officers are by both barriers and stewards are by one barrier. Sane outer
perimeter gates are open. On other occasions just Police Officers are by
the portable barriers. Stewards are by the outer perimeter gates leading
to the service road.


TAPE 1-2

There appears to be a 3 1 high portable barrier across the outer perimeter
gates leading to the service road (see Appendix 1B 1).    This causes fans
to file through an open outer perimeter gate nearest the large dividing
fence. Stewards are by this portable barrier.

1330 hrs    -    The 3' high portable barrier is still across the outer
perimeter gates leading to the service road.   The outer perimeter gates
leading to the 1 - 1 6 concourse area appear to be open and fans are
entering. Mounted and foot officers are present and stewards are visible.

1343 hrs    -   3' high portable barrier across service road by gate 'C1.
There is a 3' high portable barrier in the West Stand enclosure by gate
'C' which creates a possible sterile area about 10' wide by the boundary
wall.   It appears programme sellers are in this area.

The barrier across the service road by gate 'C' has stewards present.

A number of Police Officers are in the 'sterile area1 between the portable
barriers by gate 'C' and the outer perimeter gates.
1347 hrs    -   Shows the service road has two sets of portable barriers
either side of gate 'C' which in effect steriles the area of gate 'C'
outside in the service road.

Stewards are by one barrier.   A number of Police Officers are by the other
barrier.

1347.47 hrs   -   A steward is closing the outer perimeter gate on the
riverside by the service road.  Police Officer of rank appears to be
present.

1353 hrs     -    Access tothe A-G concourse    area is by the open outer
perimeter gate by the large dividing fence.

1355 hrs   -  The outer perimeter gate leading to the service road is now
closed but a steward opens it and allows a person access.    Gate is then
closed.

There is an assumption that an obstruction ispreventing persons entering
the service road from the     A-G concourse area as the service road is
reasonably clear.   However, at this stage no barrier can be seen.

1400 hrs   -    Fans are approaching along Leppings Lane and the concourse
areas are beginning to fill.    On approach to the A-G concourse area the
outer perimeter gates by the service road are closed and fans are gaining
access by the gate nearest the large dividing fence. Mounted and foot
officers are present and stewards can be seen.

1408.30 hrs    -   Shows clearer views of stewards in attendance by outer
perimeter gates.

1409.46 hrs    -Stewards closing outer perimeter gates after allowing a
vehicle to leave.   Foot Officers by gates.

1411 hrs   -   Gates are opened for a short time.

1411.40 hrs    - The central outer perimeter gates leading to the service
road are opened and fans walk through at a leisurely pace. Stewards are
operating these gates.

1414-05 hrs    - The central outer perimeter gates leading to the service
road are now closed.

1430 hrs    -   The outer perimeter gate is open near the large dividing
fence leading to the A-G concourse turnstiles and fans are filing through.
The central gate and the one by the riverside which both lead to the
service road appear to be closed with stewards nearby. The service road
remains clear.

1431 hrs     -    Outer perimeter gates leading to the service road are
opened slightly and fans go through into the A-G concoursearea.  Stewards
are visible by the outer gates. Persons in the service road are prevented
from gaining proximity to gate 'C' by portable 3' high fencing.
1433 hrs      -   The outer perimeter gates leading to the service road are
closed.

1441 hrs    -    There appears to be visible a 3' high portable barrier
partly dividing the service road fran the A-G concourse area (see Appendix
C).

1450 hrs     -    Only the one outer perimeter gate leading to the A-G
concourse area is open.     There appears to be free access to the 1-16
concourse area with free movement of fans.


CONCLUSIONS

Stewards appear to have seme physical control of the outer perimeter gates
leading to the service road. They are either closed or have a 3' high
portable barrier in place preventing access.     Only selected persons or
vehicles, and on occasions fans, are allowed to enter.

The service road appears to have been isolated fran the A-G concourse
area, by use of portable barriers.

Gate 'C1 is isolated by portable barriers.

There is no evidence of a filtering of fans outside the outer perimeter
gates.     This does not take into account any individual advice or
directions which may have been given.
                                      APPENDIX ’ A




               1 -8


                            ] '□
           9 -1 6
                                                               I S




                                                     WEST
                      A-G



                             gangway
                                                 STAND

                              TANDING,— I


barriers




                                             CCTV
                                                        CCXV
                         APPENDIX ’ B’




portable
farrier




                                     WEST


           \   gangway
                                    STAND

               TANDING




                                CCTV
                                         CCTV
                                      APPENDIX ’C




              1 -8


                            □
          9 -1 6




                                                    WEST
                     a- g



ortable
                            gangway
                                               STAND
arrier

                            TANDING


                   S\
                    * \
                      S\




                                            CCTV
                                                       CCTV
                                  SUMMARY

                           BODY PLAN (Enquiry   6)

The requirement is for a plan to show the locations on the terrace and
environs of all the deceased, identified during West Midlands Police
enqutries.

Individual plans for each deceased were produced by WMP for the
Coro ner 's Inquest, showing identifications made by various means, and by
various witnesses.     Copies of these plans were received at the Incident
Room on 22 June 1990.      We were already in possession of WMP reports to
the Coroner in each case, summari si ng the evidence, pa rticularly
referring to the relevent plan(s), explaining how the identifications
were made, and indicating the source material used.

An overall plan had been attempted by WMP but abandoned.      A partially
completed version was ci rc ulated to parties at the Taylor Enqu iry on 20
June 1989.    In that circula ti on it was stressed that the results were
based on officer's opinions and that it was incomplete.    (DOCUMENT 4)

A team of WMP offi cer s led by Detective Inspector 9364 Michael LAYTON
researched and constructed the individual plans produced at the inquest.
That officer formally introduced them into evidence, and explained how
they had been constructed.     He is the best witness to produce them in
any other proceedings, and is the only one who can speak as to the
c omposition and reliability of each identification.

I have contacted Inspector Layton informally, and it should be noted
that he has re servations about the plans' reliabi li ty as evidence.
They are flawed for the fo llowing reasons:

(a)         They can never be regarded as 100% accurate because they
            rely for placing either on personal re collection or
            transpo si tio n from video or photograph.

<b>         Many of the identifications rely on one untested personal
            viewing by a relative.

(O          The locations eventually pinpointed are not all timed, and
            th er e is no overall evidence of the sequence of different
            sightings.

(<*>        Not all sightings are shown on the plans.

It would seem therefore that degrees of as se ssment and judgment have
been exercised by WMP offi cer s in co nstructing the Co roner's Inquest
plans.   This is adequate for the stan dar ds of evidence required in such
a court, but other st andards apply elsewhere.

In all the circums ta nce s I suggest that Inspector Layton must be
required to give a st atement of evidence explaining how the WMP
en quiries were made, and how the individual body location plans were
constructed.    A formal request should be made to West Midl and s Police
to this effect at the earliest opportunity.

                                                                   Page 1
The tr an scr ip t of the Coro ner 's Inquest, pages 3? to 49 is pertinent to
the reliability of this evidence,         and should be considered carefully.
(DOCUMENT 5)

Of course, the option exists of       requesting West Midl and s Police to
co nstruct the plan required, but this would result in delay and no doubt
expense.

In a telephone convers at ion on We dnesday 27 June 1990 between Chief
S u pe rintendent Wain and Mr Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards the
evidential di fficulties were briefly discussed, and a policy decision
made to attempt to obtain the composite plan required by using South
Yorkshire Police resources.    The SYP Plan Drawing Technician, Mr David
NEEDHAM, would be asked to draw up a “master" plan, using:

(a)         a large scale plan some 3 feet wide

(b)         one "last alive" and    one "dead" position for each body

(c)         the same colour code    as the WMP plans

(d)         Where more than one sighting in these ca te gories existed,
             only the one nearest the perimeter fence would be shown.
             In the "live" si ghtings this would be more likely to be the
             last sighting in time. In the "dead" ones, this    would be
             likely to be the first sighting of that type.

(e)         When completed, the plan to be assessed for its value and
             any decision as to amendment.

(f)         The plan needs to be circulated to expert wi tnesses whose
             evidence has to be served before 15 August 1990.   Thus
             a completion date before mid July is to be aimed for.

To avoid confusion, the Coro ner 's plans have been marked with a
pr ominent "body number", and placed in that order rather than inquest
order.    I have now handed them over to Mr Needham, who is aware of all
the criteria outlined above, and will contact us as soon as the "master"
is complete.     A conference should then be held to assess it as at (e)
above.

OTHER RELEUENT EVIDENCE

The purpose of the "body plan" is to demonstrate that the majority of
deaths in the Hi llsborough disaster were associated with the collapse of
barrier 124a.     There will of course be the personal evidence available
of offi cer s who saw at first hand the situation in pen 3 when the rescue
op eration was underway.    The fo llowing may also be of assistance.

PH OTOGRAPHIC

There is little photographic or video evidence to demonstrate that
situation, but the following taken toge the r may back up the suggestion
being made:
1            There are views In photograph album PR 1, notably 11, 11a,
and 12, which show the forward section of pen        3 from an elevated
position In the South Stand, at the time when rescue attempts were just
beginning.   The Impaction at the front of the pen can be clearly seen.
The relative position of the collapsed barrier Is de monstrated in later
views described at 5 below.

2            Album MWL  11 around prints 9 to 15, shows     views    from the
Police Control area slightly later, and are timed.

3          Album MWL 12, prints 10     to 13, and   23 to 25   show further
details as events progressed.

4            Mldeo MAP 7 is from a BBC camera on top of the West Stand.
Most of its coverage after the disaster Is of ev ents on the pitch, but
later the shot Is depressed for a short time suffici en tly to show the
fence, and the front of the pen.     The crush of bodies around gate 3 is
most noticeable.    Selected stills have been made from the video showing
the relevant shots, from 15.17 to 15.21 (DOCUMENT 6).        The stills do
not demonstrate the striking st illness of the mass of bodies, as one or
two su rvivors trapped from the waist down wave for help.          A short
viewing of the footage would be better than the stills.      A later shot
at 16.05 shows the scene after the pen was cleared, and the relative
position of the broken barrier 124a.

5            Album MWL 13, prints 2a, 2 6 a f and 37a show clearer views of
the empty pen, and the broken barrier In Its relation to gate 3.       Album
DB 18, prints 4a to 10a, Is similar.

Taken in this sequence, the point can be demonstrated.

STATISTICAL

Study of the Co roner's Inquest evidence reports and plans shows that 29
of the deceased probably or definitely entered the ground through the
opening of Gate “C “ .

8 people died In Pen 4.

(The Taylor Interim Report gives slightly lower       figures than   this at
Page 18, paras 108 to 112, see DOCUMENT 7).

40 are shown on the plans In positions      at or   near barrier 124a.      A
further 32 were at the front of the pen.




Detective Inspector
2 July 1990
io c w   W   T T
#   J fcCERVYN JONES M Sc                                                           FU RN IVAL HOUSE
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTA8LE                                                       Fumival Gate
     H ILLSB O R O U G H INQUIRY" TEAM                                              Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                                    Telephone: 0742 727599
    W EST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ                                                  S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STA TIO N
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                          Liverpool L7 3PR
    Colmore Circus Queensway                                                        Telephone: 051-709 7190/7231
    Birmingham B4 6NQ
    Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025
                                                                                    Your Ref:
    NECHELLS GBEEN POLICE STA TIO N
    Fowler Street                                                                   Our Ref:             JMJ/VSC
    Birmingham B7 5DA
    Telephone: 021-359 3332                                                         Date:                 20 J u n e 1989



              P W h i t e h u r s t Esq
              Treasury Solicitor
              C/0 Town Hall
              S u r r e y St r e e t
              Sheffield
              S1 2HH




              LOCATION OF DECEASED - PLAN AS AT 16 JUNE 1989

              I e n c l o s e the l a te st e d i t i o n o f the p l a n s h o w i n g the po s i t i o n where, in
              o u r o p in ion , the d e c e a s e d can be i d e n t i f i e d in so me in s t a n c e s alive,
              o t h e r s where they are dead, t o g e t h e r w i t h p o s s i b l e s w h i c h are as yet
              a w a i t i n g co nf i r m a t i o n . E n c l o s e d a l s o is an e x p l a n a t o r y note.

              I m u s t s t r e s s at this time, b e c a u s e t h e r e is c o n s i d e r a b l y m o r e w o r k to
              be done, the pl a n s s h o u l d on ly be u s e d as a g u i d e and not to be
              c o n s i d e r e d the d e f i n i t i v e s t a t eme nt .

              I e n c l o s e a total o f 11 co p i e s for y o u r u s e and that o f C o un sel
              r e p r e s e n t i n g i n t e r e s t e d part ies . T h e c o p i e s for Lo rd J u s t i c e Taylor,
              S e c r e t a r y o f the I n q u i r y and the A s s e s s o r s h a v e b e e n fo r w a r d e d di re ct to
              them.




      P L E A S E R E P L Y T O T H E OFFICE A T       Sheffield
                       HILLSBOROUGH JUDICIAL INQUIRY


                                INTRODUCTION




The information shown on the attached plans has been compiled by the West
Midlands Police Video/Photographic Section of the Hillsborough Judicial
Inquiry for the purposes of assisting the work of the section.


The coloured and numbered stickers indicate, what are believed to be the
position of deceased either prior to or'following their death as seen on
either video footage or photographs.


In some instances people have been seen in different locations ie pen or
pitch and as such may have more than one identifying sticker shown.


It should be noted that the stickers in the bottom right hand corner are
designed to show the flow of persons towards the Spion Kop end of the
pitch.   Having regard to the size of the maps they are presently
reproduced on, they should not be regarded as precise locations on the
pitch.


The plan showing stickers which are all the same colour is drawn up from
information contained in statements only and at this stage does not
differentiate as to whether dead or alive.     These are additional
identifications to the above.


It should be stressed that the identifications are based on the opinion
of officers researching the material available to them as at the 16.6.89.
The plans produced as at the 6.6.89 should now be disregarded.


The plans should be treated as a GUIDE to movements of persons at this
stage and NOT a completed document.


                                                                      \Cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ft-7-
                                                                                                    PIllAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PIUAR            CATC CATCH




              Oeiign A.M 3*11* t U r n f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D e itg n A . h t   3 >1VI> 11 2 m l



                                                                                                                                                                      D e s ig n B, h t    } ') r   ~t 1. 2ml




        O tttg n B ,M   3*1*   {0 9 S m >
                                                                                                                                                                                          P e s tg n B ~ h t a T M O ^ F m T                                   ~5e«9nB,hi 3,?,IF97?mr

                                                                                                                                                     Q e i ig n A .h t 3'11M 1 1 ml


                                              B a r r i e r a n d s u p p o rt ! m a ijnfl____
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bowed outvanj
                                                            <*h— »w>Qfb^                   Wh*
       Ofiign B h i 3'5                                   I &tilgn8}                       de sign B . t i f 3 * 6 "   (1 .0 5 m l
                                                                                                                                                                                        Oeiign B .M 3 '6 " ( 1.0 5 m |             Otstgn 9, h t 3 ‘6" M.OSmF




                                                                                                                                                                O e i j g n A . h t V o M (1 2 ?m )




                                     yT 'm    1
                                                                                                                                                                           S tt p


                                     low ed                                                                                                                               Gale      k
                                                                                                                                     Fence br oken                                                              •   Fence b r o k e n        Fence b r o k e n           Fence b r o k e n



                         CRUSH BARRIERS ARE OF TWO                             OESIGNS.-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SCAtt



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10 l i l t



 ^ 'T-h. S 1
txi\o- p o ' - m o o

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         * X Qfcrt-np                                    5-TAT e rv\gMT

DRG 2 > Middle Terrace, Leppings Lane End, showing details of Crush Barriers and Fences


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h u rv e jrtd   7V C /1 9 -7 V v r-
                 A.Ffg-O'KimATt                           uoUxiowi                       oF
                  XD<?iotv (moat loros i^oivn v/ioeo
                   AmO        ? k o T o C 1RPv^)vA'-«- rv\ A T f f t i '“tu.
                   T o    0




                                                  tn*»A.w n r n twi


                                                                                                                                 Ottt)w t. hi r t r >u»i




                                           0«
                                            »ijK
                                               >» MV|« - |'l* QIMQwj            mg              tfciylM > 1- M-||a>



                                                                                                                             o»t>iiiA.»>i k- y o i i m '



                                                                                                        f a — 10—       ».

    '"■pi                     S.fi‘frjir< Tool*;                                                                                                           TEKiMAvrrs   l -A




                                                                                                                  *$>




                                                                                                                                                                                         *0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  v?
                                                                                                                                                                                                    35
                                                                                                                                                           «                                       I?
*       \p fe rt1 iC \ie D       » V - . \ \ 1£
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ft
        iOtNT\F«Ci Dfeftp
                                                                                                                                                                                fi*     g         H
        posulSuis
^           v O tN 'T lP t W D       Dfe<VO         -V A i- W t C     %*<+*,*£. u - o C A T t i i C l
                                                                                                                                                                                              &

                                                                                                                                                                               *—     *dsT *
                                                                                                                                                                                           <fc




                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
'   Z   t   o   d   J   t   i   C   H   T
                                JOHN MF.ilVYN JONES


movements on the 15th of April, l(Jb9, of those who
died, with evidence of identification and medical
evidence of the cause of death to be given at the^
inquest, but he has said that any requests for evidence
exceeding this restriction should be refused:

That is right? - A. That is. correct.

I think I am right in saying that h e i s looking to you
in your capacity as the Officer dealing with the DPP
inquiry to try and safeguard his interests in that
respect? - A. That is correct, sir.

  THE CORONER:   I am, of course, very aware of that
requirement and as far as I am concerned the 1)11. has
nothing to fear.   Thank you, Mr. Jones.

  Inspector Layton.

                MICHAEL LAYTON Called

              Examined by THE CORONhR:

Inspector Layton, you have already      taken the oath,   that
is right? - A. Yes, sir.

If you would just introduce yourself so we know who you
are?   Give us your full name and title. - A. Yes, sir.
Michael Layton, Detective Inspector with the Uest
Midlands Police.

Inspector Layton, you have prepared a statement for me
giving me an outline in particular of the work of the
video/photopraphic section which I will listen to in a
mome nt, but'before we do that there are just two other
points on those plans.    Can you just walk back to the
plans?    I think if you look at the gymnasium.   I
think you were actually pointing to the corner.     The
gymnasium is actually that big building? - A. Yes, that
was an error on my part.

  THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, can you look?
The gymnasium, the temporary mortuary and so on whicn
features as you will hear in a little while, is that
building up there.  OK?   It is not diagonally across
but it is certainly not next to the terraces:

The other point I forgot to ask you, is that there were
actually four collection sites for people who had died.
Two were the hospitals which are not on that plan.
One was the gymnasium and there was an even more
temporary collection point near Leppings Lane, I
believe? - A. It was in this area here, sir.
                                                                      M ICHAEL LAYTOH


                      A
                                 THE COROiiEil:  You will hear about thnt in the^
                               course of the evidence.   People will say the bodies
                               were placed, and then were moved.  There were about
                               eleven people who were collected there and then were
                               moved to the gymnasium from there.

                               Now if you take me through your statement please? - A.
                               Following the Hillsborough disaster, a Video and
                               Photograph Section was formed as part of the major
                               inquiry team.   This was to look at all aspects of
                               visual evidence available from various sources.    As
                               such, since the 19th of April, 1989, I have been
                               engaged with a team of Officers in the collation and
                               examination of such material, initially for the
                               Judicial Inquiry and latterly for the Coroner s
                               inques ts.

                               Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have
                               attempted to identify each person s position at the
                               ground, where possible, before and after tneir deaths.
                               The search for such information has been exhaustive,
                               but the degree of success in achieving an accurate
                      D        picture for each individual does vary greatly.    In
                               some cases the information obtained has been very
                               limited and in some instances it has not been possible
                               to confirm with any degree of certainty some of the
                               identifications made.

                               The first step which was taken with regard to obtaining
                               visual evidence was to obtain copies of the facial
                       E       Polaroid photographs of the deceased, which have in
                               fact already been mentioned.   These were taken after
                               the disaster at the behest of the Coroner.   In
                               addition the clothing of a vast majority of the
                               deceased was photographed prior to being returned to
                               families.   Again, as has been mentioned. _ At a later
                               stage a number of families did in fact assist us by
                               supplying recent photographs of their loved ones taken
                           F   prior to the disaster.

                               For reference purposes each of the deceased was
                               allocated a number from 1 to 95 and the Polaroid
                               photographs equate to that same numbering system.   The
                               clothing photographs are prefixed with the letters _
                               "NA", followed by the number.    The photographs  which
                               were supplied .to us by the families are prefixed by the
                       G       letters "KPOD".    I mention those at this stage because
                               that will help to make sense of the reference numbers
                               as we go through each individual inquest.

                               The material is obviously potentially very distressing
                               in nature and every effort has been made to limit
                               exposing witnesses to it.   However, it has to be said
                       H                            -ss-


J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                            MICHAEL LAYTON


                                 these photographs have proved to be vital for
                                 identification purposes.

                                 The next step taken was to secure the video recordings
                                 of the event which were obtained on a voluntary basis
                                 from a number of agencies, such as the South Yorkshire
                                 Police, Sheffield Wednesday. Football Club, and m
                                 particular BBC television who had several cameras at
                       B         the ground to film the match.

                                 The video material   was copied and referenced so that
                                 each individual tape had a unique identifying number
                                 with prefix letters indicating the source of the
                                 material.

                                 In all some 71 hours of video have been examined in an
                                 effort to identify the deceased.

                                 The BBC television   tapes have proved to be a
                                 cornerstone in this respect.     They are of very good
                                 picture quality.   They are in colour and they have
                                 sound recording.

                                 With the exception of a short section of film o n t a p e ,
                        D        the BBC material is superimposed with a display in the
                                 top right hand corner of the screen, which gives the
                                 accurate time that the footage was recorded.     Reading
                                 from left to right as you view the display, the tigure
                                 on the extreme left is the hour, the next figure the
                                 minutes and the next figure the seconds.    In some
                                 cases the final figure shown on the extreme n g n t
                                 refers to the film frame number.

                                 For ease of viewing, where identifications have been
                                 made from video tapes, we have produced a video print
                                 using the technical services of the Home Office
                                 establishment in Sandridge.   In addition, where
                                 appropriate, the prints have been, as it were,
                                 enlarged, to assist in the actual identification.

                                 The next   step taken was to obtain still photographs
                                 taken at   the ground on the day of the disaster.

                                 A seriesof some 600 still   colour photographs were in
                                 fact taken by South Yorkshire Police for normal
                                 intelligence gathering purposes on that particular
                                 date.   These photographs are of good quality and have
                                 a oain proved to be invaluable.   Superimposed on eacn
                                 print is the date and the time that each photograph was
                                 taken. This appears in the bottom right hand corner of
                                 the photograph and the first figure shown is the actual
                                 date.   The second figure the hour and the third the
                                 minutes.

                             H                           - 39 -


J . L. H a r p h a m l t d
                                                                                               42
                                         M I C H A E L LAYTOU


It should be pointed out that the time shown on these
photographs was set by the individual camera operator
and in each case it has been established that the time
set was by reference to the cameraman's own watch, so
as such they were not synchronised and nor are they
verified.   For example, on a photograph which has been
given the reference number P R . 11.A, which was taken by
Mr. Philip Kich of South Yorkshire Police, it will be
seen that the database time, in other words, the^time
printed on the photograph, is shown as 15.01, whilst on
the actual photograph there is a clock in the ground
which shows the time as being 15.00.

In addition to these photographs being available, it
became apparent that some 50 professional photographers
were present at the ground and these photographers
represented local and national newspapers and in many
cases were freelance agencies.

As a result of approaches to these various sources and,
indeed, a small number of supporters who had also taken
pictures, we took possession of a further 1,800
photographs for use in the inquiry.

Continuity in respect of this material is not complete
in all cases since the person handing over the material
is not necessarily the person originating that
material.   In each case the photographs again are
prefixed by letters which indicate the source and a
unique number for each individual print.

Where identifications have been made by way of a
photograph, these have been reproduced on a colour
photocopier.  The appropriate ones have been submitted
to the Coroner.

Having collected the material referred to, the task of
making identifications began.

In the initial stages whilst the public part of the
Judicial Inquiry was being held, efforts were made to
make identifications purely from the deceaseds
clothing and the facial photographs.    At the
conclusions of those proceedings in July, members ot
the Video and Photographic Section began interviewing
witnesses in an effort to identify deceased and to
obtain continuity of their movements.    To this end
over 300 South Yorkshire Police Officers have been
shown visual evidence during the last twelve months.
Where identifications of the deceased has been
established, but it has not been possible to find that
 particular person on video or photograph, then a P Ian
 has been completed which shows the location at which
 the Officer was involved with that particular person.

                       - A0 -



                                                                43
                                                                        M I C H A E L L AYTON


                    A        Examples of this are where an Officer knows for certain
                             that he has assisted with a particular deceas edbut is
                             not shown on video, or, indeed, where the identity of a
                             deceased has been ascertained by using clothing or
                             facial photographs.

                             It should be stressed that.by the very n a t u r e o f the
                             disaster the degree of certainty in respect of each
                     B       identification does vary to a great extent from being
                             absolute where there can be no question, to where in
                             fact there has to be a degree of doubt.

                             It is perhaps worth mentioning at this point, and it
                             has been touched on already, that to indicate locations
                             we devised a series of coloured dots, which were
                             basically a colour code, along the following lines.   Ue
                     C       used a red coloured dot where we felt we had found a
                             particular deceased alive;  a blue dot where apparently
                             the deceased was dead;  green where in one or two cases
                             we felt the deceased was located both alive and
                             subsequently dead in the same place;  and in some
                             instances yellow where it was an identification which
                             was still, and, in some cases, is still subject to
                             confirmation.

                             In addition to the South Yorkshire Police Officers, a
                             further 10 Police Officers from other Forces who were
                             off-duty at the game, have also been seen, together
                             with 21 members of the South Yorkshire Fire Service and
                             19 members of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service,
                             who attended the aftermath.

                             Following examination of written evidence, a total of
                             169 civilians who stated they had had some involvement
                             with deceased, have also been shown visual evidence.
                             Again, where appropriate, plans were completed to show
                             locations of the deceased and these also bear a unique
                             reference number.

                         F   In addition to those plans I have prepared plans which
                             bear the reference numbers "MUJL", followed by a
                             number.   These particular plans are designed to show
                             the location of deceased where they have been found on
                             video or photographs.   Having said that, as a general
                             rule I have not prepared one where there is already a
                             plan available from another source which clearly shows
                             the same location and as such does not take the matter
                     G       further.

                             Perhaps I should stress at this point - it has been
                             raised already - that plans now form an important part
                             of the evidence to be presented.



                     H                              - 41 -


J L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                                          44
                                        M I C H A E L L AY TO N


In the initial stages a conscious decision was made to
try to avoid the necessity for families of the deceased
to view visual evidence.   However, it soon became
apparent, following a meeting with members of the
Steering Group, that certain families did wish to be
appraised of such information as was available to us.
At the same time it was evident there were a number of
instances where we were unlikely to find any visual
evidence without the help from a family member.

following consultations with the Social Services
Department, a small number of families were initially
shown visual evidence.   In the vast majority of cases
this proved very positive and as a result a decision
was eventually made to give the families in relation to
all ninety-five deceased the opportunity to view video
and photographs.

As a result of these approaches which in the main were
done in conjunction with the relevant social_workers,
families have now been seen in relation to eighty of
the deceased.   That contact has varied from seeing
parents and wives, to aunts, uncles and grandmothers
and the amount of material shown has always been
regulated by the families themselves.

It has to be said, and I do stress this, that but for
the highest degree of co-operation from the Social
Services and, indeed, from the enormous help given by
the families, there is no doubt that in many cases we
would not have been able to produce any visual
evidence.

In respect of the remaining fifteen deceased, the
families have decided not to view that evidence.

Taking that a step further now, in all, since we
started, over 600 people have in fact viewed video or
photographs.

I should point out that on a small number of occasions
it has subsequently transpired that both police and
civilian witnesses have made mistaken identifications.
Although I would again stress they were made at the
time with the genuine belief that they were correct.
For instance, if I can perhaps quote one occasion, a
witness who in.fact was involved with a number of
deceased, initially felt he had identified somebody who
he had removed from the terraces to the pitch.    We in
fact found out that that particular person was carried
from the terraces to the rear of the West Stand.   So
whilst he was mistaken in his initial recollection, it
transpired that he had in fact been involved with that


                      - 42 -


                                                                  45
                                                                      M I C H A E L L AY T O N


                         person on the terraces themselves, but not on the
                         pitch.

                         Where a subsequent re-examination of material has
                         highlighted such mistakes, these errors have been
                         corrected.

                         As a result of the continuing process of examination of
                    B    visual evidence, information is now available by way of
                         video, photographs or plans along the following lines.
                         Ei°hty-two of the deceased are believed, with some
                         degree of certainty, to have been in pea 3 of the West
                         Stand Terraces.   Three of the deceased may have been
                         in pen 3, but it has not been possible at this stage to
                         confirm those identifications.   Seven of the deceased
                         are believed with some degree of certainty to have been
                         in pen A of the West Stand terraces.      Two of the
                         deceased may have been in pen A, b u t _again_it has not
                         been possible to confirm those identifications.

                         At this stage in one case it has not been possible to
                         establish in which particular enclosure_that person was
                         located.   However, he has been identified in the
                         company of another person who subsequently died, prior
                    D
                         to the disaster, and that person was known to have been
                         in pen 3.

                         As I said at the beginning, the visual evidence by no
                         means presents a total picture, but I believe that
                         based on our day to day experience over the last twelve
                         inontns, that at the present time it is as accurate as
                         it is possible to be.

                         May I just ask you one or two supplementary questions?
                         First of all, I cannot remember whether I asked you at
                         the beginning, but just in case I didn t, you were one
                         of the Officers who took the oath earlier? - A. I was,
                         sir, yes.

                         I am not going to ask you that every time you appear
                         because you will be appearing frequently.   I just
                         wanted it confirmed once.

                         The second thing is, it is right that everybody who
                         viewed visual evidence, be they family, social workers,
                         Police Officers or otherwise, were co-operative in
                         assisting you? - A. Very much, sir, yes.

                         With regard to the misidentifications, if we can just
                         dispose with that aspect of the matter.             Firstly, I
                         think in your presentations to me you have discounted
                         the m i s i d e n t i f ications, that is right? - A. That is
                         right, sir.             The evidence that will be presented on


                     H                            - A3 -


J L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                                           46
                                         M I C H A E L L AYTON


each individual inquest will be that which we feel is
accura te.

At the present time? - A. To the best of our abilities,
yes.

Secondly, because some people might feel, how can it be
that somebody does not recognise somebody in a^
photograph, would I be right in thinking that it is not
quite°as easy as a snapshot that one is looking at?
Can you describe a little bit the problems of
identification with the visual evidence which people
had? - A. Although the video evidence we have is of
good quality in places, it does not give a complete
picture in the sense there is a lengthy film which
shows the entire terraces for any particular length of
time.   As such it is very often snatches of an area
that we are looking at and in some cases, for literally
seconds.

Where we are looking at photographs, very often those
photographs only show a partial view of the person we
believe is one of the deceased.   Sometimes they are in
black and white so they don't assist in^terms of colour
of clothing and very often they don't given an actual
precise, clear picture.   Very o f t e n y o u only see
clothing and not facially, and sometimes vice versa.
So there is no complete set of video of photographs
which will give us and (a) to (b) for each individual.

In addition to that, of course, it was a very stressful
occasion for all the people who were t h e r e ? - A. That
is right, sir.   I can say on average that in each
individual case for those people we saw, we saw them
for a minimum of two hours.    In some cases up to a
maximum of six.

Which leads me to the next question.    When we are
talking about you seeing 600 people, this was a very
lengthy - when I say "you" I mean you and your team - a
very lengthy procedure"? - A. Very lengthy, sir.

Very many hours.   Indeed, at least 1200 from what you
say and possibly more, was spent on just seeing
families or other people who viewed? - A. That is
correct, sir.

That is quite apart from the time which you and your
team spend... - A. Researching and...

The material.   In fact, if I can summarise it, you
said 71 hours of video film? - A. That is correct, sir.
                                            M I C H A E L L AY T O N


. And about, what, 2,400 photographs altogether? - A.
  That is correct.

. Would I be right in thinking that in many, many cases
  video film was viewed over and over again to try and
  form a picture of what you were seeing? - A. Very much,
  sir, yes.

   THE CORONER:      Hr. Fraser?

   liK. FilASEK:    No,   thank you, sir.

              Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

. Inspector, have efforts been made to trace the
  movements of the deceased from the time before they
  actually went on to the terraces? - A. There is a
  limited amount of visual material available of the
  outside of the ground at the Leppings Lane end and^
  where we have been able to locate people on that video
  then that is included in the surnTiaries.

. So where the information is available to show that a
  particular deceased arrived at the turnstile, for
  example, at a certain time, moved in through the ground
  and then to the position they were at on the terracing,
  that would be in the summaries that are presented? - A.
  Yes.    It may in fact be contained in statements as
  opposed to visual evidence.    I can only refer to
  visual evidence at this stage but where we have found
  visual evidence that is included.

    MU. ISAACS:      Thank you.

                  Re-Examined by THE CORONER:

. As far as I can remember there is no visual evidence of
  anybody within what I call the concourse area, that is,
  between the turnstile and the entrance to the tunnel,
  is that right? - A. I can think of just one instance,
  sir.  The camera which covers that particular area is
  black and white and of very particular poor quality.
  In one instance only that I can recall at the moment, a
  Police Officer identified himself carrying one of the
  deceased after the event, but it was of very poor
  quality.

. Uhich reminds me that we did not even mention tne
  tunnel when we were talking to the Jury.  When you
  finish your evidence I am just going to get you to show
  that to them.

    THE CORONER:   Any other questions?   No.   Inspector
  Layton, thank you very much indeed.   Perhaps you could

                           - 45 -


                                                                       48
*

                                                                            MICHAEL LAYTON


                         A        just walk back to our plan.  I forgot the tunnel,   I am
                                  sorry.   It is terribly important but I forgot.

                                    To get from the turnstiles or gate C on to the
                                  terraces - there are several ways on to the terraces
                                  but the one that features for all practical purposes in
                                  this inquiry is a central tunnel which is being pointed
                                  out now.   Then on the other plan it is shown there,
                         B        exiting, so to speak.   You will see it is split into
                                  two so you can get into enclosure 3 or enclosure 4,
                                  depending which side of the tunnel you are coming down.
                                  The tunnel has got a bit of a slope, quite a bit of a
                                  slop towards the end in fact.   One in six* I believe.

                                    Thank you, Inspector.

                                    I have already fallen down on the job and overshot
                                  lunch hour.   Before we adjourn there is just one other
                                  thing I want to do.   When I opened the inquests last
                                  April I said I was admitting as documentary evidence a
                                  letter from the South Yorkshire Police confirming that
                                  they had no objection to my releasing the bodies.
                                  This was a technicality at the time which I felt I had
                         D        to do and in fact they wrote to me on the 18th of April
                                  and I am reading it now so that it is formally on the
                                  record and that applies to everybody.   It says:

                                    "I refer to your recent conversation with
                                    Superintendent Sleath concerning the release of the
                                    deceased persons from the Hillsborough incident to
                                    their respective next of kin following the
                          E         adjournment of the inquest.

                                    After consultation with Professor Usher I have no
                                    objection to this course of action.

                                    Yours sincerely."

                                  It is signed by the Deputy Chief Constable.
                              F
                                    It is purely for the record, and for you, Members of
                                  the Jury, to know that was done.

                                    Now we are going    to adjourn.   Would it be asking too
                                  much if we said we    would start at quarter past two?
                                  That is shortening    your lunch hour by a little bit, by
                                  ten minutes. . Can    you manage that?   (Y e s )
                          G
                                    After lunch we are going to listen to Dr. Forrest who
                                  is going to deal with alcohol.    Mr. Wardrobe, who is
                                  going to tell us a little bit about the set-up at the
                                  hospital.   Professor Usher who is going to give us a
                                  short lecture on pathology.    Then we are going to deal


                          H                               - 46 -


    J . I H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                               49
                                                                       M I C H A E L LAYTON


                               with two cases.    All right?   Thank you.     Ladies and
                               gentlemen, remember, don't talk to anybody

                                              (Luncheon adiournment)




                       B




                       D




                           H                         - 47 -


J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
3Jo   c   o   n   e   u   r   6
l o   c   u   s   t   §   M   T   f
#




                                                              co"v'y'd some 172 casua,,iK ,0 ,he Nonher” 0e”'ral
      Gymnasium
     ^ Z ^ 7 !16 g>‘mInas,“ m had been in use for serving meals to the police. When the Major Disaster Plan was
     Z t l u ' * ^ cleared, and d*v d ed into two. One end became a temporary mortuary: the otheTwas used ^s a
     M ,J      « ,£nn8 area forthe.ir}!ured- As the stretchers, designed and improvised, brought in more and more
     casualties the scene was initially and inevitably chaotic and harrowing There was intense diTt?Ss amon/st
     the injured and bereaved; relatives were reluctant to be parted from the dead and sought to revive them Thfre
     were people looking for missing friends and relations: there were recriminations there^eresc^ffles SomeTf
     those involved were the worse for dnmc. Doctors and nurses had followed the casualties in from the pitch and
     sought o attend the injured as best they could in the adverse circum stances^Tho^in m oTuSenTneed of
     D oaon w e re re q ^ e d                         ** they arrived' tria*e beinS emPloy*d to determine priorities.
     deS A                        i   h    f ? CXamme CaCh perSOn thought t0 be deceased 10 confirm and certify
     taken "hv o i ^ r Con.stable was detailed to attend and guard each of the dead and a photograph of each was
     searching amongst all^ho^had^ied.                      C° ming “              b° dieS C° Uld be Spared the ordeal of

     The Dead and the Injured
      J 0 8 . Of the 95 who died, the evidence suggests that at least 16 and probably 21 came through sate C after it
     bm survived Pm‘         115 estabhshed by the sta*m ents of relatives and friends who came through with them


      109. Bv commendable hard work, a team of pathologists headed bv Professor Usher comnleted
    and        fm ef r^ 11?atl0nS u" aU the deceased within 48 hours. They found that 88 of the victims were male
    over 50     v^n a ,Thiny‘eight " T under 20 years of age"39 were between 20 and 29 vears and onlv three were
    over 30. In virtually every case the cause of death was crush asphyxia due to compression of the chest wall
    against other bodies or fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all but nine cases that was the sole cause
    t T Z I T T the             had been 50 great as 10 rupture the ao™ in    cases there we?e
     ead. neck or chest, m the remaining two cases, natural disease was a contributory factor In 18 cases bones
    were fractured. Thirteen of those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured femur one a f r a m e d
    radius and the remaining three involved fractures of bones or cartilages round the voice box These injuries
    suggest the victims may have been trodden while on the ground.                                        J

    l .j n°o    _,A                         --
                                     takCn fr° m-------
                                                the deadr.*
                                                          *’°vu,wuv*      ivuwu ^m any
                                                              a,coho1 was found    any ui the
                                                                                       of iuc females.
                                                                                              ‘cmaies. Of
                                                                                                       ui the
                                                                                                          me ma
                                                                                                              males. 51
    Jnd s i x over P n nJ S .m ill,8rams Per cem m their blood which is negligible: 15 had over 80 millierams p,
    ana six o%er 120 milligrams per cent.                                                               “


    ooccurred
      ccu ^e ^ at
               a uthe
                  h e ftront
                         r o noftthe
                                  ^ fpens
                                      T i fbut
                                            p ?there
                                                 fthose
                                                     wereWhr  d ird
                                                          a few     WCre infurther
                                                                 fatalities Pen 3’back.
                                                                                   at least flve were in Pen 4- Most deaths


    a h i m ' w “?■ ST ' ? L° p t°Lpl' com plain' d o fb ' in8 injured inside the ground and 36 outside it. O f the 730.
    K n .        a r e , 5 0u8h! t0 5 ave       >h">ugh gate C after 2.5’ pm. The largest categorv o f injury was
    brursing. especially to the ribs and chest.                                                          '          '




                                                             18
                                    SUMMARY
                       RADIAL FENCE BATES (Enquiry 7)

The three Items of corr esp on den ce Ln this question are all copies from
the Su bm ission of Sheffield City Council to the Taylor En qu iry,pages 171
to 174 (DOCUMENTS 8 - 1 0 ) .

A search has been made of Police files at HQs and "F" Division, but
there are no further do cuments on file relating to this subject, nor
were any included in the Police submissions.

It is clear from other co rr esp on den ce around this time, Spring 1985,
that substantial and varied ground changes were being made by SWFC.
Notable was the provision of more radial fences than had previously
existed for spectator se gr egation purposes, thus creating the pens as
they were at the time of the disaster.

The co rr espondence shows that after the Working Party met on 18 April
1985, suggest io ns were made amending the club's proposals, amongst which
was that additional gates should be installed in existing radial fences,
and that the new fence should have two gates (Letter 51 pages 171 to
172, DOCUMENT 8).

The second item of corr esp on den ce from Eastwoods to SYCC objects to the
expense of manning such second gates (Letter 52 page 173, DOCUMENT 9).

SYCC replied to the effect that the request for additional gates was
primarily front the police, and that they were now prepared to concede
the request (copy letter 53, page 174, DOCUMENT 10).

It will be noted that Mr Vaughan of SYCC noted “Agreed over the phone
with Cl Clive Calvert..." on his copy of the letter.

A witn ess st atement has been obtained from Inspector Clive CALVERT
(DOCUMENT 11) in which he attr ibu te s the original request to the late
Chief Supe rin te nde nt Brian Moseley.  The corr esp on den ce files of SYCC
and East woo ds corroberate Insp Ca lvert's su ggestion that he was the
guid ing light in police interest in the ground at that time.
Co nsequently when objection was raised by Ea stwoods to the extra gates,
it was Mr Moseley's decision to concede on that point.          It would appear
that the su ggestion was discarded as a bargaining counter, to ensure
that other proposals were agreed.

Alth oug h Mr Ca lvert's name is noted on the letter 53, he says that he
consulted Mr Moseley before replying to that effect.

The purpose of the original proposal for extra gates was primarily to
obtain better access to the pens from outside for crowd control
purposes.    Better movement between pens for spec tat or s was secondary,
in Mr Ca lvert's opinion of the pr evelent police view.

The query thus seems to have been answered by Mr Calvert, and there is
no other evidence to adduce on this point.     His evidence is consistent
with that given to the Enqu iry (DOCUMENT 12).
io c c / / * E A / r   8
                DV/AA/583/5                «E /J?                2 Mzy 1985


                                        D. Vaughan               • 422



Dear S ir s ,

Safety of Soc-rts Crounds Ac;, 1?S5
Sheffield " e dr.esdsy Football Club PLC
                                                         %


In raply to your letter dat 2d 3th Airil, whilst a rce^tin'T. of the
Officar Vorkinr **arty (Sheffield District) was held cn 13th April
tc consider the -*ropo3cl3 t.’hichyyou outlined, the County Fire
Service ri'tuesie:’ .-d^itior.al tire to consider the ceans of escape
aspects.

I s n no:.’ able to lav t h z t, subject to the incorporation of the
following coir.ts s-.d to the submission ofddetiilad plans and
calculations under both the Safety of Sr'crts ~ro-~zs Act and
Building ?^~ulaticr»3, the proposals outlined ara regarded as
generally acceptable

(a) additional ■’at'^s b<?in? rroviuod bfitveen the t'i” 3tile
    numbered 16 and the wall of the inner access road;

(b) the central arsa of the Terrace (indicated as cue neutral
     area or visiting supporters ' tarraca) bein.? divided in
    half by a new central radial fence running frc- the tunnel
    entrance to the pitchside security fence v.-lth gstes greeted
     ao as to pernit entry to be'^civerteu tc either half as
     appropriate- (the proposed new secondary radial fence
     adjacent to the existing fence indicated or. tha plan to be
    abandoned):

(c)   the right hand area of the Terraco (indicateJ a3 hcrsa supporters’
       terrace) also to fee divided in half by a nev central radial
       fence running from back to front with two gates (the existing
      radial fence dividing the presenc two Terrace areas - neutral
       area and home supporters ~ to have a second gate installed;



                                      /C o n t d .   .       .



Messrs. Eastvood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. AndressBHouse,
23 Kinnfield Road,
Sheffield.
Sll 9AS
      (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit
            gates installed - one in the neutral area and one in the
            hone supporters area;

      (e)   certain gates to have the aininua widths (in metres) indicated
            on the attached plan and to then being fully supervised.



                                         Yours faithfully,



>            ‘        -   -   -

- •
I                                        Chief Exetr.itivse
~2)0CUrtCHT9
 EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                  St. Andrews Housa
               (C o n s u ltin g   E n g in e e r s )                                                     Kingfleid Road
 D incton:                                                                                               effield S11 9A5
 W. Eastwood                  F-Ing. S.Eng. Ph-D. D-Eng,                                    ti’
                                                                                              Ma             (0742) 583871
                              CEng, FACE. PJAStroetL.                                                   lax:        547266
                              FXM•<*.£_ F.G.S. M.ConsX.
 A. A. Wood                   M n g . MlD . C.Eng„ F3.&E.             CQifo.i SAH.t f.A.lNSliy                           to d   h   :
                              FXSwietfc, MJ.WXS. M-ConX
                                                                      OLTS Y0.1*^f£=E S?0 217/
 R. C. A. Eastwood            & Se. GEng, MJ.OE. M lS traetL                                             36 H ig h H o l b o r n
 G. Spir                      CEng, M.LCE, MXMcchX.                                                      London W C 1V CAA
                                                                                                         T e l.: (0 1 ) 242 7436
 C. S . G m v M               M a t, C & if MXCL. MLStractX
 J . A . Strang*              U a ti IlL S nctJ.
                                                                                    Our Ref:        WE/KH/6705
 G. Doughty                   C S a t- FXStmrt F.                                   Your Ref:.
 S. Preston                   M a * . CEit*, M ± C t, M UtniexX
 R. Tandy                     CEabUnoX
 ConsaJtant:
 A . G . Burdett              GJ1„ B-Jc(Em). C-En*,
                              PXCX. fXStri«.E.




Department of Administration,                                                                       8 May 1 9 8 5
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
S 7 Q 2T N .


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                          S'afety of Sports Ground Act 1 9 7 5
                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                  Thank you for your letter of 2 May giving the comments
of the Officer Working Party on the proposals which we sent
to you on 9 April.
                  In the Interim period several of the points which you
raised had already been incorporated in our latest scheme
which has yet to be considered by the Club Board.                                                   However I
would ask that further consideration should be given to the
request in paragraph                            (c) of your letter for a second gate to
be installed in the radial barrier and for the new radial
barrier which you have asked for to have two gates.                                                  If these
gates are meant for use in emergency it would mean having                                                        a
steward in attendance on each occasion, the expense of which
would hardly be justified.                                  It is our view that in the event of
emergency,spectators can be evacuated quickly enough by the
gates on to'the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear.
We will of course be prepared to discuss the matter with the
Fire Officer's staff should you so wish.

                                                                             Yours sincerely,
                                                                  istered in England - Na 1833144
t   O
                    DV/JC/593/5           WE/KB/6705                         lOth May, 1985.
              I
                                         D. Vaughan                          422


Dear Sirs ,
                       .i         *
Safety of Snorts Grounds Act) 1975 "                                           - •~ -....
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

In reply to your letter of 8th May, the extra gates referred to in p a r ag r ap h ■
(c) of ny earlier letter of 2nd May were included primarily at the request
of the South Yorkshire Police.
                                  *



Provided that the remainder of the points raised by the Officer Working Party
are incoprorated in the latest proposals (yet to be considered by the C l u b ) ,
the Police are prepared to concede the request for two gates per radical fence
in the right feand area of the Mappings Lane E nd Terrace (indicated as”"hone
supporters' terrace cn the p la n) .


                                       Yours faithfully,




                                       Chief Executive.




                                                             v s lk     £. - 1 * C h *< Cd, s-tH
                                                                  ^ ^ -C . ^              \/'c.*-vS


Messss. Eastwood & Partners,                                 C<t- p y   “U    C. ■ C.   ; C. . p ” £
Consulting Engineers,                                            '■+ B A
St. Andrews Souse,                                                            -*•;
23 Kin^field Road,
SHEFFIELD.                                                                10 . s ' ■
S U 9AS
3 to c t//tt6 w   r   / /
         \
                                                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                                      (CJ Act, 1967, s.9:                   MC Act, 1980, s.102;              MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


              STATEMENT OF                                                                  CLIVE CALVERT

              DATE OF BIRTH                                                                 B.

              OCCUPATION OF WITNESS                                                         Police Inspector

              ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER                                                  South Yorkshire Etolice, HQs D & C Dept,
                                                                                            Police HQs, Snig Hill, Sheffield S3LY 8

              This statem ent, consisting of              2         pages each signed by m e, is tru e to the best of my knowledge and belief and I m ake it

              knowing th a t, if it is ten dered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know

              to be false or do n o t believe to be true.


              Dated the          27          d8V of         June                  19     90-
                                                                                                                       C Calvert
                                                                  S igned

                                                           Signature witnessed b y ............. j .Cleverley..Det.              Insp...

              j                                                                                                       being unable to read th e statem en t below.

                                                                                                                                                            , read
              I,                                                                  of

              it to him before he signed it.

              Dated the                       day of                              19



              Further to my previous reports and statements concerning Hillsborough

              Football ground, particularly R55D dated 19 May 1989, and R55E dated 16

              June 1989.

                  I gave evidence to Lord                                Justice Taylor's enquiry on 28 June1989.

                  I have examined 3 items                                of copy correspondence frcm the submission to the

                  enquiry by Sheffield City Council, as follows :

                  1.    Copy letter 2.5.85                               -      SYCC to Eastwood and Partners

                  2.    Letter 8.5.85                     - Eastwoods                    to SYCC

                  3.    Copy letter 10.5.85                             -      SYCC to Eastwood and Partners.

                  In the first letter (1) above, a proposal for new radial fences, mention

                  is made of two gates to be installed, and second gates to be installed in

                  existing fences.

                  In the letter, item (2) this suggestion is resisted on grounds of expense

                  of stewarding.

                  In the letter, .item (3) SYOC say that "the Police are prepared to concede


GEN/5             Signed . . .   .C .Calvert..........................................   Signature w itnessed b y ............... J .Cleverley .
        CEW
                                                                                                                                                     cont'd.
                                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                  -   2-
                           (CJ Act, 1967, s.9: MC Act, 1980, s. 102: MC Rules, 1981, r.70)


        Continuation of statement of                             CLIVE CALVERT

        the request for two gates per radial fence."                                                      There is a note handwritten

        on this copy as follows : "Agreed over the phone with Cl Clive Calvert."

        At this time a considerable number of changes were being considered by the

        club.      The idea of extra gates in the radial fences was only a small part

        of the whole.

        The Chief Superintendent 'F' Division at this time was Mr Brian Moseley,

        viio died in 1986.                  He was very interested in ground improvements, and I

        would say that it was very much his personal decision as to what took

        place.           The extra radial fence gates were his idea.                                                    He took control at

        the ground on all major matches,                                                   and worked frcm the control room

        overlooking the Leppings Lane Terraces.                                                    He was therefore famxliar with

        the problems that arose there.

        I was the Liaison Officer, but on most matters I would consult Mr Moseley,

        and on a question like this the Police would present a single policy, over

        viiich Mr Moseley was the controlling influence.

        To my recollection, I was contacted by Mr Vaughan of SYCC about the club's

        objection to the radial fence gates, and I consulted Mr Moseley, before

        replying to him that the Police were willing to concede this point.                                                           There

        were other requests which were thought to have greater priority.

        The reason for originally requesting gates to be installed lower down the

        terrace, adjacent to the perimeter fence, was two fold.                                                              First to allow

        better access by the Police to the front of the terraces to sort out crowd

        trouble;          second, to allcw easier movement of spectators between pens.                                                   In

        my opinion the first of these two reasons was most important to the Police

        at that time.




GEN/6   Signed . . . .   .C .CellVGA.L   .......................................   Signature witnessed by ■ ■ ■ ■
T   x   >   o   o   m   »   T   /   «   ?
                                                       C. CALVERT

When the 1985 prop osals were being considered and going
through there was a sugg estion at one stage from the
Police that there should be a second gate in the radial
fences. - A. I have seen that on the papers.
Was that something that you initiated, that suggestion?
- A. I have looked at it and I will be quite honest, I
cannot remember initiating it. I can remember it now
but it was not one of my m a i n priorities.
Can you remember what the specific purpose of the
suggestion was? - A. Not really, no.
Go to page 265 and o. Notes of an officer working party.
You were not present. - A. No.
The natter I w o u l d just like your help with is on page
266, Letter I, a reference to the gates in the pitch
perimeter fence b eing for both security access and
emergency egress purposes. - A. Yes.
Was that your understanding? - A. Yes. I heard the
comment about the gates and I have always considered
the gates were used for both purposes.
Did you?-give arty thought as to what .emergency m i g h t ’-- ' x'tcm
occur at that end of the ground? - A. One of the reasons-
I have seen the gates used for is when there has been
fighting on. the terraces and I have also seen it used
when there has been a flare discharged, an emergency ships
flare discharged on the terraces, which has caused
total chaos.

And has that resulted in large numbers of people being
evacuated on to the pitch?- A. We have certainly brought
then out.  I would not sav
                         * large
                              O numbers.

Because v;e now know that on the day this disaster occurred
the gates were not large enough for people to come out
either quickly or in any numbers.   Is that not something
you have considered beforehand?- A. When we have had to
use then for any purpose in the past they have been
adequate for bringing the numbers out we wanted to bring
out.  We have brought them out to transfer them round
from one pen to the other when they have got themselves
into the wrong area of the ground and certainly it has
been adequate.
Can you go, please, to page 292? These are the minutes
of an officer w o rking group, 13th of November, 1985, at
which you were present. - A. Yes.
And it is items 5 and 6 that I w o u l d like to ask you
about. Item 5, the Police reported on the continuing
