CM
                                              pc 2453     a;::ond kounsfohd
                                              ci unifohk.




I an the above name d and currently engaged in uniform beat duties at Main
Street Police Station, Ho therham.


On Saturday 15th April,1939j I was o# duty in full police uniform and paraded
at Kain Street Felice Station at 8.30AK in readiness for transportation to
Hillsborough Stadium,Sheffield,where I was to be deployed as part of seriel
l6.r.y i^meadiate commanding officers v;ere Inspector Broomhead and sergeant 2171
Keenan*


At approximately 9.50AK this date I was sat in th' 'North' stand with my seriel
where we were briefied by aenior officers in overall connand.
Following this I consumed a packed lunch in the stand and then I was briefed
by Sergeant Keenan as to my individual duties together with PC 179 Sykes
who was assigned to work with me during the tour of duty*


At about 11.15AM myself and PC Sykes took up our designated position at the junction
of Southey Green Hoad and Ilalifan Hoad.At this junction is the White Hors-., public ho us?
and at about 11.30AT. I saw a ?3V pull up at this junction and the full compliment
of passengers alighted and made straight for the public house. I walked over to the
front door and spoke with the licensee whom I have known for 15 years.Mr. Clewes
initially informed these supporters,who all spoke with Liverpool accents,that
they could not cone in as a group because of possible trouble,however after
they had pleaded v.dth him for several minutes he capitulated and they all entered
with   a token warning by the   licensee not to cause trouble.
This senario was repeated as many more fans tried to enter the public house and
only   a short time later thedoor:; were closed and     a ’doorman1 who was apparently
just aregular customer was      employed to let out a number of customers before letting
the same number in*
During the course of the next 3 hours or so myself and PC Sykes were called upon
to prevent Liverpool fans from urinating onto adjacent walls, as they were leaving
the public house,urinating and then re-ent-ring* At one time the pressure to get into
this hostilary was such that people were actually climbing.in through the toilet
windows.
I was asked on many iany occasions where another public house was and when it was
pointed cut that we did net know .any people simply walked about 30 yards to the neorb*
'Thresher1 off licence.I saw that there were actually que les to get into this
shop for almost J hours,people were cowming out with arms full of cans of intoxicating
liquor.They were invariably drinking it close by although in total honesty
although they were boisterous and noisy I saw little trouble.The atmosphere up
*.




      until1 about 30 minutes before the intended kick off time of J P li was quite friend*

      bUt.al,taiS junctur° onc 5GnG3d a sutfsn PWi n G o f mood which I can only -’escribe   ;
      panic.It was as though a -oat number had lost track of time and were suddenly
      aware of why they had visiter?, the city.

      ~ nar>S *ex°dus*ensued leaving the public house and the already closed off licence
      empty(the latter apparently due to selling out of intoxicants,which was of little
      supprise).

      x was instructed to wait until! about 2.55H: when our c,oriel were to walk      ov;n
      to Claywheels Lane traffic office for our scheduled meal break.
      This was actually what happened but at about 3HI just as we were turning into Claywhee]
           our seriel was stopped by an offJ ccr in a police transit van who informed us
     that all avaiable manpower were required i :mcadi ate ly at the Leppings Lnau end of
     the ground.

     For several minutes prior to this I was aware via sergeant KeenanCwho was in
     po«session of a personal radio)that something was happening outside the ground
     but we were un^er the impression that fighting had broken out.
     We were transported the short distance to Leppings Lane and on debusing I saw
     a .targe number of liverpool supporters around the metal gates at this location.
     In the maia they were being 'held back' by mounted officers and I saw several
     officers asking them not to push.The atmosphere at this time was ’frightening'.
     There were large numbers of fans who were shouting,using abusive language and who wore
     venting eheir anger at police officers.That came shining through to me was that
     they were going to get into -he ground and it mattered not what was said to them,
     1 yaS a3ked 011 ^ r o u s occasions if the kick off time was to be delayed but by
     this time I was seperatcd from ny sedel and. without a personal radio.
     "or se*vral cinute3 after -riving at Leppings Lane I was instructed to clear
     a way for emergency vehicles and to that end I together with other officers who
 by now --sre joining us actually man-ged to expedite this in a fashion.
     The ateosph re by now was 'charged‘heavily with hostility end anger, this being
 directed at us,the more co-xion call being that we were ’:eerderersfand were !-i:ig
 nothing to save lives.

 This continued for quite some time but due to a lack of personal radios must
of the initial information was ccr-niag from liverpool supporters who were
leaving the ground.

I renamed at the outside of the Leepings Lane end of the ground until about 5.3 0
       E”:clstlnC v’ith the dispersal of the crowd.I did not enter the ground except after        !
the events and did not handle any bodies.I together with ny seriel were debriefed                 ^
at about 5 .3 OP: and then was transported back to Lain Stret Police Station.
                                                                                                  Ms




                   ‘   ‘                          : '   .7 ’                   .. .           .   f‘
