■■ j7          2_j~)                                                                     m

                                                                CO

                            IN D E X       T O    B L IN D IY F .



 D ocum ent                                                                 Pcisc N xd


 1. Reading List                                                            1

 2. Form 86 A                                                               2 -1 7

 3. Affidavit In Support                                                    1 8 -2 2

 4. Exhibits                                                               2 3 -3 6

 5. Relevant legislative provisions, case-law, Statutory Instruments and Home Office Circulars

        a) Extract From Royal Commission on the Police 1962                37 - 50

        b) Section 4 o f the Police Act 1964                               5 1 -5 2

        c) Section 48 o f the Police Act 1964                              5 3 -5 4

        d) Section 111(1) o f the Local Government Act 1972                55

        e) Section 6(1) o f the Police Act 1996                            5 6 -5 7

        f) Section 88 o f the Police Act 1996                              5 8 -5 9

        g) Home Office Circular 77/87                                      6 0 -6 3

        h) Home Office Circular 4/1998                                     6 4 -6 9

        i) R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson                 7 0 -7 2
        and Dalton - The Times 8.8.89
                                     R EA D IN G LIST


With respect, the Applicant respectfully submits that the only essential reading in this
matter consists o f the Form 86A itself, the Affidavit in support, and the statutory and
other material referred to therein, copies o f which are at enclosure 5.
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST




  NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                           (FORM 86A)




In the matter o f an application by Michael Hedges for leave to apply for Judicial Review (Ord
53 r.3).

And in the matter o f The Police Act 1996, and the Local Government Act 1972.




    Applicant’s Ref. No.         Notice of APPLICATION               Crown Office Ref. No.
                                   for leave to apply for
                                 Judicial Review (0.53 r.3)


 This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance obtainable from the Crown Office.


  To the Master o f the Crown Office, Royal Courts o f Justice, Strand, London, WC2A 2LL


Name, address and description of                   Michael Hedges
applicant(s)                                       Chief Constable
                                                   South Yorkshire Police
                                                   Police Headquarters
                                                   Snig Hill
                                                   Sheffield
                                                   S3 8LY


Judg m ent, order, decision or other The decisions made by the Respondent on 5th
proceeding in respect of which relief is February 1998 .
sought
                                         1.     that the Respondent has no legal
                                         power to provide financial assistance to Mr


                               008     1_
                                                                        vhi <i57-WHW.app.pcm.O5O2.itf.d0c
                                               I
                                                 David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
                                                 relation to their costs and expenses o f
                                                 defending the private prosecutions brought
                                                 against them by the Hillsborough Family
                                                 Support Group (“HFSG”), by information
                                                 dated 10th July 1998, and that any previous
                                                 decision o f the Respondent, or any officer
                                                 acting under its authority, to make such
                                                 assistance available is null and void.

                                                 2.      that the Respondent has no legal
                                                 power to provide financial assistance to Mr
                                                 David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
                                                 relation to the costs o f any judicial review
                                                 proceedings brought by either of them :
                                                 whether relating to the decision of the Crown
                                                 Prosecution Service not to take over the
                                                 conduct o f private          prosecutions and
                                                 discontinue such prosecutions, or to any
                                                 decision of the Clerk to the Sefton
                                                 Magistrates’ Court to challenge the payment
                                                 of the officers’ costs o f proceedings before
                                                 that court from central funds, or to any other
                                                 decision of any court, authority or body
                                                 arising from such prosecutions ; and,
                                                 accordingly, to reject the applications o f Mr
                                                 Duckenfield and Mr Murray for financial
                                                 assistance in relation to such proceedings.



                                         R EL IEF SOUGHT


Judicial review in the form o f :


(1)    Certiorari to quash the decisions o f 5th Febaiary 1999 identified above.


(2)    A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David
        Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending
        the private prosecutions brought against them by the Hillsborough Family Support
        Group.


(3)     A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David



                                                                         clii.i)57-(HJ<W.app.|H3ii.0502.itf.doc
                                    oo          2
       Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending
       the private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG as and when such costs
       and expenses are incurred and irrespective o f the outcome o f the prosecution and any
       application for costs made against the private prosecutor.


(4)   A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David
       Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending
       the private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG irrespective of whether
       they have attempted to obtain or could obtain financial assistance by way o f Legal Aid
       and / or a declaration that the availability or otherwise of legal aid is an irrelevant
          consideration.


(5)   A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide         financial assistance to David
          Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to the costs and expenses o f any judicial
          review proceedings brought by either o f them relating to the decision of the Director of
          Public Prosecutions not to intervene in the private prosecution.


(6)   Adeclaration that David Duckenfield and              Bernard    Murray have a legitimate
          expectation that their costs and expenses o f defending the criminal prosecution will be
          met by the Respondent as and when such costs and expenses are incurred.


(7)   The applicant seeks an expedited hearing o f the substantive application for judicial
          review (if leave to move is granted) together with an Order abridging time for service
          o f the Respondent’s evidence to seven days or such further period as the Court deems
          appropriate.



Name and address o f applicant’s solicitors,        Hammond Suddards Solicitors
or, if no solicitors acting, the address for        2 Park Lane
service of the applicant                            Leeds
                                                    LS3 1ES

                                                    ~          iSB.CHI.57-9


 Signed                                                                Paled   1 0 - 2 - ^
               GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT


The issues in this case are :


(a)    whether the Respondent was in error in law in resolving on 5th February 1999
        that it had no legal power to provide financial assistance to David Duckenfield
        or Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses of defending the
        private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG by information dated
        10th July 1998 and in determining that any previous decision of the Authority,
       or any officer acting under its authority, to make such assistance available was
        null and void ;


(b)     whether the Respondent was wrong in law in resolving that it had no legal
        power to provide financial assistance to David Duckenfield and Bernard
        Murray in relation to any judicial review proceedings in respect o f the private
        prosecution brought against them ;


(c)    whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance as and when
        costs are incurred in defending the private prosecution or whether power is
        limited to meeting any costs incurred and not recovered from other sources.


(d)    whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance irrespective of
        the availability o f legal aid.


As to the Applicant:


(a)    The Applicant is the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. As such it is his duty
        to secure the enforcement o f the law in his area and he is responsible for the
        disposition and control of his force. David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray
        are former police officers who were acting in the course o f their policing duties
        at the time when it is alleged that they committed criminal offences.         The
        decision in question is of very real consequence to the Applicant.        If it be
        correct in law that a police authority has no power to grant financial assistance *
        to police officers who subsequently face a private prosecution arising from their
        conduct when acting in the course of their duties, it will have very significant
        repercussions with regard to the recruitment of police officers, discipline and
        effective policing. The Applicant made representations before the Respondent
        before it made the decisions in question.   In the circumstances, the Applicant
        has a sufficient interest.


(b)     The Applicant has no alternative remedy.


                                     TH E FACTS


On 15th April 1989 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster occurred.             Both David
Duckenfield, then Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, and Bernard Murray, then
Superintendent Murray, were on duty at the Stadium that day. They have both since
retired from the Force on medical grounds.


There have been two inquiries in respect o f the Disaster.      Lord Justice Taylor was
appointed to carry out an inquiry into the events of the disaster on 17th April 1989.
His interim report was made public on 4th August 1989.        Then in June 1997 Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to conduct an independent scrutiny as to whether
there was any new evidence relating to the disaster.         His Scrutiny Report was
presented to the House of Commons on 18th February 1998. He concluded that there
was no basis for re-opening Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, nor did he consider that there was
any material which should be put before the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority
which might cause them to reconsider decisions already taken.


In 1990 and 1997 the Crown Prosecution Service considered whether there was
evidence to support any prosecution arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster and
decided against any form o f prosecution. Plainly they did so on the basis that there
was no realistic prospect of conviction.
6.   On 10th July 1998 a private prosecution was brought by Ms Adlington, a solicitor
     representing the Hillsborough Family Support Group (an association of families who
     suffered bereavement in the disaster) against David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray.
     The officers are charged with the manslaughter o f John Alfred Anderson and James
     Gary Aspinall, two o f the deceased from the Hillsborough disaster, and also with wilful
     neglect to perform a public duty.        Further, Mr Duckenfield faces a charge of
     intentionally perverting the course o f justice in lying about the circumstances in which
     Gate C at the Stadium came to be opened.


7.   Criminal proceedings were initially commenced in the South Sefton Magistrates’
     Court. But as objection was made on the basis that the offences were not committed
     within the area nor did either defendant live in the area, and the objections were
     upheld. An order was made for the payment of the defendants’ costs from central
     funds, but the Clerk to the Justices has since queried the claims for costs on the basis
     that the Respondent had originally agreed to fund their legal representation.


8.   On 27th February 1998 in the tight o f threatened private prosecutions against officers
     involved in the Hillsborough Disaster, the Respondent considered the general question
     o f whether financial assistance should be granted to the officers concerned.            It was
     recognised that actual decisions about financial support could only be made on
     individual application. The Respondent resolved as follows :


             “I.     That in the light o f the findings o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
                    inquiry and his comments on the outcome, members do not
                    believe there is any new evidence to cause them to reconsider
                    the Authority's previous view, and remain o f the opinion that
                    the officers acted in good faith.


             2.      That the Authority agrees to authorise the ( 'lerk and Treasurer
                     to consider applications fo r financial assistance from officers
                     (serving and retired) in accordance with the provisions o f
                     Home Office Circular 77 <S7. Financial Assistance to Police
                     Officers in Legal Proceedings".


                                  007         o                        wino57-oOO‘Aapp.|K’m.05U2.itf.Uoc
      In March 1998 an application made by Mr Duckenfield for financial assistance was
      approved. In June 1998 an application made by Mr Murray for financial assistance was
      approved.



10.   Pursuant to the said decisions, those acting for M r Duckenfield and M r Murray in
      defending the criminal proceedings have done so in the expectation that their costs
      would be met by the Respondent. Very significant sums have been incurred by way of
      defence costs.



11.   During the Autumn o f 1998 the Director o f Public Prosecutions considered whether to
      intervene in the private prosecution following a request made by the former officers
      that he intervene and terminate the prosecutions.     On 18th December 1998 it was
      announced that the DPP would not intervene either to terminate or conduct the
      prosecutions.


12.   The private prosecution is proceeding swiftly, pursuant to a tight timetable, to a fixed
      committal date on 19th April 1999.


13.   At an interlocutory hearing concerning the private prosecution at Leeds Magistrates
      Court on 21st December 1998 those acting for the two former officers indicated that
      they proposed to apply for judicial review o f the decision o f the DPP not to intervene.
      They sought to extend the tight timetable imposed by the Magistrates’ Court leading
      up to the fixed date for committal.         They were unsuccessful.          The stipendiary
      magistrate acceded to the submission made by the prosecution that it was essential that
      the prosecution be proceeded with speedily.


14.   On 22nd December 1998 and 23rd December 1998 respectively Mr Murray and Mr
      Duckenfield made applications to the Respondent to extend financial assistance to
      cover the proposed application for judicial review o f the decision o f the DPP not to
      intervene.




                               003            7                        Jit i)'~ .u tin ') .ip|i |H.ni.05U2.rtf.doc
In December     1998 and January       1999 the private prosecutor made written
representations by way o f letter to the Respondent complaining about the provision o f
financial assistance to the officers and suggesting that in providing assistance to the
former officers the Respondent had acted unlawfully. Further, complaint was made
about any proposed funding o f an application for judicial review of the decision o f the
DPP.



In the light o f the complaints about funding from the private prosecutor, the
Respondent sought legal advice and then held a meeting       or   5th February 1999 to
determine whether or not it had power to grant financial assistance to the former
officers.Reluctantly, on 5th February 1999 the Respondent resolved that it               had no
power. More specifically, it resolved as follows :


       “7      ... the Authority has no legal power to provide financial
               assistance to M r David Duckenfield or M r Bernard Murray in
               relation to their costs and expenses o f defending the private
               prosecutions brought against them          by the HFSG,             by
               information dated IOth July 1998, and that any previous
               decision o f the Authority, or any officer acting under its
               authority, to make such assistance available is null and void.


       2.      In the light o f legal advice, including advice from Leading
               Counsel, members are recommended to resolve that, on
               balance, the Authority has no legal power to provide financial
               assistance to M r David Dnckenfield or M r Bernard Murray in
               relation to the costs o f any judicial review proceedings
               brought by either o f them : whether relating to the decision o f
               the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over the conduct o f
               private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions, or to
               any decision o f the Clerk to the Sefton M agistrates’ Court to
               challenge the payment o f the officers' costs o f proceedings
               before that court from central funds, or to any other decision
               o f any court, authority or body arising from such prosecutions


                         009                                      chi U57-0U09 upfviKm.U5UZrtf.tloc
                       ; and,      accordingly,   to reject the applications o f Mr
                      Duckenfield and M r Murray fo r financial assistance in
                      relation to such proceedings.


              3.      In recognition o f the fact that the legal advice provided to the
                      Authority is that it remains arguable that power exists to
                      provide the assistance referred to in 1 and 2 above, to take
                      such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation with
                       the Chief Constable, the Authority’s legal advisers and the
                       Chairman o f the A uthority, may decide as appropriate to have
                       the decisions referred to in I and 2 reviewed by the High
                       Court and to expedite such review with a view to clarifying the
                       Authority’s powers in this regard. "


17.1   As is evident from the third resolution made by the Respondent, the Respondent
       accepts that the question of whether there is power to grant financial assistance is, at
       the very least, arguable.


17.2   The Respondent does not oppose an application for leave to apply for judicial review.


                                            THE LAW


18.    Pursuant to section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 :


               “Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
               maintenance o f an efficient and effective police force fo r its area. ”


19.    Pursuant to section 111(1) o f the Local Government Act 1972 .


               '‘Without prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section
               but subject to the provisions o f this Act. a local authority shall have
               power to do any thing (whether or not involving the expenditure,
               borrowing or lending o f money or the acquisition or disposal o f any

                                      010                                  vlu (i57-(MH»y.an|i.|H;in.0502.rU'Uoc
              property or rights) which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or
               incidental to, the discharge o f their functions. ”


20.    Pursuant to their duty under section 6 o f the Police Act 1996, and its predecessor
       section 4 o f the Police Act 1964 which is in very similar terms, police authorities
       nation-wide have as a matter o f practice over many decades granted financial
       assistance to police officers to defend legal proceedings in appropriate cases.


21.    As long ago as the Royal Commission on the Police 1961-1962, the? practice whereby
       police officers were granted financial assistance, when proceedings were begun and not
       after the case had been heard and decided, in order to meet and defend private
       prosecutions was recognised and no recommendations were made to alter the practice.


22.1   Two Home Office Circulars have purported to offer guidance to police authorities in
       deciding whether or not to offer financial assistance to police officers to defend
       litigation brought against them in respect of their conduct when acting in the course o f
       their police duties.


22.2   Home Office Circular No 77/87 includes the following passages :


            “... Also acting in pursuance o f its general .statutory duty to maintain an
           adequate and efficient police force fo r its area, the police authority has
           discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds o f legal
           proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance o f
            their duties, or the interests o f the force as a whole are involved. ..


            The central principle which should guide consideration o f individual
            cases is that, where a police authority considers that an officer has acted
            in good fa ith in pursuance o f his duties or that the interests o f a force as
            a whole are involved, the officer should have the support o f the police
            authority to ensure that he has the services o f a lawyer and that he
            should not be out o f pocket.



                                                                            %tn u*7-uoo‘; u|*|* |*v*m.0502 ftl’.doc
                                   Oil           10
           A police officer should he able to carry out his duties in the confidence
           that, i f he acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably, his
          police authority will support him. I f in a case where a member o f the
          public brings a prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied
           that the officer has acted in this way, the authority should provide or
          fu n d legal advice and / or representation. ”


23.3   Home Office Circular 4/1998 includes the following passages :


              “J.     It is important that police officers should be able to carry out
                      their duties in the confidence that their police authority will
                      support them, if they act in good fa ith and exercise their
                     judgment reasonably......


              6.      It is fo r individual police authorities to decide in the
                      particular circumstances o f a case, and on the basis o f legal
                      advice, whether to make financial assistance available to
                      officers in criminal proceedings. "


24.    In R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton The Times 8.8.89 the
       Divisional Court considered an application for judicial review o f the decision o f the
       Derbyshire Police Authority, in the exercise of their discretion, not to pay any part of
       the legal expenses of two police officers with regard to an auditors inquiry.                  The
       Divisional Court proceeded on the basis that section 4 of the Police Act 1964 provided
       the statutory basis for the payment o f money to the police officers with regard to legal
       expenses. Although it would appear that there was no specific argument as to whether
       the Authority had power to grant financial assistance, the source o f the Authority’s
       power was considered by the Court and not found wanting. Ralph Gibson LJ stated
       that “section 4 o f the Police Act 1964 .. defines the duty of the police authority and the
       purposes for which the authority may spend the money provided, namely, to secure the
       maintenance o f an adequate and efficient police force” .




                                                                         «:h» o* 7.000V app.|H.m 0502.rtt‘doc
                                  U12          11
Further, in Wilson the status o f a Home Office Circular was considered. The Court
referred to and endorsed what was said by Scarman LJ in Bristol District Council v
Clark [1975] 3 All ER 976 concerning the status o f Home Office Circulars to the effect
that they are a good indication o f the purposes to be served by the relevant statute.


Both Home Office Circulars recognise the importance o f the principle that police
officers should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police
authority will support them if they act in good faith and exercise their judgment
reasonably. The earlier 1987 Circular is plainly put on the basis that there is a power
to grant financial assistance.    The later 1998 Circular does not suggest that it is
improper to extend financial assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings and
suggests that there is power and justification for doing so.


There are very strong public policy reasons as to why it should be open to a police
authority to provide financial assistance to police officers facing litigation, and more
specifically as in this case a private prosecution, arising out o f his or her conduct acting
in the course o f his or her police duties. Much is asked o f police officers in acting on
behalf o f a Force.    They have to make difficult decisions, often in the heat o f the
moment, where lives are at risk or individuals exposed to injury.           Further, they are
daily dealing with the unscrupulous and situations of conflict. Police officers, by virtue
o f their duties, are liable to be made the subject o f litigation and, indeed, litigation
without proper justification.    It is essential to effective policing that police officers
police officers know that if they make mistakes, or face litigation arising from their
work on behalf o f the Force that they will receive financial support where they have
acted in good faith.


In this case the former police officers face a private prosecution which is brought in the
name o f a solicitor who is said to represent the HFSG. On some three occasions the
DPP has declined to prosecute these officers.        This must be on the basis that the
prospects o f success do not justify a prosecution. Yet the private prosecutor is subject
to no such restraints and the prosecution continues.       It is contended that the public




                                          P                         vln(i      '      502.rtf.Joe
                                 013
       policy interest in providing financial assistanee to officers who face prosecutions where
       there is no or little realistic prospect o f success are overwhelming.


29.    In summary, it is contended that the Respondent has power arising from section 6 o f
       the Police Act 1996 to grant financial assistance, which has been recognised in two
       Home Office Circulars and by the Divisional Court in Wilson.


30.1   It is understood that the Respondent’s concern about whether or not there is power to
       grant financial assistance to police officers in these circumstances arises from the
       provision at section 88 o f the Police Act 1996 (originally section 48 of the Police Act
       1948) which provides for the liability o f the chief officer o f police in respect o f torts
       committed by constables under his direction and control.          At section 88(4)(b) it is
       provided that a police authority may pay out of the police fund any costs incurred and
       not recovered by an officer in respect of an action in tort brought against him. It is
       said that as a matter of statutory interpretation, it should be inferred from the presence
       o f this provision that Parliament intended only to provide for the recovery o f costs
       incurred by an officer in these circumstances.


30.2   It iscontended by the Applicant that this suggested interpretation o f the 1996              Police
       Act cannot be correct, for amongst others, the following reasons :


       (a)     There is no express suggestion in the Act that section 88(4)(b) was intended to
               fetter the power arising from section 6.      Section 88 does not purport in any
               sense to preclude assistance for non-tort claims.           It does not deal with
               assistance in non-tortious claims at all.


       (b)     Section 88 exists to provide for vicarious liability in respect o f actions in tort
                on the part of the chief officer of police for his officers and to ensure that the
                payment o f damages and costs will be met by the police authority and not the
                chief constable.   Sub-sections (2) and (4) are necessary to relieve the chief
                constable o f the ordinary civil consequences o f bearing the damages and costs.




                                   014                                      J it w57*oouV.app.pcm.0502.rtf.doc
       (c)     It is evident from the Royal Commission Report on the Police 1961-62 that                       «
               there was never any recommendation that the making o f section 88 (originally
               section 48 o f the Police Act 1964) would fetter the practice of making
               assistance available in non-tort claims.


       (d)     It is apparent from the Home Officer Circulars that it has never been suggested
               by the Home Office that the presence o f section 88(4) should limit the power of
               a police authority to provide assistance.


       (e)    It would be contrary to public policy to interpret section 88(4) as limiting the
               power which a police authority has under section 6.


31.    At the Police Authority meeting on 5th February 1999 those acting for the Respondent
       indicated that they considered t h a t:


       (a)    Even if the Respondent had power to grant financial assistance to Duckenfield
               and Murray to defend the private prosecution, it was limited to meeting costs
               not recovered at the end o f the proceedings.


       (b)    The grant o f financial assistance was dependent upon the former police officers
               exhausting alternative sources o f funding including legal aid.


32.    It is contended that the power arising from section 6 o f the Police Act 1996 to provide
       financial assistance is neither expressly nor impliedly fettered in the manner suggested
       and that any such conditions are inconsistent with the duty o f the Respondent to
       maintain an efficient and effective police force.


33.1   On 5th February 1999 the Respondent resolved that it did not have power to grant
       financial assistance to the former police officers so as to allow them to seek judicial
       review o f the DPP’s decision not to intervene in the private prosecution.


33.2   It is contended that the Respondent has power to grant financial assistance to police
       officers facing litigation as a result of its duty pursuant to section 6 o f the Police Act


                                                                          chi 05 7-0009.app.pcm.0502.rtt!doc
1996 to maintain and effective and efficient police force.        In the event that the
Respondent has power to grant financial assistance to a police officer facing a private
prosecution, such assistance cannot properly be specifically limited to simply defending
the private prosecution and to exclude the sort o f steps which a legally aided defendant
in criminal proceedings would properly take on legal advice extending beyond the
specific criminal jurisdiction.


The Respondent has made clear representations to the former officers that their costs
and expenses o f defending the private prosecutions will be met by the Police Authority.
On this basis many tens o f thousands o f defence costs have been incurred. The former
officers have not sought funding from elsewhere. The private prosecution is now at a
crucial stage.   It is contended that they have a legitimate expectation that they will
receive financial assistance.


In the light o f the above, the Applicant contends that the Respondent was wrong in law
in resolving that it had no power to provide financial assistance to the former officers
both with regard to defending the criminal prosecution and in respect o f any judicial
review application arising therefrom.


                                  EXPEDITION


Given (a) the proposed committal date o f 19th April 1999 (b) the tight timetable
imposed upon the parties in the run up to the committal date (c) that those acting for
Duckenfield and Murray seek to apply for judicial review of the DPP’s decision not to
intervene in the private prosecution (d) that if the former officers are to be without
financial assistance from the Respondent in defending the private prosecution they need
to seek funds from elsewhere (e) the former officers currently find themselves suddenly
without any source o f financial assistance to defend the private prosecution, this
application must be heard and determined as a matter o f extreme urgency.


It is recognised by both the Applicant and the Respondent that this application must be
determined as a matter o f extreme urgency.
    Both David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray are currently receiving medical treatment
    as a result o f what occurred at the Hillsborough Stadium. Thus far, they have acted in
    the expectation that the Respondent will support them financially in defending the
    private prosecution. They need to know as soon as ever possible whether they can
    continue to receive financial assistance from the Respondent, or whether they will have
    to try to find funds from elsewhere.




*




                                                                   chi   1157-01109.apiMviii.0502.rtf.doc
                                U 17       “>
                                                                     DEPONENT : IAN DAINES
                                                        S W O R N ON BEHALF O F : APPLICA N T
                                                                    NO O F AFFID AV IT : FIRST
                                                                      NO O F EXHIBITS : FO U R
                                                                        DATE SW ORN : 10.2.99
                                                                      DATE FILED :


                                                                 f R O W N O FFIC E REF NO ... 1999
TX TTTF. HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

OTTFF.N’S BENCH DIVISION

rR O W N OFFICE LIST

                                        t „ T H E C H IE F CONSTABLE OF SOUTH
IN T H E     iMATTER o f an application by
                                 ^ xrc     a     Y FO R JU D IC IA L REVIEW
Y O R K S H IR E PO L IC E FO R LEAVE TO A»


                                      , , (jnllth  Yorkshire Police, Police Headquarters,
I IAN DAINES, Assistant Chief Constable of .boutn
                                j   »..... a NI) SW EA R as follows :
SnigHill, Sheffield, S3 8LY M AK E OA I H AINU s w


                              .          ii ,                    Yorkshire Police. 1 am duly authorised to
 1.    I am the Assistant Chief Constable of Soutn
                                 , , „• e             fh i.-r Constable o f South Yorkshire Police.               I
       swear this affidavit on behalf o f the Chicr
                                                 -jnniir'ition for leave to apply for judicial review of
       make this affidavit in support of an appli
             • j ••              c   fu Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e A u th o r ity m a d e o n 5th February 1999
        certain decisions of the South Y orKsmrc
       referred to in RSC Appendix A Form No HOA.


                                          1 mutters deposed to within this affidavit are within
 2.    Save as stated herein, allfacts and matters ucpo->
        my knowledge, information and belief


                                          u- u ioutline and to w h ic h 1 refer in this Affidavit are
  3.   The      concerns andworries      which 1outline an
                                               . a ..,.,I i cannot stress too highlyhow important it is
           shared by The Chief Constable Indeed,
                                                   .      o f whether there is power to provide financial
           to The Chief Constable that the question
                                                    i.
           assistance to police officers be r e s o i/e u
                                                            Moreover, while clearly it is a matter for the
                                          • I f r nmner and efficient policing that it be established
           Court, it is regarded as crucial tor pr >|
                                                 I                                      .. • i-rnice It is a matter of th
           that there is power to grant financial a >»i >*




                                              018         i
I have read the Notice of Application prepared by those advising the Chief Constable
and confirm that the factual assertions contained therein are true.


There is now produced and shown to me:-


a)        marked ID1 a copy of the recommendations section o f a report dated 1
          February 1999 and prepared by Messrs Garretts, the South Yorkshire Police
          Authority’s legal advisors. On 5 February 1999 the Authority resolved to act
          in accordance with paragraphs 1 - 4 of those recommendations. The terms of
          those resolutions are set out in the body of the Notice of Application.


b)        marked ID2 a letter from Messrs Garretts dated 10 February 1999 on behalf of
          the South Yorkshire Police Authority which indicates that they do not oppose
          the application for leave to apply for judicial review and supporting the

           application for an expedited substantive hearing ;


 c)        marked ID3 copies of the informations laid against David Duckenfield and

           Bernard Murray dated 10th July 1998.


 d)        marked ID4 correspondence received from The Association of Chief Police
           Officers and the Police Superintendents Association of England & Wales
            dealing with the concern which these bodies have with regard to the decision
            made by the Police Authority and the need to have this application determined

            as a matter of urgency.


     It is my experience that there has never been any question but that a Police Authority
     has the power to grant financial assistance to a police officer who faces legal
     proceedings brought in respect of his or her conduct whilst on duty. I know of no
     other case or set of circumstance in which the Police Authority s power to grant
     assistance has been questioned or challenged. As can be seen from the letter from the
     Chief Constable of Derbyshire Constabulary, President of the Association of Chief
     Officers, the decision that there is no power to provide financial assistance which is the



                                                                       chi uf7JKJW.aU'. 1U0 2 .pon.wd.doc
                             019
    Aft fc.4s.fef K~-|ri|-fBfr1




                     essential subject matter of this application is contrail to current practice and
                     understanding. The resolution of this issue is a matter of national importance.


          7.         I am greatly concerned at the suggestion that there is no power to provide financial
                     assistance to police officers who face legal proceedings. I consider it absolutely vital
                     that officers should know that if they act in good faith in performing their duties that
                     their Police Authority will support them in the event that they face litigation.


          8.         I fear that if officers do not enjoy the confidence that they have this form o f support,
                     that we will see defensive policing. That is, officers deciding not to act when faced
                     with a difficult situation in case it rebounds upon them, or officers seeking to push
                     decision making up the rank structure rather than taking responsibility themselves. It is
                     absolutely vital that officers feel confident about immediate decision making. This is
                     essential to proper policing.


           9.        It is important to bear in mind that it is a particular feature of police work that it is
                     usually the most junior officers who are faced with the immediate problems o f
^                    managing or dealing with violent or dangerous situations. They are at the front line, as
                     it were. These officers need to know that if they act in good faith they will have the
                     support of their police authority in the vent that they become the subject or target of
                     litigation. It is essential to effective policing that junior officers have the confidence to
                      make the difficult decisions and choices which are demanded o f them in the course o f

                      their duties.


           10.       Policing necessarily involves situations of conflict. Police officers daily deal with the
                      unscrupulous who are well practised in taking advantage of any weaknesses which they
                      may be able to exploit. It takes little imagination to think of how the threat o f private
                      prosecution may be used to intimidate where police officers do not have the confidence
                      that they will receive police authority assistance should any such threat be realised.


               11.    I am concerned that if police officers cannot act in the knowledge that they will be

                      supported if they face litigation that it will impact on recaiitment



                                                     02 0                                    .111   all 1OOCpcin.wd.doc

    I
I


    12.       As a result o f the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster tragically 96 people died. The impact
              on South Yorkshire Police has been enormous.         Such is the profile of the private
              prosecution that the whole Force will know of the decision on the part of the Police
              Authority to cease funding. 1 have no doubt that the decision will be the subject of
              much concern within the Force, both with regard to the way that David Duckenfield
              and Bernard Murray have been treated and how the decision will affect all current
              officers.   Further, given the press coverage o f events, it will not have escaped any
              officer’s attention that the decision ter eease funding came about as a result o f
              representations made by the private prosecutor.


    13.       The decision to cease funding has come at a crucial stage in the private prosecution.
               The decision can only have come as a major blow to the two former officers who have
               thus far acted in the belief that they had financial assistance. Clearly, the question of
               whether they have funding or not has to be determined as a matter o f absolute urgency
               either so that funding can be resumed so that they can continue properly to defend the
               prosecution brought against them or so that they can make alternative financial
               arrangements.


        14.   In all the circumstances, the Chief Constable seeks leave to apply for judicial review as
               sought in RSC Appendix A Form No 86A and thereafter, the substantive relief
               claimed.


     f|,P P \0 - tf\iQ
    -SWQRN-by the above named Ian Dailies)
     this              day o f February 1999  )
     atjLeeds in the Countv of West Yorkshire )
    2            UYi

        Before m e ...
                   Solicitor/Commicsirmer for Onths

        Name :
        Address:    ^ E v r C rp fV c     V o i A"




                                                                                 chi U<7-(IO<W ;iiriO O : pan.w d.doc
                                              021
'\




     ii   ;>,
     U tw>K
             DEPONENT : IAN DAINES
   SW ORN ON BEHALF O F : A PPLICA N T
            NO O F AFFIDAVIT : FIRST
              NO O F EXHIBITS : FO U R
                DATE SW ORN : 10.2.99
              DATE FILED :




          CRO W N O FFIC E REF NO ... 1999




IN TH E HIGH C O U R T O F JU ST IC E

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROW N O FFICE LIST




 IN THE M A TTER O F AN A PPLICA TIO N
 BY TH E C H IEF C O NSTA BLE O F SOUTH
  Y O RK SHIRE PO L IC E FOR LEAVE TO
     APPLY FOR JU D IC IA L REVIEW




         Hammond Suddards Solicitors
               2 Park Lane
                  Leeds
                 LS3 IES

            Ret': PCM.SB.CHI.57-9
                                                                    DEPONENT : IAN DAINES
                                                           SWORN ON BEHALF OF : APPLICANT
                                                                   NO OF AFFIDAVIT : FIRST
                                                                     NO OF EXHIBITS : FOUR
                                                                       DATE SWORN : 10.2.99
                                                                     DATE FILED :


TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                        CROWN OFFICE REF NO ... 1999

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST




                                                E X H I B I T ID1




This is the exhibit marked ID1 referred to in the first Affidavit o f Ian Daines.




 SW O R N by the above named Ian Daines)
 this '           day o f February 1999 )
 at Leeds in t|


 Before m e/_____________________________
             S o lic it o r /C o m m iis iu iie r for Oirtfis


 Name :
 Address:
NOTE: THERE 15 MATI-RIAL IN THIS TEXT AND T H E APPENDSCE5 WHICH
IS CONFIDENTIAL. IT CONTAINS INFORMATION DISCLOSED BY .MR
DUCKENF1ELD, MR MURRAY AND TH EIR ADVISER? W HICH I f . J I
BECOMES GENERALLY AVAILABLE AT THIS STAGE COULD PREJUDICE
THEIR LEGAL POSITION. MEMBERS ARE THEREFORE REQUESTED..TO
KEEP THIS REPORT 5ECURE AND D15CUS5 ITS CONTENTSJWIT>I_NQ^ N E
OUTSIDE THE MEMBERS OF THE POLICE COMMITTEE, ITS OFFICERS AND
ADVI5ERS-

FURPOSE OF THE REPORT

To consider:

 i)          the decisions taken in principle on 27Ul February 1998 to provide financial
              assistance tc Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard Murray in relation to
              certain criminal proceedings taken against them an d to review end decide
               whether to reverse or confirm those decisions;

 ii)         further applications for financial assistance from Mr David Duocenfield and
               Mr Bernard Murray to m eet their respective legal costs and disbursements in
               proposed proceedings for judicial review of:

               a.         the decision of the C row n Pres coition Service not to intervene to take
                           over the conduct of the private prosecutions brought against them by
                           Ms Ann Adlir.gtun, Solicitor, on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
                           Support Group ("HPSG");

                b.        an adverse ruling by the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices on claims
                            made for the payment of costs from central funds;

      iii)      written representations submitted by Ms Adlington, on behalf of the HFSG,
                 tc the Authority;

      RECOMMENDATIONS

,, 1. ■ ;.In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
      . \ ... '.: are recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power
               to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
               in relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions
               brought against them by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and
               accordingly to determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any



       ra;.\5*nT..*ouT!:'irc<><<3ti:ncr\}ucC'rNjiMii.!>cic
officer acting under its authority, to make such assistance available is null and
void.                                     * *

In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
are recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power
to provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
in relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of
diem: whether relating to the decision of die Crown Prosecution Service not to
take over the conduct cf the private prosecutions and discontinue such
prosecutions, or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to
challenge the payment of the officers’ costs of proceedings before that court
from central funds, or to any ether decision of any court, authority or body
arising from such prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of
Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to such
proceedings:

In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Audicrity is that
it remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1
 and 2 above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation
 with the Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the Chairman of
 the Authority, may decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1
 and 2 reviewed by the High Court and to expedite such review w ith a view to
 clarifying the Authority's powers in this regard.

 To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlingtcn, in her
 letters of 22 December 1998 to die Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to
 the members of the Authority, until the legal power of the Authority to provide
 the financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to
 the satisfaction of the Authority.




           o i liatroucr/ rs-ow i•.rxx:         I
                                                                      D EPO N EN T : IAN DAINES
                                                            SW ORN ON B EH A LF O F : APPLICANT
                                                                     NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIRST
                                                                       NO O F EX H IB ITS : FO U R
                                                                          DA TE SW ORN : 10.2.99
                                                                       DATE FILED :


IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                         C R O W N O F F IC E R E F NO ... 1999

Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION

C R O W N O FFIC E LIST




                                                  EXHIBIT ID2




This is the exhibit marked ID2 referred to in the first Affidavit ot Ian Daines.




i    A            •
 SW ORN-by the above named Ian Dailies)
 this l O ^         day o f February 1999 )
 at Leeds in H<» C n im tu o f W p g t V n rlfs h irft ^




 Before me
                S o lic it o r /C fanmiyyTcnrer tor U a t h s ^


 Name :
 Address:
                                                                                                     1 City Square
                                                                                                     Leeds LSI 2 a L
10 February 1999                                                                                     0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                     0113 207 9001 Facsimile
                                                                                                     DX 26444 Leeds ftirk Square

Crown Office                                                                                         Direct line   0113 1
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand                                                                                               Our ref       CXB/DH/KH
London
WC2




Dear Madam

R - v - The South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte The Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police

We have been instructed by the South Yorkshire Police Authority ("SYPA").

We are aware that the Chief Constable proposes to seek judicial r e v ie w of resolutions made by
SYPA on 5 February 1999. These resolutions were to the effect that SYPA did not have power to
provide financial assistance to two former police officers in relation to their costs and expenses of
defending private prosecutions brought against them arising out of the Hillsborough Stadium '
disaster.                                                                               — '

SYPA passed these resolutions with great reluctance on the basis of the advice received from
ourselves and Counsel we instructed to advise, Miss Presiley Baxendale QC and Mi Mark Shaw.-"—:

The Chief Constable contends that SYPA, and indeed all police authorities, did have power to
grant financial assistance to officers facing prosecution. This view accords with a practice which
police authorities have adopted for some 60 years, This practice appears to have been endorsed by
the Home Office in two Circulars (Number 77 of 1987 and Number 4 of 1998), although we have
now received a letter from the Home Office which appears to cast some doubt on the matter.

The Chief Constable's proceedings will raise questions of national importance. The questions need
to be determined as a matter of urgency. This is because the officers who have been denied
financial assistance as a result of SYPA's decision are fadng committal proceedings due to
commence in April 1999 in the Leeds Magistrates Court Those committal proceedings have been
given an estimate of 4 weeks.

 We understand that the Chief Constable will be seeking leave for judicial review and an order or
 direction that these proceedings be expedited.

                                                           027
 i ••ineiu >•• t mcmlvr *>• ihc And<’ vrn LocjI   A tut ol (hr »ame» nt the pattnw» r. upcn lo              Otticc* KtraunghJin Cambridge Uccdt
 inu*rv*tu>nat network of bw i<rmj                      ttun al ih# .ibuvc ofl»w ‘f he       »trc           Lon<l<«< Mancfwal" Kcadin*
                                                  miner toiuiitim i.t r*fcuU-ut!      la«wer»               A.UOCUU Him i* ScollW: Ound* * Wttron 05


                                                                                                    sjll3»* j9         iS :H         66/28/0*
                                          G arretts

                                                      -2-
                                                                                               10 February 1999



      On behalf of the SYPA, whose decision is to be the subject of review by the court we:

  1          consent to the grant of leave; and




            m any event during the m onth of March 1999; *                                 “ S° ° n M PracticabIe'


  “         7                                     ^                              * f« * *                   in « P .y


  ta tl” *T p“         et “ d e tf ta f                     * * *                                              - •
  save time, that this is a case where the Court mieht b" '          at? nlio11 at ***                          order to
  Home Office at any substantive h e S t f         8            * ** submissions «" ^                         cf the

 Yours faithfully




                                                  U ~8
\\w^owrv^n\«\
                                                      T0 0 i   * 6 2 £ 1 X0 - 5 J_L3 tititi3       <LS:TT       6 6 / 2 0 /0 1
2tM.‘0N
 \
      RESOLUTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
      FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 1999

      1. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading C ounsel members are
         recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to
          provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
          relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought
          against them by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and accordingly to
          determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any officer acting
          under its authority, to make such assistance available is null and vqid,

      2. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members are
          recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to
          provide financial assistance ta Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
          relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of them;
          w hether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take
          over the conduct of the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions,
           or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to challenge the
           payment of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court from central funds,
           or to any other decision of any court, authority or body arising from such
           prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of Mr Duckenfield and
           Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to such proceedings.

       3. In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Authority is that it
           remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1 and 2
           above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation w ith the
           Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the C hairm an of the
            Authority, may decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1 a n d 2
            reviewed by the High Court and to expedite such review w ith a view to
            clarifying the Authority's powers in this regard.

       4. To d efe r c o n sid e r a tio n o f th e p r o ce d u ra l issu e s r a ise d b y Ms A d lin g t o n , in h er
            le tte r s o f 2 2   December 1998 to the Clerk a n d Treasurer a n d 5 January 1999 to th e
            m e m b e r s o f th e A u th o r ity , u n til   the le g a l p o w e r o f th e A u th o r ity to p r o v id e th e
            fin a n c ia l a ssista n c e referred to in p a ra g ra p h s 1 a n d 2 h a s b e e n r e s o lv e d to the

              sa tisfa c tio n o f th e A u th o rity .




                                                              029

                                                                         X0 0 i PQZ £T T 0-** SLL3aaW9 .                 <LS"-TX
*00     ‘ON
             CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT


             South Yorkshire Police Authority has met today to consider issues relating to the
             funding of the defence costs of former police officers in legal proceedings relating to
             the Hillsborough disaster.


             As well as considering various legal advice, we heard representations from the
             Hillsborough Families Support Group and solicitors representing two former
             officers.



             Questions have been raised recently about the powers of Police Authorities to pay
^            the defence costs of police officers in legal proceedings. We have taken extensive
             legal advice on the matter. On balance, our advisers have concluded that Police
            Authorities do not have the powers and we have felt obliged to support that view.


             However, the issue is far from clear cut We have heard this morning from several
             other legal advisers - including the Chief Cpnstable's adviser - who are firmly of the
             view that Police Authorities do have the powers. We are therefore co-operating with
            the Chief Constable to have the true legal position determined by the court.


            The implications of this m atter go beyond South Yorkshire and could affect the
            Police Service as a whole.


•-            -




            pp>OQ0l4
                                               030

sea   z v l “on                                         X00^ tree        «* siiaaata       os'-ti      66/sa^x
                                                             D EPO N EN T : IAN DAINES
                                                   SW ORN ON B EH A LF O F : A PPLICA N T
                                                            NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIR ST
                                                              NO O F EX H IBITS : FO U R
                                                                 DATE SW O R N : 10.2.99
                                                              DATE FILED :


IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                 CRO W N O F F IC E R E F NO ... 1999

Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION

C R O W N O FFIC E LIST




                                          EXHIBIT ID3




This is the exhibit marked ID3 referred to in the first Affidavit o f Ian Daines.




SW O R N by the above named Ian Daines)
this            ‘ day of February 1999    )
at Leeds in the County o f West Yorkshire )


 Before me   *<«*•••*»••**••••
             Solicitor/Commissionerfor

 Name :
 Address:
               / I I =3 8      FROM   UINCKUJORTH SJ-ERUOOD            TO             9 0 1 1 3 2 8 4 7 0 0 1 “’   P. 0 2 *




                                 IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE




THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states tbai


             THE DEFENDANT


             DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD of



              On the 15th April 1989 at H illsb o r o u g h Football Stadium, Sheffield.

              (1)       Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                        Coiatfaiy to Common Law

              (2)           Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                            Contrary to Common Law

              (3 )          W TlfnlTy neglected to
                                              perform a public duty
                            Contrary to Common Law

               (4)          With intent to pervert the course o f justice did an act which had a
                            tendency to pervert the course o f justice in that he lied about the
                            rjrn mi«fl>vHr-i><: in which gate C became open.
                            Contrary to Common Law




                DATED THE l(TIHt>AY OF JULY 1998




                                                            032
F W




                            SUMMONS TO DEFENDANT

                        IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE

                       LEEDS CITY PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION


                                The 13^-day of          1998



 Informations have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice of the Peace, by
 ANN ADLINGTON, (Solicitor) acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support
 Group that you BERNARD DEAN MURRAY

  of

  on the 15“ day of April, 1989

  at      Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

  1.      Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
          Contrary to Common Law

  2.      Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASFINALL
           Contrary to Common Law

  3.      Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
           Contrary to Common Law



   YOU ARE THEREFORE HEREBY SUMMONED to appear oiT1^ * ^ - 2 ? K
   day of          1998 before the MAGISTRATES’ COURT sitting at WESTGATE,
   LEEDS to answer the said informations, ow \ O tT°




      Jgattee af th« P mcc for the County aforesaid
                     CV\0£vi u^otc.


                                                 033
                                                             DEPON EN T : IAN DAINES
                                                   SW ORN ON BEHALF OF : APPLICANT
                                                            NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIRST
                                                              NO O F EX H IBITS : FOUR
                                                                DATE SW ORN : 10.2.99
                                                              DATE FILED :



IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                 CRO W N O FFIC E REF NO ... 1999

Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION

C R O W N O FFIC E LIST




                                          EX H IBIT ID4




This is the exhibit marked ID4 referred to in the first Affidavit o fla n Daines.




 SW Q RN ^by the above named Ian Daines)
 this | o ^ -      day o f February 1999   )
 at Leeds in the County o f West Yorkshire )


 Before me
             Solicitor/Gtrmnnssioner foi

 N a m e:
 Address:




                                                      034
                             THE ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
                             OF ENGLAND. WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND

                             President:              John Newing, QPM., BA(Hons).,
                                                     C h ief Constable, D erbyshire C onstabulary


M. H ed g es Esq.,                                                                                       O u r Ref: JN /JB
C h ie f C onstable,
S o u th Y orkshire Police,
S nig H ill,                                                                                             5th F ebruary, 1999
Sheffield. S3 SLY.




                      I u n d e rs ta n d th a t th e South Y orkshire Police A u th o rity have received
 in d e p e n d e n t legal advice w h ic h inform s them th a t th ey h av e no p o w e r to g ra n t
 financial s u p p o rt to serv in g o r fo rm er officers facing p rosecution. This advice w as
 g iv en in respect of a p riv a te prosecution cu rre n tly faced by form er C h ief
 S u p e rin te n d e n t D uckenfield a n d fo rm er S u p e rin te n d e n t M u rray as a resu lt of th eir
 in v o lv em en t in the tragic ev en ts a t H illsborough.

                 This decision is clearly contrary to c u rre n t practice a n d u n d e rs ta n d in g
 a n d is a m atter of nation al concern. You have said th a t y o u are looking for this to be
 ju d icially review ed. C an I a sk y o u to p u rsu e the review w ith all diligence a n d o b ta in
 as early a hearing as possible.

                                                                    Yours sincerely,




                                                                       John N e w in g
                                                                        PRESIDENT




                                           telephone ( i l l 7 7 ? i               l as
                t >1 KhN SlIIKi W > \ S | \ | U l \K \ Id Vlxit VHIIHN III I'll Kl I 1 II U.l. K l i m    III Kin SlllHI   1*1> ‘•KS


                                                                   035
                       /


                                                                                                       67A Reading Road
                             Police Superintendents                                                          Pangbourne
                                                                                                      Berkshire RG8 7JD
                                   Association
                                                                                                       Tel:
                                       of                                                              Fax:

                               England and Wales                                          E-mail: Police.Supers@BTIntemet.com
                                                                                           Website: http://www.PoIiceSupers.com


R e f:D C P /W A C

 8 F eb ru ary 1999

 M r M.I.I. H edges, QPM, LL.B
 C hief C onstable
 S o u th Y orkshire Police
 Police H e ad q u a rte rs
 Snig H ill
^ e f f i e l d . S3 8LY


 D ear             \

 F IN A N C IA L SU PPO RT FO R FO R M E R PO LIC E OFFICERS D A V ID D U CK EN FIELD A N D
 B E R N A R D MURRAY

  It has com e to m y notice th at at a meeting of the S ou th Y orkshire Police A u th o rity on 5 F ebruary it w as
  decided to discontinue financial s u p p o rt for the tw o above n a m e d officers. As I u n d e rsta n d it th a t
  decision w as based u p o n in d e p e n d en t legal advice w hich they h a d received as to w h e th er there w as
  a p o w e r in law for them to m ake su ch financial assistance available, a n d in particular w h e th e r th a t
   pow er w as available under the Police Act 1996, sections 6 an d 88, a n d the Local G ov ernm en t A ct 1972,
   section 111 (1).

   H o m e Office C ircular 4 /1 9 9 8 deals w ith the issue of w h en police authorities can pro v id e financial
   assistance to police officers in legal proceedings an d in its in tro d u ctio n says " It is important that jpolice
O ffic e rs should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police authorities will support them if
   they act in good faith and exercise their judgement reasonably.".

   The decision by the South Y orkshire Police A uthority h as therefore com e as a considerable s u rp rise to
   the Superintendents' Association and w o u ld appear to ru n c o u n te r to all previous belie a n practices
   of police authorities in su p p o rtin g b o th serving a n d form er police officers. I u n d e rstan t a t y o u r
   position, as advised by y o u r C ounsel, is th a t there is clear a u th o rity in law for su ch a n action a n d th a t
   y o u in te n d to seek a d eterm ination o f this m atter by w ay of Judicial Review.

   T his m a tte r is clearly of nation al im portan ce for the Police Service a n d certainly from the perspective
   of th e S u p e rin ten d e n ts' A ssociation I w o u ld ask yo u to take this forw ard w ith all d u e espatc
   diligence an d seek as early a hearing before the H igh C o u rt as y o u can possibly arrange.

   .Yours sincerely,


    Des P arkinson
    C hief S u perin tenden t
    N ational Secretary
   Royal Commission
     on the Police
                                 1962
                     FINAL R E P O R T

             Presented to Parliament by Command o f Her M ajesty
                                   M ay 1962




                                  LONDON
             H E R M A J E S T Y ’S S T A T I O N E R Y O F F I C E
                             IMUCI- I2.i, (id.   N Fi'F
Cmnd. 1728
            v. I l l     I'I      V . U            li.iw        iK 'c n u 'il      il    > \p .- d ic n l      llw l      a    * 'o iim iis s io u          s h o u ld
     ■     i . . .I,        i    i,     I.'   i    >i,-w       | | k ' <.<>i l - l 11 i 111• >■>:< I p o s i t i o n o f I li t * p o l i c e l l i r o i l i ' J l o u l
                  I    | j i ,i , n ,   il        ,ii l a i i i ' t iiK -n l- .   lo r   llu -ir     n u iln il       iim l     a d m in is tra tio n            and.

                           i.l.n        I          r.id e r:                                                                                                                                                                 CONTENTS
                  i i ; ij.,                 11 ii i ii iii aiul f u n c tio n s o f local p o lice a u t h o r i t i e s : (2) the
                         -i.iiii> .m.i .K -.oim labilily o f m e m b e rs o f p o lice fo rces including                                                                    C iiaimur       I. Procedure of the C o m m i s s i o n ...............................................                        I
                        dn.-i .'IIi..-is o f p o l i c e ; (3) the re la tio n s h ip o f the p o lice with the
                        i uhl.. .m .i ihe ilk’.m s o f e n s u rin g th a t c o m p la in ts by th e p u b lic                                                              G hai 'TER     II. The Scope of the R e p o rt...........................................................                     •*
                        ,i :hi,; ill.- police a r e ell'ectively d ealt w ith ; a n d (4) th e broail                                                                       C haimrr      III. The Development of l ’olice l-'urees: The Polic-c Service loda.v                                                   v
                        , in,. ij i, . which s h o u ld g o v e rn d ie r e m u n e r a tio n o f th e co n s ta b le ,                                                                            Local characler o f ihe police                       ..........................................                *•>
                        I .m i-          I . - . ' .ird to die n a tu r e a n d ex ten t o f p o lice d u tie s and
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Common law derivation o f the constable’s office and
                        ! ■ . , , . ' 1 .I n i ,i k s a n d th e need to a ttr a c t a n d r e ta in a n a d e q u a te                                                                                powers     ...............................................................................               *l'
                        ii,ni:l r if i ecru its with th e p r o p e r q u alificatio n s ;                                                                                                         Subordination o f police to justices                              ...                                        II
            ,i iv. K .tiV. \ I. ih.it W e, r ep o sin g g r e a t trust a n d co n fid en ce in y o u r                                                                                            Nineteenth century legislation: two further lea lures
                   ,1.        in.I .iln li i ) . hav e u iith o i'i/ed aiul a p p o in te d a n d d o b y these                                                                                        superimposed            ....................................................            •                *•'
     I••                    ill... 11 /  uul .tppoiiil y o u th e said Sir H e n r y U n iisto n Willink                                                                                            I he theory o f the police ill theiiincleciuli century                                                      K'
      i                    i l i . n l - . J o h n , lia ro n ( ie ild e s o f l ip so m ; Sir Lidward Ian                                                                                         The modern police systems......................................................                              Il*
     i ... i I., . !'                Mr ( ieorge W ilfred T u r n e r : A r t h u r L e h m a n G o o d h a r t ;
     Vi J. j o u i J .-k .. n R o b e rts o n : O w e n T e m p l e T e m p le -M o v ris ; K a th le e n                                                                   C hapter      IV. The Purposes of the Policc and their Constitutional Position ...                                                  21
     i ; . . i i U n i,m u . Jo lm ( ia r d i n c r S u m n e r H o b s o n ; J o h n C h a rle s l iu rn u m :                                                                                    The purposes o f the police                   .............................                                  21
     U .;i!.-i           1.1.1 K cid 1 'ra .w r: C h a rle s           Leslie H a l e ;      H e c to r A la s ta ir                                                                               The present constitutional status o f the p o l i c e .................                                      22
     ii       :.-i i : il-;.-; i j.,ino.s W right M a c f a r la n e a n d M a rg a r e t A liso n R ic h a rd s o n                                                                               Status o f ranks below chief constable         ............................                                  24
         . c. *              t ..iKiiiissiviiiers for th e p u r p o s e s o f the s a id i n q u ir y :                                                                                           Legal status o f chief constables .........................................                                  25
Co        i\lj        i ; , li.iK-r ell'ecting th e p u rp o se s o f this O u r C o m m is sio n , We                                                                                                   I lclip.se o f th e c o n s t a b l e ' s s u b o r d i n a t i o n l o th e ju s ti c e
           i 1 1.     I i. . «•!.% g i \ e a n d g ra n l u u lo y o u . o r a n y live o r m o r e o f you,                                                                                                 o f ihe pcace           ...           ...                                        •                 2')
GO
     : . . , . . i ! , ..ill liel'oie yo u su c h p e rso n s as y o u sh all ju d g e likely to                                                                                                         Subordination o f chief constables lo democraiic super­
     ..ii :,| v,,,, .,m> in fo rm a tio n u p o n the su b je c t o f th is O u r C o m m i s s io n :                                                                                                     vision    ................ ...              •
     I,. ..ill i,.i iiif.Miii.uion in w r i t in g ; a n d also to call for, h a v e access to                                                                              C iia I’IER    V.     Arrangements for the Control of tlic Police             ...          ...                                      34
     .,, .1 . ..niiiii.- .ill micIi b o o k s, d o c u m e n ts , registers a n d re c o rd s as m ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Present control over chief constables:
       il 'uI j.>n ilu- Ililiost in fo rn u tlio n o n the su b je c t a n d to i n q u ire o f a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Direct legal control   ......................................................                         35
     . mi..iiinij.- ill.- iivm ise.s by ull o th e r law fu l w ays a n d m e a n s w h a ts o e v e r :
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Indirect legal c o n t r o l .............................                 ^
                \ \ D u , ,l.i In ilicse P resents a u t h o r iz e a n d e m p o w e r y o u , o r an y of
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Non-slalulory a r ra n g e m e n ts................................. ■)>'i
          . . . , i.. ... h .iii.l p ersonally inspect su c h p laces a s y o u m ay d eem il
                                                                                                                                                                                                         The case for a unified or " national ” police service ...                      40
         . - i e.lt.-ni mi ........              fo r the m o re ellectu al c a r r y in g o u t of th e p u rp o ses
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Comment on the case for unifying the police service ...                        43
         .il.iIVvlhl
                 v S I ) \ \ ,- ,1.. In these P re sents will a n d o r d a in th a t th is O u r C o m m issio n                                                                                        Police s t a t e s .......................................................................          "*5
          ...,!l i ■ >■111it■i,' in full force a n d v irtu e , a n d th a t y o u . O u r sa id C om m is-                                                                                              The case for continuing local police forces                                        ................     46
                     i,        ,iii;. |i \ c o r m ore o f yo u m ay f ro m tim e to lim e p ro c e c d in th e                                                                                          Conclusions on arrangements for the control o f ibe
                    .III..11 i t n i . n l , ,iud of e v e ry m a i le r a n d tiling th erein c o n ta in e d .                                                                                           police           ...............................................................................      -P*
                 .........I, ihe -..line be not c o n tin u e d f ro m tim e to tim e by a d j o u r n m e n t :                                                            C hapter      VI. The Police Authority    ...................................................................                      51
               AM)                il*> Im ilier o rdain that yo u , o r any five o r m o re o f y o u , have                                                                                      General functions o f police authorities ...                           ...          ...                      51
          iiK -ii. to i.-p.irl j o u r p roceeding s u n d e r this O u r C o m m is sio n fro m tim e                                                                                            The police authority as an advisory body                               ................                      54
          i, m u . ii t o n %li.-<II judge il e x p ed ien t so lo d o :                                                                                                                          The police authority’s role in appointing chief constables,
                 \ M ) Urn l i i i i Ik i will aiul p l e a s u re is th at y o u d o , w ith as litlle d elay                                                                                      deputy chief constables and assistant chief constables...                                                  55
          ,i, jr .r .ib h - . r.-|i>ui io Us y o u r o p in io n u p o n th e Blatters h erein s u b m itte d                                                                                     The police authority’s role in removing chief constables,
         l . ’i    \i,m         c o n s id e ra tio n .                                                                                                                                             deputy chief constables and assistant chief constables
                                                                                                                                                                                                    from odiee        ..................................................................                       57
                      <,i. n ,.i d m Court a t Saint Ja m e s 's the twenty-lifih day o f Ja n u a ry ,                                                                                           The police authority's role in relation lo the appointment,
                          I'll, I ; 111 Ilie I-iglMh Y e a r o f O u r R eign.                                                                                                                      promotion, discipline and removal from olliee o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                    subordinate ranks              .....................................................                       60
                                                                                                   By H e r M a je sty ’s C o m m a n d .
                                                                                                                                   R . A . BU T L E R .                                                                                   v
                                                                                         iv                                                                                     32185
,^ a t v ' v j ' d
us »huws that these relations are at present good; and we think that
they can best be maintained by accelerating the pace a t which the police
service moves towards greater unity, rather than by any abrupt and radicaj
change which might not be readily understood.                                                                        CHAPTER VI
   151.    It follows from this conclusion that we make no recommendation
to alter the present legal status of the chief constable—a matter which we                             THE POLICE AUTHORITY
left over from the last chapter. As the chief officer of a local police force      152. The diversity which characterises the police system is nowhere more
he should in our view continue to possess the status defined by the courts,     apparent than in the variety in composition and functions of police autho­
and not that of a Crown or a local authority servant But his conduct            rities. There are five or six different types. In the Metropolitan force the
and efficiency in his office should be subject to control and supervision in    police authority is the Home Secretary, aad in the City of London it is
ways which we proceed to discuss.                                               the Common Council of the City. In English and Welsh counties it is the
                                                                                standing joint committee, a body composed of equal numbers of elected
                                                                                councillors nominated by the county council and justices of the peace
                                                                                elected by quarter sessions. In the cities and .boroughs of England and
                                                                                Wales the police authority is the watch committee, a body composed of not
                                                                                more t h a n one-third of the council. In Scotland the police authority is the
                                                                                county or burgh council itself. Where police forces have been combined
                                                                                the police authority consists, in England and Wales, of an ad hoc body,
                                                                                which generally, but not invariably, contains representatives of the local
                                                                                authorities whose forces (have been com bined; in Scotland the executive
                                                                                authority is also an ad hoc body, but in this case the local authorities
                                                                                retain the title of “ police authority ”.
                                                                                  153. The present functions of police authorities are not clearly defined
                                                                                by statute, and the recommendations in this chapter are designed to clarify
                                                                                their r61e and to deal with their composition.
                                                                                General functions of police authorities
                                                                                   154. A police authority, in our opinion, ought to have four main duties.
                                                                                The first is to provide an adequate police force for its area, properly paid,
                                                                                equipped, housed and administered^ The second as to constitute a body of
                                                                                citizens concerned with the local standing aad well-being of the police,
                                                                                interested in the maintenance of law and order, and able to give advice and
                                                                                guidance to a chief constable about local problems. The (hard is to appoint,
                                                                                and if necessary discipline or remove, the senior officers of the force. The
                                                                                fourth is to play an active r61e in fostering good relations between the police
                                                                                and the public. ..
                                                                                   155. The evidence before us, including that of chief constables, is that
                                                                                police authorities cany out die first of these purposes properly: they make
                                                                                as ample provision for the police as they reasonably can. During the post-war
                                                                                housing shortage many authorities sensed high priority for police accom­
                                                                                modation. A legacy of antiquated and unsatisfactory police stations and
                                                                                headquarters remains, and with limited resources available for capital invest­
                                                                                ment in this as in other services some yean must elapse before police build­
                                                                                ing throughout the country achieves uniformly high standards; but there is
                                                                                generally no lack of intention. Nor have we any reason to think that the
                                                                                equipment provided for the police as indicative of parsimony in any significant
                                                                                number of cases. The PoKoe FederatkwP) expressed to us the opinion that
                                                                                the financial control exercised by some police authorities, concerned with the
                                                                                 ( 0 Minutes o f Evidence 18, page 1026-7.

                                     50                                                                                      51
level of the local rate rather than the policing of their area, may put a brake        committees .(*) The Magistrates’ Association suggested that the inspectors’
on propex development. The weight of the evidence does not support                     reports should always be sent to the police authorities concemed.(4)
this view.                                                                                158. We do not        that these proposals meet the situation. The difficulties
                                                                                       are inherent in the principles which underlie the present system, and what
    156. It is not useful to try to define precisely what is “ adequate ’’ provision   is required, in our view, is a modification of principle, not of machinery.
for the police. In the nature of things there is a good deal of discussion             There are at present overlapping responsibilities; and there is an inertia
between a police authority and a chief constable, and perhaps the chairman              thus resident in the system which acts against the public interest.(6) It is
of a finance committee, when police estimates are being settled. Moreover,             necessary in our opinion to put an end to the anomaly that a p o lic e authority
the police resources required in one area may not be the same as those                 appears to have responsibilities for the efficient policing of its area*, yet has
required in another. Local circumstances, the incidence of crime, geography            no technical competence in the matter and no adequate system of
and the density of population must all be taken into account. We do not                inspection.
therefore think that any rigid formula can be usefully employed to determine
                                                                                          159. To rationalise this situation we recommend that police authorities
police requirements in manpower or equipment But there are certain
                                                                                       be relieved of any legal responsibility they may have for the efficient
minimum standards which clearly ought to be adopted. Already the Secre­
                                                                                       policing of the area. An authority will continue to be responsible for
taries of State have power to approve the numbers of police in a force.
Recently, as we said in our interim report, this power has sometimes been              the proper provision of manpower, equipment and buildings and for the
used as a brake upon the expansion of forces rather than as a means of                 appointment of proper persons to Jbe the chief constable, deputy chief
encouraging their development; and we recommended that existing establish­             constable arid, where appropriate, 'assistant chief constable of the force.
ments be reviewed to ensure that they provide for adequate police                      Failure in any of these duties would, as now, endanger payment of the
protection.^) We are confident that any police authority which made no                 police grant
effort to provide for an adequate establishment for its force would be                    160. We discuss the functions of the inspectors of constabulary in the
compelled to do so by the Secretary of State. As regards the professional              inexit chapter, but it will be convenient here to set out our views about
requirements of the police, we describe in the next chapter new central                their relations with police authorities under the role which we propose for
arrangements, the provision of which we regard as urgently necessary, for               the police authority. It might be inappropriate for the whole of the
developing modem methods of policing and items of equipment. Again                     inspector’s reports to be made available to i t We recommend, however,
it is implicit in our proposals that the financial estimates of police authorities     that the inspector always meet the chairman and members of the authority
will be adequate to ensure that their forces are constantly kept up-to-date,           during the course of an official inspection and discuss with them matters for
and that local authorities will make suitable provision for this purpose.              which the authority is legally responsible. A t such meetings the general
                                                                                       state of the force would, naturally, be reviewed. To the extent that this is
   157. We referred earlier in our report to the differing interpretations put         not already done, we also recommend that the Home Department draw the
before us as to the extent of a police authority’s responsibility for the              attention of the police authority formally to all matters concerning its
efficiency of its police force and, in the phrase used in the Police (Grant)           responsibilities which may come to the inspector’s attention. We think
Orders, for the “ efficient policing of the area ". We also described in the           that arrangements of this kind will meet the legitimate concern of police
last chapter the awkward dilemma in which these statutory provisions may               authorities to know what opinion the inspector has formed of their forces.
place a police authority. If it purports to give instructions to its chief                161. A clarification on the foregoing lines of the duties of a police
constable, even stopping short of interfering with tew enforcement, it may             authority will remove the present uncertainty in the relations between the
well he going too fa r; if,     the other hand, it fails to take timely action         authority and its chief constable, while leaving the authority’s present
against an ineffective chief constable (and it is difficult to see how such            powers substantially unchanged. The most important of these is the
action can avoid the giving erf instructions or at least advice) it may be             flnnnfll duty to make financial provision appropriate to the scale of policing,
failing in the purpose for which it was appointed. The police authority’s              having regard to other demands on a local authority’s resources. We
task is rendered yet more difficult by the inadequacy of liaison between police        recommend that the principle of sharing the cost of the police equally
authorities and inspector of constabulary. The reports of Your Majesty's               between the rates and the Exchequer be maintained. It is in our view
inspectors are submitted to the Secretary of State. If they reflect adversely          entirely appropriate that locally elected people should be responsible for
on the functions of a police authority, the authority’s attention is normally
                                                                                       g>*tiing the amount to be raised locally and that, subject to any requirements
drawn to the alleged shortcomings. But it is not the practice to acquaint
                                                                                       of the Secretary of State, they should have a voice in determining the
a police authority with the nature of the remainder of the report. In these
                                                                                       size of the force, and the scale on which it Is equipped and the manner
circumstances the Association of Municipal Corporations asked us to
recommend that the Home Office should give police authorities an account                 (*) Minutes o f Evidence 11-12, page 631.
of inspections, and that arrangements should be made for formal consultation             (<) Minutes o f Evidence 14, page 793.             ;            .
                                                                                         (j) An instance was brought to our attention in which the continuance in office for eight
about the state of police forces between inspectors and members of watch               yean of a chief constable known by both the police authority and the Home Office to be
                                                                                       ineffective was tolerated because each party waited for the other to act and neither was
 (') Crnnd. 1222, paragraphs 69-71.                                                    confident o f the support of the other.
                                        52                                                                                         53
iii which it is housed. The financial responsibilities of a police authority      authorities, but there is no statutory requirement that they should do so.
involve much routine in arranging, for example, contracts for the erection        These reports vary greatly in quality, form and scope. There is good
and maintenance of police buildings and in making provision for police            reason to encourage originality in thought and approach, but a t present
training. But there is scope for an enlightened police authority to exercise      some reports tend to be obscure and unhelpful .and the lack of uniformity
considerable initiative in promoting the well-being of the police, and in         in their contents materially reduces their value in. providing the Secretaries
giving financial backing to the imaginative proposals of a chief constable,       of State with an overall picture of the police service. We therefore
particularly in the field of training.                                            recommend that chief constables in England and Wales be required to
                                                                                  submit to police authorities annual reports on the policing of their areas;
 The police authority as an advisory body                                         and, as regards both England and Wales and Scotland, that the form and
                                                                                  scope of annual reports to police authorities be guided by regulation.
     162. We turn now to the second important function of a police authority
                                                                                  We further recommend that the reports contain statistical information,
  — 10 constitute a body of citizens concerned with the local standing and
                                                                                  including information about complaints against the police, compiled on a
  well-being of the police, interested in the maintenance of law and order,
 and able to give advice and guidance to a chief constable on local problems.     uniform basis.
 Already there is much informal consultation between chief constables and            165. We are attracted by a suggestion of the Association of Municipal
 police authorities, for the authority needs to have a thorough grasp of          Corporations that the right should be recognised of a member of a council
 police problems if it is to give proper consideration to proposals for changes   to ask questions of the chairman of a police authority, on the understand­
 in the establishment of a force, and for the supply of vehicles and equip­       ing that he would be under no obligation to reply if to do so would be
 ment. It should be the duty of both parties to see that consultation is          contrary to law or the public interest!*) Again, this is already the practice
close and continuous.                                                             in some places, and it entirely accords with our view that local problems
    163. There is at present a general understanding between police authori­      of law and order should be the concern o f local people. Such an arrange*
 ties and chief constables about the limits to which discussion of police         ment would not. however, work easily in a combined authority.
 affairs can properly go, and a general acceptance that within these limits          166. Reports submitted to police authorities, other than annual reports,
 discussion is valuable to both sides. It was suggested to us by some             should be regarded as confidential to the authority. Moreover, the
 witnesses that arrangements for this purpose should be put on a more formal      authority’s role cannot, under the arrangements which we propose, extend
 basis, and that the concern of a police authority with problems of law and       beyond the giving of advice; and it will not be entitled to give orders or
 order should be unequivocally recognised. Although, for the reasons we           instructions to a chief constable on matters connected with policing. Thus
have set out in paragraphs 157-158. we do not think it either necessary           the relationship between a police authority and its chief constable will in this
or desirable that police authorities should have legal responsibility for the     field differ from that between other council committees and their chief officers.
efficient policing of the area, we regard them as entirely suitable bodies        In the latter case the role of the official is to advise the committee and to
 to give advice to chief constables on general questions of policing. To          implement its decisions on matters of p olicy; but the decisions themselves
enable them to carry out this function effectively, we recommend that             are the responsibility of the elected body. In the case of the police these
arrangements be introduced in England and Wales on the lines of the               positions will be reversed. The r61e of the police authority will be to
provision in section 34 of the Police (Scotland) Act, 1956, which enables         advise the chief constable on general matters connected with the policing
a police authority to call for reports from its chief constable. It is already    of the area ; but decisions will be the responsibility of the chief constable
the practice in many places for chief constables to make reports to police        alone. However, the lack of local control which this relationship implies
authorities, often in response, for example, to a petition from the residents     wall be offset by increasing a chief constable’s accountability for his
of a particular locality urging that police protection should be increased,       actions, and also by improvements in the cohesion of separate police
or that police activities should be directed against a prevalent type of          forces, dm ways we discuss in the next chapter, designed to make the palace
offence. The police authority is well placed to bring such opinions to the        function mow effectively as a national body.
attention of the chief constable, and we do not think that any reasonable
chief constable would refuse to report on such matters. However, in               The police anthority’s rdle in appointing chief constables, deputy chief
order to protect a chief constable from improper o r ill-judged requests               constables and,assistant chief constables
for reports on police activities concerned with law enforcement we
                                                                                     167. We now oame to the third jdk a police authority's main functions.
recommend that he be entitled to refuse a request for a report, subject
                                                                                  In this and the following section w i deal with ihe au& ority’s powers in
to a determination of the matter by the Secretary of State.
                                                                                  relation to the appointment, disaipMoe and reunovai from office of the
    164. Section 34 of the Police (Scotland) Act, 1956, requires every chief      senior officers o f'th e force; and we conclude this part of our description
constable in Scotland to submit to the police authority an annual report          of fihe rdle of the police authority with a further section, the -purpose of
 on the policing of the area, and to send copies of the report to the             wfaidh is to reoommend that the present powers of watch committees in
Secretary of State and other authorities. It is also a common practice for
chief constables in England and Wales to submit annual reports to police           (<) Minutes of Evidence 11-12, page 632.
                                     54                                                                                       55
relation to the appointment, promotion and discipline of police officers                      in principle that he should be appointed by the police authority after
                                                                                              consultation, with the chief constable. We further recommend that the
of subordinate rank be transferred to chief constables.                                       appointment of a person to be deputy chief constable be subject to the
    168 Tihe approval of «he Secretary of State is required to the appoint-                   approval of the Seoretary of State.
ment of a chief constatole.(') Tihe practice is for a police m A m V »                            172. We recommend the same arrangements for the appointment of assistant
advertise the vacancy. following which there is generally informal con­
                                                                                              chief oonstablesO). Most officers of this rank are, in fact, deputy chief
sultation with officials in A c Home Department albout the applicants. Tihe
                                                                                              constables; and it would be pointless to place the appointment of the deputy
police authority d ra w up a short list of candidates whom it proposes to
                                                                                              in the hands of the police authority while leaving the chief constable to
interview, and at this stage the Department indicates who among these
                                                                                              appoint to the one post from which, in the larger forces, the deputy could
3          be approved fey the Secretary of State and who aw regarded as
                                                                                               be found. Moreover the post of assistant chief constable is often a stepping
unsuitable with possibly a (to d category of candidates to whom, it is
                          W a r t y to giving approval. TOe D ^ a r t o ^ njay                stone to a chief constableship in another force, and it is essential that
                                                                                              persons appointed to these posts should be selected from the widest possible
also suggest the names of additional persons who might toe ^ ^ e for                           field, so as to ensure that they are filled by the best men available. In all
the appointment These arrangements have sometimes ipven nse to difficulty
                                                                                               cases, therefore, appointment should bo by the police authority after
for two reasons: because a .police authority .has                     “ K h |2                 consultation with the chief constable, and it should bes subject to the
informal advice from the D epartm ent on placing a local man, with tas
entire service in the same force, upon the short 1s t ; o r ■beranseof the                     approval of the Secretary of State.
uncertainty implied by the Department m expressing a ™ w th a tth e                           The police authority’s rdle in removing chief constables, deputy chief
Minister would have “ difficulty " in approving a p a rtK ^ a r candidat^ When                     constable? and assistant chief constables from office
disputes have arisen they have occasionally led to the threat to wlhhaM
the police grant, on the ground that a force without an approved chief                           173. A police authority may have occasion to remove a chief constable
                                                                                              from office on one or other of two grounds: on account of his personal
constable cannot be regarded as efficient
                                                                                              eonduct. or because he has cease# to be effective and no longer enjoys its
     169 . It has been the stated policy during the last few * « * * * •                      confidence in his ability to command the force properly.
 Secretaries of State will not approve local candidates w to aU toetf sem ce                     174. Removal from office on the first of these grounds, namely when the
 in the force to which they seek appointment as chirf constable. unless
                                                                                              chief constable’s personal conduct is in question, may be effected under
 suoh candidates possess outstanding m erit We think that this                   “            discipline regulations applicable to chief constables^) or, in England and
 S d ! ta t U o c S S Z l y gives rise to trcmble ^              of £ « * * < *»              Wales but not in Scotland, under the Municipal Corporations Act, 1882.
 police authority, with understandable and cxjmmendalUe loyMty to an
                                                                                              and the County Police Act, 1839, as regards boroughs and counties
 able           with long service, to consider (him along with others fo rm e
 vacant post. The occasional exceptions to the stated policy aggravate these                  respectively.
 difficulties, for they make its operation mvidious; and *: was                                  175. The discipline regulations enable the police authority, after investiga­
 to us that it would be preferable for ihe rule of no local appointments                      tion of allegations th at a chief constable has committed an offence against
  to be firmly adhered to without exception. We do not think ‘h a titw o u i                  discipline^” ) to impose a punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign
  be practicable to make this change without due notice. We K c o ^ e n d .                   or reprimand. Provision is also made for an appeal by the chief constable
  however, that seven years from now a rule be introduced that a period ™                     to the Secretary of State against the two more serious punishments ;(*) and
  recent service to another force be made a condition of appointment as a                     the regulations permit a chief constable to be suspended from office
                                                                                              pending the hearing of a charge against him, .These arrangements appear
  chief constable.
                                                                                              to us to strike a satisfactory balance betwseji tbs interests of the police
      170 We do not recommend any change in the principle that a po^ce                        authority and those of the chief constable, and we make no recommendation
  authority should be responsible for appointing its chief constabJe, subject                 to alter them except in one particular. The procedure laid down in England
   to the approval of Ihe Secretary of S tate; tout in the next chapter w e ^ o s e           and Wales for hearing a case against a chief constable provides that a police
  some procedural changes designed to remove the sources of uncertainty                       authority may arrange for the case to bq heard, and for a report to be
  and embarrassment to which we have referred.                                                submitted, by a tribunal consisting either of a person selected by the
      171 The deputy chief constable holds an appointment and not a                              (,) w0t every force has an assistant chief constable. The rank is authorised onty for a
   In a large force the deputy has the rank of assistant chief                                f o r c e n u m b * r in g   400 upwards. There are at present 31 such force* In England an<f Wales
   in a small force he may be a superintendent or even im inspector. The
   deoutv chief constable in English and Welsh boroughs us appointed by                       ^ p V T h eP o lS ^ P isd p lto e (Deputy Chief Constables, Assistant Chief Constables and Chief
                                                                                              Constables) R e p la tio m T 1952 and the Police (Discipline) (Scotland) Regulations, 1952
   the police authority; elsewhere he is appointed by the chief constable with
   the approval of «he police authority. As the deputy is required to take                               offence agatast^iscwUDe is any offence In the Discipline Code as set out in the
                                                                                              first schedule to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1952 or, ^ Scotland, to the Police
   charge of the force in the chief constable’s absence, we thank it us right                 (Discipline) (Scotland) Regulations, 1952 (S,1. 1703 and 1356 respectively.)
   (i) police Regulations, 1952, regulation 6; Police (Scotland) A ct, 1956, section 6 (1).      (») The Police (Appeals) Act, 1927.

                                             56                                                                                                     57
                                                                                                     32185                                                                                 C
                                                                                                     for which ho is responsible; or, and this is perhaps the most likely situ­
authority from a list of persons nominated by the Lord Chief Justice, or of                          ation, he might show a general decline in efficiency over the whole range ol
not more than five members of the police authority itself. We do not                                 his duties so that he was merely “ soldiering on
 think it appropriate that members of the police authority should form a                                 179. Examples of inefficiency under the first head m i ^ t be evidence of
tribunal for this purpose. We accordingly recommend that this alternative                            bias or lack of regard io r economy in tlje allocation of police houses,
provision be repealed. With this amendment the discipline regulations                                unconcern about the state of police headquarters, wasteful administrative
relating to chief constables should protect their interests adequately and                           methods or general resistance to change. Such conduct would not appro­
provide reasonable safeguards against improper dismissal. A t the same                               priately be met by disciplinary action, but it is clearly ^ s u a b le that a police
time the offences prescribed are. in our opinion, so broadly defined as to                           authority should have power to deal with i t R e g u l a t i o n 5 2 of the Police
enable a police authority to take action on any proper occasion.(u)                                  Pensions Regulations, 1955, and of the Police Pensions (Scotland) Regula­
    176. We have considered, on this basis, a request by the chief constables                        tions, 1955,(u) enables an authority to require an officer of any rank to
of England and Wales that the additional powers of dismissal contained                               retire if his retention in the force is not in the general interests of efficiency
in the County Police Act, 1839, and of suspension and dismissal contained                            and if he is entitled to receive a full pension—i.e. if he has had thirty years
in the Municipal Corporations Act, 1882. should be repealed.(1*) The                                 service We are not aware that this regulation has been used m relation
argument for their repeal is, broadly, that the modem discipline regulations                         to chief constable?. The Association of Municipal Corporations thought,
provide a satisfactory disciplinary procedure which covers, or could be                              in any case, that it was inappropriate, since a chief constable could not
made to cover, any circumstances in which it is reasonable to consider the                            be retired under its provisions unless the authority passed a resolution
suspension or dismissal of a senior police officer; and that these later                              referring to inefficiency, which would attract undesirable publicity, and to
provisions incorporate safeguards for the rights of police officers which are                         require that he should be entitled to full pension was unduly restrictive.
lacking where resort is made to the Acts of 1839 and 1882. The case for                               They therefore recommended that an authority should be able to deal with
retaining these old powers is that the discipline code was drafted with the                           sucih a case without passing a resolution calling into question a chief
lower ranks in mind, and not many of the offences which it describes are                              constable’s efficiency, that an officer might be required to retire before he
suitable bases for a charge against a chief constable; and that the retention                         was entitled to the maximum pension, and that he be given a right of
of a reserve power to suspend or dismiss is a useful safeguard. The officer                           anneal to the Secretary of S tate; or alternatively, that exercise of the power
is protected from the consequences of unreasonable dismissal by the                                   be subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, with an opportunity
existence of a right of appeal to the Secretary of State under the Police                             for the officer to make representations to him.(1*)
(Appeals) Act. On balance we think that the position in this respect in
 England and Wales should be brought into line with that in Scotland. We                                  180. We agree generally with this view and recommend that arrangements
accordingly recommend that the 19th century statutory provisions which                                on .these lines be introduced to enable a police authority to retire a cluef
 enable a police authority to suspend or dismiss a chief constable be                                 constable in whom it has lost confidence. There is ample precedent for
 repealed.                                                                                            schemes of this kind elsewhere in the public service. We also thank it
    177. So far we have dealt only with measures to secure the removal of                             preferable that action by the police authority should be subject to the
 a chief constable whose personal conduct is in question, and these measures                          approval of the Secretary of State, rather than that a chief constable should
 are in the first place a matter for the police authority and only secondarily,                       have a right of appeal to him. We further recommend that die arrange­
 in the event of an appeal, for the Secretary of State. Under the present                              ments be made the subject of a specific statutory provision and not be left
 arrangements the initiative in removing a chief constable on the other                                within the scope of the Police Pensions Regulations. On this basis Regula­
 ground w h ich we distinguished above—inefficiency—also lies with the police                          tion 52 should be revoked in its application to chief constables.
 authority. This situation requires to be examined in the light of our re­                                181 The other main field in which ,inefficiency can occur, as has been
 definition of the authority’s rdle.                                                                   stated, is that of a chief constable’s command over his force, or of his
    178. Three possibilities have to be considered. A chief constable might                            enforcement of. the law. Under the arrangements which we propose, this
  be inefficient in carrying out duties on behalf of a police authority for                            win be primarily the concern of the Secretary of State, whose powers in itos
 which the authority itself, and not the chief constable, is responsible; or                           regard we discuss in the next chapter. We recommend, however, that toe
 he might be inefficient in the way in which he commands his force—a matter                            nv^hanism of removal should always be operated through the pobce autho­
                                                                                                       rity although the decision whether to operate it or not would in these
   (u) Thus the Discipline Code provides against “ discreditable conduct" in the following             circumstances be for the Secretary of State. In practice we should expect
term s: " . . . that is to say. if a num ber o f a police force acts in a disorderly maimer or any
manner prejudicial to discipline or reasonably likely to bring discredit on the reputation of          an understanding to be established that a police authority, with its close
lhe force or of the police service ” ,           .....       «        - „ . . . ... . . .              interest in .the local standing aad well-being of the force and in the main­
    (») “ . . Every chief constable. . . may hold his office until dismissed by the standing
joint com m ittee(C ounty Police Act, 1839, s. 4, as read with the Local Government Act, 1888,          tenance of law amd order, m ig h t, properly take an initiative in making
s 9 (1)). “ The watch committee, or any two justices having jurisdiction in the borough,               representations to an inspector of constabulary, or to the Department, it it
may at any time suspend, and the watch committee may at any tim e dismiss, any borough
c o n sta b le whom they think negligent in the discharge of his dirty, or otherwise unfit for the      (») S.I. 1955/480 and 485. _
same " . (Municipal Corporations Act. 1882, s. 191 (4).) An additional power of suspension              (ii) Minutes of Evidence 11-12, page 636.
 is contained in section 26 of the County and Borough Police Act, 18S9.
                                                                                                                                                    59
                                                58                                                                                                                               C2
                                                                                                          32185
had reason to think that a chief constable was doubtfully efficient in this                      responsible for appointment, promotion and discipline is S watch com
part of his duties. Certainly any action should be preceded by consultation                      mittee. The Desborough Committee recommended, as l° f* ag°ol1aSJ rr«
                                                                                                 that these powers be in the hands of the chief constabie m all forces,
between the authority and the Department.
                                                                                                 and the Oaksey Committee, reporting in 1949, endorsed this view.
   182. Under the arrangements which we propose, the powers of the Sec­                              187. As regards discipline, the Oaksey Committee commented
retary of State would be limited to requesting a police authority to retire
                                                                                                           “ The police are a disciplined body and discipline is ahnost always
an inefficient chief constable. Refusal to comply with such, a request would,
however, endanger payment of the police grant, since the police authority                               safer in the hands of an expert individual than in those of a lay wm -
                                                                                                        mittee. No commanding officer can exercise proper authority m
would then be continuing in office a chief constable from whom the Secretary
                                                                                                        matters of internal administration if he has continually to share that
of State had withdrawn his approval.                                                                    authority with a committee, particularly an elected body subject
   183. So far we have discussed the arrangements for removing chief                                    inevitably to local pressures and prejudices
constables from office. In our view the same considerations should apply                          Similarly they observed that selection for promotion was not a function
to the removal from office of deputy and assistant chief constables.                              w h ic h police authorities should expect to perform, and
   184. At present the disciplinary authority for deputy and assistant chief                      that this. too. should be in the hands of chief constables. They
constables throughout Scotland, and also in the English and Welsh boroughs,                       commented—
is the police authority; but in county and combined forces in England and                                   “ The chief constable and the officers who advise him see the men
Wales the disciplinary authority is the chief constable. The Oaksey Com­                                 at work, and they alone can have a sufficiently intimate know ledgeof
mittee recommended(“ ) that in all cases the police authority, and not the                               the merits of the different candidates to decide who should be selected
chief constable, be the disciplinary authority for assistant and deputy                                  for promotion
chief constables. They held the view, with which we agree, that the
                                                                                                  Appointment they regarded as largely a formal matter which was. in any
chief constable is too closely associated with the men holding these posts
                                                                                                   case, in practice generally left to the chief constable.(18)
to enable him to feel satisfied that he can always act with complete
impartiality in disciplinary matters concerning them. We accordingly                                  188. We do not think that any further continuance of this anomaly
reco m m en d that the police authority be the disciplinary authority for                          as between the English and Welsh county borough forces and all other
deputy and assistant chief constables in county and combined forces in                             p o lk e ^ o r c e s in Great Britain is justified; and we have been surprised
England and Wales, thus making the pattern uniform throughout the                                  to discover that earlier recommendations on this matter have not tee
country.                                                                                           adopted. We accordingly strongly urge that the powers of watch com­
                                                                                                   mittees in relation to the appointment, promotion and discipline of sub-
    185 We also recommend that the changes in the law which we have                                ordinate ranks be now transferred to chief constables. We further
proposed in paragraphs 175-180 as regards the discipline and removal                               recommend that watch committees cease to have any appellate function in
from office of chief constables be applied to deputy and assistant chief
                                                                                                   regard to discipline.                                           . . .
constables. The effect of this will be that a charge against such an officer                           189 This recommendation will not touch a police authority s powers
will not be heard by a tribunal consisting of members of a police authority;                        under Regulation 52 of the Police Pension Regulations to retire an officer( *)
 that a police authority will cease to have power to suspend or dismiss                             in the interests of the efficiency of the force provided he is entitled to
 a deputy or assistant chief constable except under the discipline regula­
                                                                                                    the maximum pension, since this jS&wer is not related to discip in .
 tions ; and that statutory provision will be made for the compulsory
                                                                                                    think that this power should contWfie to lie with a police authority, since
 retirement of a deputy or assistant chief constable on the ground of
                                                                                                    it is the authority which has to bear the cost of the pension of a retired
 inefficiency to be made subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
                                                                                                    police officer. But we recommend that the power be exercisable only with
                                                                                                    the approval of the Secretory of State. In our interim r«poet we referred
The police authority’s role in relation to the appointment, promotion,                              to evidence that Regulation. 52 was .being applied syst<matioaUy in^swne
      discipline and removal from office of subordinate ranks(17)                                   forces with the object of creating a promotion flow and without regard
   186.    Apart from the foregoing proposals in relation to senior officers                        to the overriding need to retain officers for the maximum service of which
we do not think it appropriate that police authorities should have powers                           they are usefully capable. We commented .that we should n o te x p e c tth ^
relating to the appointment, promotion and discipline of the police. Some                           regulation to be used arbitrarily as if it were of m iveisaJ ajppiication (*)
                                                                                                     Further evidence that the regulation is being used m some areas for ttas
70 per cent, of police officers serve in forces where these powers are vested
                                                                                                     purpose has come to our notice dujmg the preparation of this report, w e
in chief constables; and only about 30 per cent., namely those in county
borough forces in England and Wales, serve in forces where the authority
                                                                                                          oth er Ihan                  S        or assistant chief c o n s t a b l e paragraphs
  (“ )Cmd. 7831, paragraph 261.                                                                    180 and 185.
  (>’) i.e. police officers other than chief constables, deputy chief constables and assistant       (» ) Cmnd. 1222, paragraph 112.
chief constables.
                                             60                                                                                            61
                                                                                                                                                                                      C3
                                                                                                       32185
regard this as an entirely improper use of the regulation, and we recommend                         the present status of cadets be reconsidered with a view to giving chief
that the Secretaries of State give instructions to police authorities that the                      constables control over them.
regulation is not to toe applied as a standing rale to provide for the automatic
retirement of officers in the sole interests of promotion policy.                                   Support of police officers In legal proceedings . . .
   190. It is our intention that, under tihe foregoing proposals, the discipline                       195. There is a fresh responsibility which we think should be placed
of subordinate ranks should in every case be the concern, of the chief                              upon a police authority. It should, in our view, b e liable for tortious acts,
constable and not the police authority. The residual powers of suspension                           or delicts, committed b y a police officer in the course o f Ibis duty as a
and HitmUtal conferred an watch committees by section 26 of the County                              constable, o r in the untended execution of such duly. This proposal
and Borough Police Act, 1859, and on watch committees or justices by                                represents a significant departure from the present position which, as we
section 191 (4) of the Municipal Corporations Act, 1882, should accordingly                         indicated in Chapter IV, was affirmed by the decision in Fisher v. Oldham
be repealed in their application to subordinate ranks.(*') The chief                                Corporation and other cases.
constables told us, however, that these provisions have still a certain                                196. At present, because a constable is not a servant of the police
usefulness in making it possible to suspend a man who has committed a                               authority, the latter cannot be ma^e liable for his wrongful acts. Conse­
serious offence in such a way as to prevent him from resigning to avoid                              quently an injured plaintiff has tqjpely on his right of action against the
disciplinary action and dismissal,^2) since suspension from duty under the                          constable alone. To enable a plaintiff to recover any sum awarded by the
discipline regulations does not have this effect. We accept that a power                            court, and also to encourage the police to cany out their duties confidently,
of this kind may have value and we recommend that the discipline regula­                            officers are assured that public funds will, in certain conditions, be made
tions be reviewed to take account of this point                                                      available to meet damages and costs awarded in civil proceedings. These
   191. It remains, before discussing the relations of the police authority                          conditions were considered by a committee of the Police Council in 1931
with the local authority and the composition of police authorities, to deal                          and by the Oaksey Committee. The current practice is 9 s follows:—
with a further responsibility wihioh we think should be transferred from                                  (a) A constable must have acted in good faith in the intended execution
police authorities to chief constables; and to develop reasons for our                                        of his duty.
proposal, mentioned in Chapter IV, to make police authorities vicariously                                 (b) The sums in question (so far as not fixed by the court) must be
liable for the wrongful acts of police officers.                                                              reasonable and, in the case of costs, necessarily incurred.
P o lice c a d ets                                                                                        (c) The likely effect on discipline if payment were denied is considered.
   192. It was represented to us by police witnesses that responsibility for                              (d) Following a recommendation of the Oaksey Committee it is a
appointing cadets should be transferred from police authorities to chief                                      common, although not the invariable, practice for a police authority,
constables.                                                                                                   following an application by a constable, to consider the question
   193. The present arrangements are a logical consequence of the legal                                       of meeting damages and costs when proceedings are begun and
position that only a constable ran be a member of a police force. Cadets,                                     not after the case has been heard and decided. This practice is
who are trainees and have not yet been appointed to the office of constable,                                  universal in Scotland.
have the status of local government employees. In some forces this staJtus                                (e) It is the practice for a police authority which is not satisfied that
is reflected in the persistence of the old titles “ cadet clerk ” and “ boy                                   payment should be made to refer the matter to the Secretary of
clerk ”, and it may w e a occasionally be seen in the range of their duties.                                  State.
We understand also that, because of ithis status, cadets do not enjoy standard                         197. Criminal proceedings against a constable are treated, in Scotland,
rates of pay or conditions of service throughout the country. Im some areas                         in the same way as civil proceedings. In England and Wales a distinction
police authorities appear to play an active part in enrolling boys for cadet                        is made between a private prosecution, in which the decision as to the
service, with the result that some of ithose selected are not acceptable to                         support of a constable will be taken on the same basis as in the_case of a
the chief constable.                                                                                civil action, and a public prosecution brought by the police or the Director
   194. It is in our view important, at a time when increasing reliance is                          of Public Prosecutions. Here the view is taken that, where a constable
being placed on the cadet system as a source of recruitment to the police,                          has been prosecuted and is acquitted, but. without an award of costs, he
that cadets should enjoy a proper standing as junior members of the police                          ought not to be treated more favourably than any other member of the
force, with national rates of pay and conditions of service. It is equally                          public; and it is exceptional for a constable who has been acquitted to
important that they should be placed more directly under the supervision                            have his costs paid by his police authority. We accept that the difference
of the chief oonstable, who is obviously the right person, to be in charge                          in practice between England and Wales and Scotland is grounded in the
of their selection, training and discipline. We therefore recommend that                            different prosecuting systems, and we make no recommendation to alter
                                                                                                    the practice in either country.
  (») We have already recommended the repeal of the 19lh century provisions which enable
a police authority lo suspend o r dismiss a chief constable, deputy chief constable o r assistant      198. There was a strong body of opinion in favour of retaining the
chief constable. (Paragraphs 176 and 183.)                                                          present arrangements relating to civil actions against the police. The local
  (" ) Minutes of Evidence IS, page 8j61.
                                               62                                                                                        63
                                                                                                       32183                                                               C4
                                                                                                        acts of a constable without implying any alteration in the constable’s legal
      authority associations and the Magistrates’ Association regarded them as                          status.(“ )
      appropriate to the constitutional position of the constable vis-a-vts a police                       201 We have already stated our view that the present legal status of the
      authority and the police witnesses also told us that these arrangements                           constable should continue, and it wouJd be wrong to tatr^ ° ° .anr c^ “ g°
      uive rise to no practical difficulties^” ) The police witnesses asked us to                       in his liability which would interfere # ith it. We are satisfied, howeve ,
      recommend that all police authorities should follow the Scottish pracUce.                         that to make a police authority vicariously liable for a constable s actions
      bv formally adopting the Oaksey Committee’s recommendation that the                               would not derogate from this status ; nor would it confer any power upon
      question whether or not to support a constable should be decided as soon                          a police authority to control his duties. It appears to us that there are good
      as proceedings were launched, and not after they were completed. The                              reasons for making this change, and that to alter the p r e s e n t arrangement
      Police Federation also urged that there should now be set up a standing                           would be to the advantage of both the police and the public. In particular,
      committee of the Police Council to consider cases referred to the Secretary                       we are impressed by the argument that, where a particular constable
      of State, as was recommended by the 1931 Committee of the Police                                  complained of is not identifiable, a member of the public is at present
      Council^*1)                                                                                       unable to pursue a legal remedy. We recommend, therefore, that a police
           199.    The arguments used in defence of the present arrangements may be                     authority be made liable for the wrongful acts of police °®ce rs“ * ® S ^
      summarised as follows. They exactly reflect the legal status of the constable                     way as the Crown is liable, under the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, for the
      and the legitimate interests of the police authority, and they demonstrate                        wrongful acts of an officer of the Crown.
      to the public that a policeman enjoys no special protection. They also                               202 On this basis i t would no longer be for the police authority to
      provide reasonable assurance of remedy for an injured party, while giving                          determine whether the constable complained of had acted in the course of
      a constable confidence to carry out his duty properly without encouraging                          his duty or in the intended execution of his duty. This question would be
      irresponsibility. Thus they strike a fair balance between the interests of the                     decided by the courts. Normally we should expect proceedings to be
      constable and of the public.                                                                       brought against the constable and the authority jointly. If the court found
                                                                                                         that the matter complained of had not arisen in the course of or m the
          100. Against this we heard a body of evidence favouring an m o ­                               intended execution of duty, the action could succeed against the cttutaM e
047




       ment under which the police authority should he vieariouslyhablefor the                           alone, and the police authority would not be liable. It would accoid with
       tortious acts of a constable. This view was argued by the Faculty of                              the sp irit a n d intention of this recommendation that a chief officer of police
       Advocates, the Sheriffs Substitute Association, the Inns of Court Conserva­
                                                                                                         should in the absence of special ^ u m s ts n c e s disclose the nam M ofm enon
       tive and Unionist Society and Professor Wade on the following grounds.! )                         duty on a particular occasion so as to enable an aggrieved person mor
       Failure to identify a particular constable might preclude the bringing of an
                                                                                                         easily to identify a police offset against whom he v ista s to seek a legal
       action, even though it was beyond doubt that a member of the constabulary
       was concerned; thus a complainant would have no redress. Moreover,                                remedy.
       although there are few, if any. cases In which financial support has been                         Relations between the police authority and the council in England and
       unreasonably refused, the lack of certainty on this point may well have
       discouraged the bringing of well-grounded actions. I t was also submitted                           Wales(27)
                                                                                                            203.    Although there was no concluded agreement, f ^ s s i o n s had been
       that a police authority, in reserving to itself the decision whether or not
                                                                                                         proceeding for some time before our appointment between the County
       a wrongful act had been done in the course of the constable’s duty, was to                        C ouncils Association and the Magistrates’ Association about changes in the
        some extent usurping the normal function of the court. If the decision
        were taken before the hearing it would be on inadequate information, and                         functions of the standing joint committee, and in its relationship to the
        without detailed knowledge of the plaintiff’s case. If the decision were                         county council. It was accepted by both bodies that the county council
        taken after the proceedings has been concluded, both the constable and the                       should have financial control in the county, as the borough council has in
        injured party would be in doubt whether financial support w a s forthcoming,                     the borough; that the county equncil should become the police authority;
        and how the police authority would exercise its discretion. Finally, it was                      and that it should be required to appoint a police committee composed as to
        represented to us that the doctrine of vicarious liability as dependent upon                     one-half of its membership of justices. County councils also agreed that
         the ability of a master to give orders to his servants has been broadened                       they should be under a statutory obligation to delegate responsibility for
         by recent decisions of the courts. Thus the liability of a hospital manage-                     police administration, other than, f a u c ia l control, to the re»constituted
         mem committee extends to the professional negligence of a doctor or                             standing joint committee.             _______________________________
         surgeon in the h eal* service— where no question of orders arises. On this                        (u\ Another suggestion put to us was that liability should attach to a chief constable for
         basis it was suggested that a police authority might be made liable for the                     the tortiousacts o f t o                    We think that such an arrangement is open to objection^
                                                                                                         N or cto      fo v o ^ a p ro ^ o X u b m itte d to us by the Law S o & ^ t a t a d sh o u d be
                                                                                                         S ° a b l 4 ^ u n to the G 5w n from which damages, awarded against a constable should be
         l11) Minutes of Evidence 11-12, page 636; 14, page 791; 25, pages 1351-2.
                                                                                                         Pap j) in this and the two following sections we are not concerned with combined authorities.
         (») Minutes of Ividence   11 - 1 2 ,Epage   696; 25, pages 1351-2; Appendix 11 to Minutes of    These are discussed in paragraphs 218-221.
       Evidence, page 106.
                                                                                                                                                         65
                                                          64
                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                 209. The Magistrates’ Association argued that, at a time when decisions
    204. In their submission to us the County Councils Association invited
                                                                                              of local authorities are increasingly swayed by political views, it is par­
 us to endorse this agreement, but representatives of some countiesC)
                                                                                              ticularly important that a body concerned with the police should contain
 dissented from the proposals in this form. In particular, they expressed
                                                                                              non-electcd persons; and the most appropriate people in their opinion
 misgivings about the wisdom of placing a county council in a position
 to put political or other pressure on the police. Thus the Berkshire County                  were the magistrates, since their work brings them into dose touch with
                                                                                              police problems. They accordingly recommended that the composition of
Council submitted: “ I t is more important that the independence o f the
                                                                                              standing joint committees remain unaltered, and that magistrates also
police should be safeguarded than that financial saving should be achieved
                                                                                              constitute one-half the members of watch committees.(**) This view did not
by granting financial control to county councils and thus sacrificing such
independence            A ad a memorandum from the Essex County Council                       find favour with the Association of Municipal Corporations, who thought
                                                                                              that it was inherently objectionable to associate die functions of'the police
was even more specific—                                                                       with the administration of justice. Our own view is that this objection
         '* In a county such as Essex, where political persuasions are of some                is theoretical rather than real, and that there are overriding advantages in
      considerable consequence in the county council, it is of the utmost                     enabling the experience of justices to be made available to police authorities.
      importance that there should be no opportunity for allegations to be
     made that the administration of the force is subject to political influence.                 210. Under the arrangements which we are proposing, with a clarifying
      It is not enough that such allegations could easily be refuted ; it is in               definition of the respective idles of the central government; the police autho­
      the public interest (hat the very opportunity for their being made                      rity and the chief oonst&ble, the argument that local political pressure might
     should not be available and this can only be achieved by the main­                       be brought to .bear upon the police in such a way as to jeopardise
      tenance of the status quo ante whereby the administration of the police                 i m p a r t ia lity in enforcing the law ceases to ibe tenable ; and we regard locally
      not merely is, but can be seen to be, in control independent of the                     elected persons as entirely fit and proper people to discharge the functions
     county council                                                                           which we propose in future should be accorded to police authorities
   205. We understand these misgivings, but experience in Scotland and in                     But we Jhinfc that they can be greatly assisted in their tasks of enhancing
the English and Welsh boroughs suggests that they are groundless. We see                       the standing of the police force and appointing its senior officers by the
                                                                                              i n r i n s i n n in their number of a proportion of justices.         Through theii
no reason, therefore, to continue the arrangement under which a standing
joint committee, atone among uncombined police authorities, precepts upon                     judicial work magistrates have a close knowledge of police affairs and
the council. We accordingly recommend that the standing joint committee                        problems, and they above all people see the fruits and nature of police
submit estimates of police expenditure for approval, in the same way as                        w ork They constitute a body of public-spirited citizens whose services
any other committee of the council.                                                            cannot be enlisted through the normal machinery of local government;
                                                                                               and the inclusion in the police authority of a quota from the magistracy
   206. We received no evidence favouring any change in 'the relationships                     widens the field of selection. We accordingly recommend that police
between other police authorities and the councils by which they are
                                                                                               authorities throughout England a |d Wales consist as to two-thirds of mem­
appointed, and we make no recommendation to alter them, except for
                                                                                               bers of the appropriate council, Had as to one-third of co-opted justices;
recognition of a qualified right for a member of a council to ask questions
                                                                                               and that the justices be elected in counties by quarter sessions and in
of the chairman of a police committee.^1)
                                                                                               boroughs by the local body of justices for automatic co-option to the police
Composition of police authorities in England and Wale*                                         authority.
   207. The reasons for the difference in the constitution of standing joint
committees and watch committees are historical, and we think that the time                         211. The size of a watch committee is limited, under section 190 (1) of
has come to assimilate the two.                                                                the Municipal Corporations Act, 1882, to not more than one-third of the
                                                                                               membership of the council as a whole, but there is no statutory provision
   208. We have considered what is the appropriate composition for an                          as to the size of a standing joint committee. As a result, there are wide
authority with the functions we propose. A body associated with local                           variations in the size of standing joint committees in different parts of the
government ought clearly to contain elected councillors. Witnesses were,                        country. Thus Lincolnshire has a police authority of 15 members;
however, divided             whether it should also contain outside persons,                    Gloucestershire, a county with a slightly smaller population and less than
and in particular whether there was a case for continuing the long-standing
                                                                                                half the area, has an authority of 56 members. We have considered whether
arrangement under which justices are appointed to standing joint com­
                                                                                                the size of standing joint committees should be limited in the same way
 mittees but not, unless a member happens to be a justice, to watch
                                                                                                as that of watch committees. On balance we think this unwise, because
committees.                                    ___________________ ______                       the ideal membership of an authority may depend to some extent on
  (**) Berkshire. Cumberland, Essex, Gloucestershire, Hampshire and Isle o f Wight,             the size and nature of its area, the difficulties encountered by members in
Hertfordshire, Leicestershire and Rutland, Lincolnshire (Parts o f Kesteven and Parts of
Lindsey). Norfolk, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Surrey, East Sussex, Warwickshire, Westmorl­     attending meetings and possibly the amount of business to be transacted.
and, W iltshire, East Riding o f Yorkshire.                                                     We are however impressed with the disadvantages of large committees and
  (» ) Minutes o f Evidence 20, page 1141.
  (»•) Minutes of Evidence 20, page 1128.                                                        (« ) Minutes o f Evidence 14, page 789.
   (») See paragraph 165.
                                            66                                                                                             67
we recommend that the cize of all police authorities be reviewed with                        proportion of justices of the peace, and we accept that the police authority
                                                                                             must be composed, as at present, wholly of elected councillors. We do
the object of restricting them to the smallest practicable number of persons.
                                                                                             not, however, regard the whole council as a suitable body to discuss and
   212. We recommend that police authorities so constituted be committees                    finally decide the im portant matters which arise In connection with the
of the local authority, and that their appointment be made obligatory                        police. We accordingly recommend that statutory provision be made for
by statute. We further recommend that the chairman of the police                             the appointment of a committee of the local authority to be the police
authority be a member of the local authority. We see no reason to                            authority, and that the size of Scottish police authorities toe reviewed, like
abandon the present title of the police authority in county boroughs:                        those in England and Wales, with the object of restricting them to the
the name Watch Committee has associations going back for many centuries.                     smallest practicable number of persons.
We recommend, however, that the police authority in a county be called                          217. The functions of police committees in Scotland should comprise all
the police committee rather than the Standing Joint Committee, which is                      the matters for which, under our recommendations, police authorities will
a clumsy title of no great antiquity.                                                        be responsible. These do oot include fiu&nciiil control, <ujd the police
Police authorities in Scotlaiul(“)                                                           committee in Scotland will continue to submit estimates to the council,
                                                                                             as a t present The functions of police authorities will then be uniform
   213. Different considerations arise in Scotland, where the police authority
is the county or burgh council itself. This does not mean that in practice                   throughout Great Britain.
all police business is transacted in the full council; it is referred in the                 Combined police authorities
first instance to a police committee, as in roost other fields of local authority               218. Where two or more local authority areas in Eeglaed and Wales are
work. But it does mean that all decisions of the police committee, whether                   a m a l g a m a te d for police purposes the constituent authorities surrender all
in financial or other matters, must be ratified by the council. The police                   their police ftmctions to a onmhfoed authority* This                           ®*
committee has no powers of its own, nor has it any legal standing. A                         individual council* have thereafter no say in the amount to be speot
consequence of these arrangements is that the local administration of the                    ajjsmaSy on the polk®, and must eoBtritwte A eir pnepKtifi® of $ $ cost a?
police is entirely in the hands of elected persons.                                          assessed in A# amalgamation scheme. In Scotland the coasitsegt' connate
   214. The Scottish system accords with the pattern found both in England                   at present remain police authorities, and m ,ay retain the right to challenge
and Wales and in Scotland in the administration of other local authority                     the estimates of the joint police committee, althougsh tWs w tw tfoB
functions, such as education and housing, in which responsibility is vested                  hardly ever to have arisen.
in the local authority as such. We do not think, however, that this principle                   219. We recommend that the Scottish procedure in this m sttsr he brought
should hold in relation to the police. We therefore recommend that in                        iQito line wifth that in En§i$und a^nd 'Wales* It is the oornbHicd comjHittce that
future the police authority in Scotland be the police committee and not the                               be the police authority, not        constituent coraoits. We also
council.                                                                                     recommend that all combined police authorities have the fight to precept
   215. There are two particular considerations that have weighed with us                    or requisition upon thek conettoeot councils. Gombffled n f l watttw* W“J
in making this recommendation. In the first place, it seems likely that                      thus form a s exception to the t » m i f«s»ctpJe that fwifc* a e A o rife should
Scotland will increasingly be policed by combined forces covering the                        have to secure approval for f a i r estimate* i w » tfeafc t t & f & fl»n ttss.
area of more than one local authority. In these cases an ad hoc committee                    We tMsk that this is amply justified by convenience.
is appropriate, and it seems unreasonable in such circumstances to adhere                       220. The constitution of Joint authorities is not a t p te m l canirojled by
to the present practice of attaching the title of police authority to separate               statute, but is left to be dete®nined by agreement in the scheme of
councils which have no police and little authority over a combined force.                    amalgamation. There is m o A to              mid for this, but » our view there
The title should he accorded where it properly belongs—to the joint                          are two matters which ought now to be reviewed. The s» e of joint
committee.                                                                                   authorities should be restricted to the smallest p eaceable wmfoer of
   216. The second consideration applies to all forces, not only those in                    persons, and in England m i Wales the proportion of coopted justices of
joint areas, and introduces the question of the composition of police                        the peace should be the same as in individual authorities, oamely Ofle-*ird-
authorities. As already stated, we favour the inclusion of justices of the                      221. Although wheao a combined police area is formed in England and
peace in tooth county and borough podioe authorities m England and Wales.                    Wales a joint committee becomes the police authority, it is a common
We have considered whether a sim ilar provision; should apply in Scotland,                   practice to maintain in toeing the individual standing joint or watch com­
but justices in Scotland are not so numerous as their counterparts in                        mittees w&icfh were the police authorities before toe .amalgamation took
England and Wales, nor do they have the same wide judicial functions.                        place. These committees have no police function# apart from the duty
Historically, moreover, they have not played so large a part in, local                       of nominating some of their members to the combined police authority:
government as the magistracy in England and Wales. Consequently we do                        they may, however, continue to exercise (pther m ajor local'authority func­
not recommend the appointment to police authorities in Scotland of a                         tions such as the control of house-to-house collections. Tito retention of
  (•*) Oihcr Ulan combined police authorities, which are dealt with in paragraph! 218-22).   these oommittees seems to us confusing and unnecessary, We therefore
                                            68                                                                                      69
                                                                                                                                   the central authority for the police of England and Wales as a whole. We
        I           II.M. nil lli.it they I k; alio h sh e d :iml th eir m in o r f u n c tio n s l i a u s l c r r c d to         agree with this proposal, and return to it in the next chapter.
         , i;           i   niiiiiiU'C ol ilic co uncil in l " th e justices.                                                         ‘’■>7 The second criticism rclalcd to the position ol the local authorities,
                                                                                                                                   which' contribute to the upkeep of the Metropolitan Police but have no
         I In M iiiu |iiiliia ii urea
                                                                                                                                   control over their expenditure. Since 1949 an informal arrangement ha,
                ; I he [>i' Iu'c a u th o r ity for the M e tro p o lis is th e H o m e S e c re ta ry . anil                      been operated under which the Receiver meets the chief financial ofltcers of
           . .■: .u iilM i'iii^ play 110 p a r i in the a d m in is tr a tio n o f the M e tro p o lita n                          these authorities as soon as possible after the Metropolitan Police estimates
        I’          ,ilili.Hi"li ilicy c o n t r ib u te a lm o st h alt ol its cosls. W e h e a r d little                        have been presented to Parliament, in order to discuss and answer questions
             .i.-.u. >.n t u . d of the g en eral p rin c ip le e m b o d ie d in these a rra n g eflien ts.( )                    about the policy and details of the proposed expenditure. The Metropolitan
        I        I      u;.ic-.enlali\c" o f the M e tro p o litan B oroughs lold us th a t in the                                 Boroughs Standing Joint Committee asked for an extension of this arrange­
        .       ,,i i      ilo i\.u g h s the p resen t system sh o u ld c o n tin u e , h.o*vevcr t h e local
                                                                                                                                   ment to allow for confidential consultation before the estimates are presented
                   mi.mi mi uctiire m ig h t be re-orgauiscd-t*')
                                                                                                                                   to Parliament and. in the event of disagreement, for an appeal by ‘he local
                    • \ \ c a c c e p t that th e r e a r e ov errid in g a d v a n ta g e s in a u n ita r y sy stem              authorities to the Home Secretary against the Receiver s proposals* ) We
                      ■ i.,l „ , . - r ib c police in the M e tro p o lis a n d a ls o th a t, in v iew o f the                    see little constitutional difficulty in this kind of consultation. w h ich -p ro -
                             ............        responsibilities            in L o n d o n , c o n tro l sh o u ld he w Uw WUWS    vided it is kept confidential—can carry no risk of subverting the Home
                         ( . .w-rnment.                The G o v e r n m e n t's p r o p o sa ls r e cen tly o u tliiK d for        Secretary’s jurisdiction. It might he objected that the proper p l a c e o
            . 1 . .•i".niisati»ii ol local jju v e m in e n t in G r e a te r l . u n d o a ^ ) s h o u ld not.                     challenge the police estimates is in Parliament, where the Home S e e r e U r v
         ....,.n (.i.iyiticiit. lead to a n y c h a n g e in the H o m e S e c re ta ry 's p o sitio n                              is publicly answerable. But. as we understand U. the machinery requested by
          . ; li.v .imli.irity for th e M etropolis.                                                                                the Metropolitan Boroughs is designed to provide a means, not of challeng­
    '               ; i,               h a \ e sh o w n , th e re la tio n sh ip b etw een the H o m e Secretary                    ing the Home Secretary’s policy in regard to the financing of the Me ro
              .1 liu- ( ..i,iim ,sio n er o f th e M e t ro p o lita n Police is n o t th e s a m e a s t o t                       nolitan Police, but of influencing his mind before the policy js presented to
          ; , U , . | . .1 |'i.i\iiic ia l police a u th o r ity a n d its chief c o n s tab le, l h r o u g h his                  Parliament. This seems to us an entirely acceptable objective and we
          > , . | . . i ,,t api'rovinsi th e o r d e rs a n d re g u la tio n s fo r the g o v e rn m e n t o f the                 accordingly recommend that arrangements be made, along the lines
O       \ i . i , , r ..iii.ni         P o l i c e * t h e H o m e Secretary ex ercises a d irect c o n t r o l over                suggested, for consultation between the Receiver and representatives
          r.               m i \ e w ork a n d a d m in is tr a tiv e policy o f th e fo rce ;(»•) a n d th ro u g h                 the local authorities in the Metropolitan Police District.
O       i 1 l i . . i . - i . lie c o n tro ls not only p o lice h o u sin g a n d b u ild in g a n d the
          .. . u* .J tid c s uiul equipment, but also such mailers as research am!                                                 The City of London
         vt      , ,;.n, n t hi mobility ui.ul communications, which would normally be                                                 '>28. To the stranger it must appear odd that a square mile in the centre
           ",  !.i i .1 iii a p rovincial force to h e the resp o n sib ility o f th e chief                                       Of the vast Metropolitan area should be policed separately from the rest
              .u ,.i .     M o reo v er, lo r the d isc h a rg e o f h is resp o n s ib ilitie s the                               with a distinct police a u th o rity -th e Common Council of          c ‘iy —a lo'v-r
          I, .uu. V.IVLUJ is a n s w e ra b le to P a rlia m e n t in a way th a t n o police                                      rate of police grant than elsewhere, and a cluef olhcer dignified by the title
           ; ; 1: i i * a c c o u n ta b le U) its local co u n cil.                                                               of Commissioner. The City of London has. however, an importance and
                  ^ \ \ v. consUler th a t these dill'erences betw een th e c o n tr o l o f the                                   position out of all relation to its size. In the held of policing its p r e l u m
                       n. the M e tro p o lis a n d elsew h ere a r e b ro a d ly justified by th e intrinsic                      are unique and specialised. It has to contend with a daily influx of three-
                                 a n d interest o f events in L o n d o n w hich call f o r police a tten tio n ,                  quavers of a million people ; it has to protect some of the most valuable
           \ t . u-             tiic sta tu s o f the H om e S ecretary anil the ra n g e o f b is fu n ctio n s                   properly in the world ; and it has been forced to develop in a very high
              i i • ,rd t.> tlie police service as a w h o le, a n d th e fact ol his an s w era b ility
                                                                                                                                   decree means of combating crime in technical Helds such as company
                  Kifli.im eiit. give sullicieni a s s u r a n c e th a t his w hfe p o w ers o v e r the
                                                                                                                                   frauds. W e should hesitate to assert positively that these considerations
           M . i . . , . . ,|,i.,it Police will he exercise d wisely a n d w ith p r o p e r r e s tr a in t—
                                                                                                                                   necessarily call for a separate police authority or a separate police k re .
                                                                                                                                   But all the evidence we have heard suggests that the arrangements for the
           ... i.. ^wminoii co n sen t, they have b een in th e past.
                                                                                                                                   policing of the City work well, and that there is entirely satisfactory > -
                 >         | u o criticism s w ere voiced in th e evid en ce we h e a rd a b o u t the                             operation with the M e tro p o litan Police. In the cm-un. sta n c e , we m ak e no
             ,;i..ii:viiic iiis for a d m in is te r in g th e M e tro p o lita n force.     O n e c o n cern ed                   r e c o m m e n d a tio n for any change in these arrangement*.
            •I, i.oMit.in of tlie R eceiver an d his dual role as Ikiaiice ollicer f a r the
            M u .poln.tn Police a n d a ls o its a d v is e r o n r esea rch a n d te ch n ical d ev elo p -
                            It sm s suggested to us th a t th e latter d u ty s h o u ld be tra n sfe rre d
            i.. iiu‘ 1Kune S ecretary, not as police a u th o r ity for th e M e tro p o lis , b u t as
                 , .,,             o f » i t u e i s ~ a rg n c U fo r a police auth o rity consisting o f representatives o f
            i i . . . u m w i u t V r o u g h councils in lh e M etro p o lita n Police D istric t.
                 . , MiiutK--. i»t I a ktuiLC 24, Q. 4579.                                                                            (*■) M inutes o f E vidence 24, p ag e 1272.
                , i , i.....I I%1
                .     ,   .....   ..I Iv iJ c n e e 20, page 1 >53’                                                                                                                  71
                                                                      70
                           Police A c t 1964                   C h . 48                     683


   3>—7 ( 1) The police authority for a combined area shall be the            Pa   rt   I
combined police authority constituted for the purpose in                  poiic®
accordance with the provisions of the relevant amalgamation               authorities for
scheme, and every such authority shall, subject to subsection             combined
(4) of this section, be a body corporate by such name as may              areas,
be prescribed by the scheme.
   (2) A combined police authority shall be appointed in such
manner, and shall consist of such number of persons, as may
be prescribed by the amalgamation scheme; and of the number
of persons so prescribed—■
      (a) two thirds shall be members of the constituent
           councils;
      (b) one third shall be magistrates for the constituent
           areas.
  (3) Provision may be made by an amalgamation scheme for
applying, in relation to the constitution and proceedings of the
combined police authority and in relation to the officers of
that authority, any of the provisions of Parts II to IV of the
Local Government Act 1933 subject to such modifications as
may be prescribed by the scheme.
  (4) If the constituent councils request that the combined
police authority to be constituted by an amalgamation scheme
should be a committee of one of those councils, the scheme
shall constitute the combined police authority a committee
of that council instead of a body corporate; and the provisions
of Schedule 1 to this Act shall have effect with respect to such
a scheme and a combined police authority so constituted.

    4*—(1) It shall be the duty of the police authority for every G eneral
police area for which a police force is required to be maintained functions
’^fcpction 1 of this Act to secure the maintenance of an adequate of police
       efficient police force for 'the area, and to exercise for that authorities,
purpose the powers conferred on a police authority by this Act.
    (2) The police authority for every such police area shall,
 subject to the approval of the Secretary of State and to regu­
lations under Part II of this Act, appoint the chief constable
 of the police force maintained by that authority and deter­
mine the number of persons of each rank in that force which
 is to constitute the establishment of the force.
    (3) The police authority for any such police area may, sub­
 ject to the consent of the Secretary of State, provide and main­
 tain such buildings, structures and premises, and make such
 alterations in any buildings, structures or premises already
 provided, as may be required for police purposes of the area.
     (4) The police authority for any such police area may, sub­
 ject to any regulations under Part II of this Act, provide and
684               C h . 43                 Police Act 1964


  - SthRT I
•=* m
                  maintain such vehicles, apparatus, clothing and other eaui.
                  raent as may be required for police purposes of the area.
                    (5)    A combined police authority may, if so authorised by the-
                  amalgamation scheme, make arrangements with any constituent
                  authority for the use by the combined police authority of th
                  services of officers of the constituent authority and the makinl
                  of contracts and payments on behalf of the -combined police
                  authority by the constituent authority.
                                                                                   •:
C hief               5.—(1) The police force maintained for a police area under
constables.       section 1 of this Act shall be under the direction and control
                  of the chief constable appointed under section 4(2) of this Act
                     (2) The same person may, with ithe consent of the police
                  authorities concerned, be appointed chief constable of more
                  than one police force.
                     (3) The Secretary of State shall not approve the appointment
                  as first chief constable of a combined force of any person other
                  than the chief constable of a police force which ceases to exist
                  in consequence of the formation of the combined force unless
                  the Secretary of State is satisfied, having regard to the size and
                  character of the combined force and any exceptional circum­
                  stances, that some other person should be appointed.
                      (4) Without prejudice to any regulations under Part II of this
                  Act or under the Police Pensions Act 1948, the police authority,’
                   acting with the approval of the Secretary of State, may caii
                   upon the chief constable to retire in the interests of efficiency.
                      (5) Before seeking the approval of the Secretary of State under
                   subsection (4) of this section the police authority shall give the
                   chief constable an opportunity to make representations and shall
                   consider any representations so made.
                      (6) A chief constable who is called upon to retire as afore­
                   said shall retire on such date as the police authority may specify
                   or on such earlier date as may be agreed upon between him
                   and the police authority.
D eputy an d        6.—(1) In every police force maintained under section 1 of
assistant chief   this Act there shall be a deputy chief constable, who shall
constables.
                  have all the powers and duties of the chief constable—            >
                        (a) during any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty
                             of the chief constable;
                       (b) during any vacancy in the office of chief constable;
                  but shall not have power to act by virtue of this subsection for
                  any continuous period exceeding three months except with the
                  consent of the Secretary of State. •                            ;?
                     (2)    The provisions of subsection (1) above shall be in addition
                  to, and not in substitution for, any other enactment which makes



                   052
706                C h . 48                      Police Act 1964


     P a r t III     47.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member • ,
M em bership       of a police force shall not be a member of any trade union, o r :'
o f trade          of any association having for its objects, or one of its objects,'?
unions.            to control or influence the pay, pensions or conditions of service
                   of any police force:
                     Provided that where a person was a member of a trade union -
                   before becoming a member of a police force, he may, witE:)
                   the consent of the chief officer of police, continue to be a member-'
                   of that union during the time of his service in the police force. -
                     (2) If any question arises whether any body is a trade union
                   or an association to which this section applies, the question";
                   shall be determined by the chief registrar of friendly societies;:?!:'
                      (3) This section applies to police cadets as it applies tof {
                   members of a police force, and references to a police force oil;
                   to service in a police force shall be construed accordingly.     ,
                      (4) Nothing in this section applies to membership of tie I
                   Police Federations, or of any body recognised by the Secretary,
                   of State for the purposes of this section as representing members
                   of police forces who are not members of those Federations.

                                                        P   art    IV                    r
                                      M   is c e l l a n e o u s   and   G   eneral

                                  Remedies and complaints against police
 Liability for         48. (1) The chief officer of police for any police area shall be
 w rongful acts     liable in respect of torts committed by constables under his direct
 o f constables.    tion and control in the performance or purported performance
                    of their functions in like manner as a master is liable in respect
                    of torts committed by his servants in the course of their employ?
                    ment, and accordingly shall in respect of any such tort be treated
                    for all purposes as a joint tortfeasor.
                       (2) There shall be paid out of the police fund—
                          (a) any damages or costs awarded against the chief officer ■_■;
                                of police in any proceedings brought against him by
                                virtue of this section and any costs incurred by him in
                                any such proceedings so far as not recovered by him jy
                                in the proceedings ; and                               'tb-r.,
                           (b) any sum required in connection with the settlement of .
                                any claim made against the chief officer of police by
                                virtue of this section, if the settlement is approved by-
                                the police authority.
                        (3) Any proceedings in respect of a claim made by virtue of: ^
                     this section shall be brought against the chief officer of police for
                     the time being or, in the case of a vacancy in that office, against . ^
                     the person for the time being performing the functions of the g



                              053
                         P olice A c t 1964                   C h . 48        707


chief officer of police ; and references in the foregoing provisions  P a r t tv
of this section to the chief officer of police shall be construed
accordingly.
    (4)    A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent
as they think fit, pay any damages or costs awarded against a
member of the police force maintained by them, or any constable
for the time being required to serve with that force by virtue of
section 14 of this Act, or any special constable appointed for their
area, in proceedings for a tort committed by him, any costs in­
 curred and not recovered by him in any such proceedings, and
 any sum required in connection with the settlement of any claim
 that has or might have given rise to such proceedings; and any
 sum required for making a payment under this subsection shall
 be paid out of the police fund.
     49.—(1) Where the chief officer of police for any police area investigation
 receives a complaint from a member of the public against a of complaints,
 member of the police force for that area he shall (unless the
 complaint alleges an offence with which the member of the police
  force has then been charged) forthwith record the complaint and
 cause it to be investigated and for that purpose may, and shall if
  directed by the Secretary of State, request the chief officer of
  police for any other police area to provide an officer of the
  police force for that area to carry out the investigation.
      (2) A chief officer of police shall comply with any request
  made to him under subsection (1) of this section.
      (3) On receiving the report of an investigation under this
   section the chief officer of police, unless satisfied from the
   report that no criminal offence has been committed, shall
   send the report to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
   50. Every police authority in carrying out their duty with information
 respect to the maintenance of an adequate and efficient police as to m anner
 force, and inspectors of constabulary in carrying out their duties
 with respect to the efficiency of any police force, shall keep comp]aints.
 themselves informed as to the manner in which complaints
 from members of the public against members of the force
 are dealt with by the chief officer of police.
                                O ffe n c e s
     51.—(1) Any person who assaults a constable in the execu- A ssaults on
  tion of his duty, or a person assisting a constable in the execution cons a es.
  of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence and liable-
        (a) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a
             not exceeding six months or in the case of a second
             or subsequent offence nine months, or to a fine not
             exceeding £100, or to both;
        (b) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a
             term not excccdinu two vears or to a fine or to both.
                                                                  z ;

                                                   ■j   i 1
                                                         L O C A L G O V E R N M E N T A C T l ‘)72                               267


                                                           P A R T VII
              M IS C E L L A N E O U S P O W E R S OF L O C A L A U T H O R I T I E S

                                                       Subiidiar]' powers

111 S u b sid ia ry p o w e r s o f lo c a l a u th o ritie s
     (1) W i t h o u t p re ju d ic e to an y p o w e rs ex ercisab le a p art fro m this se c tio n b u t



•
       ect to th e p ro v isio n s o f this A ct a n d an v o t h e r e n a c t m e n t passed b efo re o r after
        A ct, a local a u th o rity shall h av e p o w e r to d o an y th i n g ( w h e th e r o r n o t
       in v o lv in g th e e x p e n d i tu r e , b o r r o w i n g o r le n d in g o f m o n e y o r th e acq u isitio n or
 disposal ot an y p r o p e r ty o r rights) w h ic h is c alcu lated to facilitate, o r is c o n d u c i v e
 o r inc idental to . th e disch arg e o f an y o f th e ir fu n ctio n s.
     (2) F o r th e p u rp o ses o f this se c tio n , tra n sa c tin g th e business ot a parish or
 c o m m u n it y m e e ti n g o r any o t h e r parish o r c o m m u n i t y business shall he tre a te d as
 a fu n c tio n o f th e parish o r c o m m u n i t y c o u n c il.
     (3) A local a u t h o r it y shall n o t b v v irtu e o f this se c tio n raise m o n e y , w h e t h e r bv
 means of rates, p re c e p ts o r b o r r o w i n g , o r le n d u io n e v e x c e p t in a c c o rd a n c e w ith
 the e n a c tm e n ts relatin g to th o s e m a tte rs resp ectiv ely .
     (4) In this sectio n “ local a u t h o r i t y " in c lu d e s th e C o m m o n C o u n c il.


 NOTES
      G e n e r a l N o t e . It was stated in 1department o f the E nvironm ent Circular 121/72 that rim section
  it a n ew provision winch put!, b eyond J o u b t tli.it local authorities have p o w e r to d o anything which
  is calculated to facilitate. o r is conducive o r incidental to, the discharge ol any o f their functions, even
  if they have n o specific statu t o n ’ p o w e r tor that action. This proposition had loni; represented the law
  (see. in particular,                 v Smcthwirk (,'1117111 | l l>32| C’h 5(>2. | l lCi2| All E R R e p 3114, C'A). but the
  section was included lor the avoidance ot'anv doubt w hich nui;ht ham per local initiative.
      L o c a l a u t h o r i t y . For m eanm n. see s 27l>( I) post, and see the notes "R esid u ary bodies" and “Joint
  authorities; police authorities" below; and note also suh-s (4) above.
^ ^ £ h a l ] h a v e p o w e r to d o a n y t h i n g , e t c . T h e powers ol a local authority under this section and
               1 12 post are subject to regulations made un d er the S uperannuation Act 1'<72. ss 7. 24. Vol .Vs.
         Pensions and Superannuation; see A lhop t* S o n lt 'I'yticsidc MtiC. (1*^2) 'Ml LCiR 4(i2. CA
   (payments m ade un d er an enhanced voluntary redundancy scheme in addition to statutory payments
   found to be unlawful).
      C a lc u l a t e d to fa c ilita te , o r is c o n d u c i v e o r i n c i d e n t a l to , e t c . A local authority has no po w er
   to enter into speculative interest rate swap transactions for a profit since they neither "facilitate". nor
   are "co n d u cive sir incidental to " the discharge o f its borro w in g functions; see Hiicr// r Hiiiwtwnmtih
   and Fiillmm L iiC 11'»»11 I All E R 545. 11» » 11 2 W L R .V72. HL.
       A local authority cannot lawfully impose .1 charge for pre-application plannint; consultations since,
   although the vr.vini; o f pre-application planning advice facilitates o r is conducive or incidental to the
   council's planning functions, a charge for that advice does not facilitate no r is it conducive or
    incidental to those functions and it is therefore not w ithin the authority's ancillary powers u n d er this
    section; see AI.C'.iniiy £- Slone (Dctxlotminihl Lid !' iiirinih'mi nnoti Tlnttnes LHC | IW2] 2 A C 4S.
              4 All E R S 0 7 . HL.
       Parish: c o m m u n i ty . As to the panshcs in England and their councils and meetings. see ss ! (A)-(l>).
    9 et seq ante. ScH 1. Pts IV. V post. As to the com m u n ities in Wales and their councils .md meetings,
    see ss 20(1). 2** et seq ante and the note “ Communities** to s 20 ante.
       C o m m o n C o u n c il. For meamnj:. see s 27*Hi) post.
       R estraints o n pub licity. T h e Local (*ovemnu*ur Act 19Xf». Pr If post applies to publicity expresstv
    or impliedlv authorised by. infer alia, this section or s M l o r M3i l)(a) posr; see s (»(5) ot that Act post.
       Saving, Thi*- -*cction saved bv s 1nl post.
       C o ven an ts re lating to land. |:or the enioice.ibilirv bv local authorities »*t certain covenants
   J’^ljfiili' to latui. %i*i* the I.oc.il i eminent -Mist t-ll.iiit**>n^ Provisions) Acr P'-'O. s .V\ \ ol                            rule
   "a?al Proper:-. p* I?
       R c s id u a rv b o d ie s , Hv the   ,il Cit»\erntnem Ai t P » o . ^                   Siii I para 12 posi .nni the
                                                       V h i . \ para P ‘ post, a u*\uh;.in. b»»K i^ublislied i«\
   <>1*thc p»s^           lit.: ::ie Ivc      vodvjoi \Vaie'. •-.t.ihltshed un.lv: ^                   and S* li \ .> i f the
                                              »rn\ m. r- :i u- . .im- iis.u i v . .i*. .j pi ns«     . .• iin « i». U ‘» ‘. li e p u ;
   '**'hi\ sCi :is-                                        t> :       ! .    m   »- v *4>»i     ■ ;*

    ^imrr:iu*;r.                                                                 : K,
         -**•* .                                                                                            ..'.Uu;:
                                                                                                            J   «_)
1216      V O L 33 P O LICE


  C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1996; see the note to s 1 ante.
  S e c re ta ry o f S ta te . le one o f H er M ajesty’s Principal Secretaries o f State; see the Interpretation
Act 1978, s 5, Sch 1, Vol 41, tide Statutes. T he Secretary o f State here concerned is the Secretary 0f
State for the H om e D epartm ent. For the general duty o f the Secretary o f State in the exercise o f
certain o f his pow ers under this Act, see s 36 post.
   M ay b y o r d e r, e tc . See further, in connection w ith a reduction in the num ber ot a police
authority’s m embers, s 5 post.
   P o lic e a u th o rity . For m eaning, see s 101(1) post.
   S ta tu to ry in s tru m e n t. For provisions as to statutory instruments generally, see the Statutory
Instrum ents A ct 1946, Vol 41, tide Statutes.
   L aid b e fo re P a rlia m e n t. F or m eaning, see the Laying o f D ocum ents before Parliament
(Interpretation) A ct 1948, s 1(1), Vol 41, title Statutes.                                        . . .
   O rd e rs u n d e r th is se c tio n . U p to 1 January 1997 no orders had been made under this section
but, by virtue o f s 103(2), Sch 8 , Pt I, para 1(2) post, the Police (N um ber o f M embers o f Police
 Authorities) O rd er 1994, SI 1994/2024, has effect as if m ade thereunder.
   As to the m aking o f orders under this Act, see s 102 post.



 5 Reductions in size o f police authorities
    (1) This section applies to any order under section 4(2) which varies or revokes
 an earlier order so as to reduce the number o f a police authority s members.
    (2) Before making an order to which this section applies, the Secretary of State
 shall consult—
         (a) the authority,                                                    .
         (b) the councils which are relevant councils in relation to the authority for
             the purposes o f Schedule 2, and
         (c) any selection panel, constituted under regulations made in accordance
             with section 21(1A) o f the Justices o f the Peace Act 1979, which is
             responsible, or is represented on a joint committee which is responsible,
              for the appointment o f members o f the authority.
     (3) An order to which this section applies may include provision as to the
  termination o f the appointment o f the existing members o f the authority and the
  making o f new appointments or re-appointments.


  NOTES
   T his section contains provisions formerly in the Police Act 1964, s 3B, as inserted by the Police and
  Magistrates’ C ourts Act 1994, s 3(1).
   C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1996; see the note to s I ante.
   P o lic e a u th o rity . For m eaning, see s 101(1) post.
   S e c re ta ry o f S ta te . See the note to s 4 ante.                                                          ,
   C o u n c ils w h ic h a re re le v a n t co u n c ils . . . fo r th e p u rp o se s o f S c h ed u le 2. See Sch 2, para

   ^ J u s tic e s o f th e P ea c e A c t 1979, s 21(1A ). See Vol 27. tide Magistrates.



   6 General functions o f police authorities
     (1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
   maintenance o f an efficient and effective police force for its area.
     (2) In discharging its frmctions, every police authority established under section
   3 shall have regard to—
          (a) any objectives determined by the Secretary o f State under section 37,
          (b) any objectives determined by the authority under section ,
          (c) any performance targets established by the authority, wheth
              compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise, and
          (d) any local policing plan issued by the authority under section ».
      (3) In discharging any function to which a code o f practice issued under section


                                            056
                                                                                             POLICE A C T 1996 s 8                     1217


39 relates, a police authority established under section 3 shall have regard to the
code.
  (4)     A police authority shall comply with any direction given to it by the
Secretary o f State under section 38 or-40.

    NOTES
       This section contains provisions formerly in the Police Act 1964, s 4, as substituted by the Po ice
    and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994, s 4.
       C o m m e n c e m e n t . 22 August 1996; see the note to s 1 ante.                                _                 _      r       , .
       Shall se c u re th e m a i n t e n a n c e o f a n e f f i c i e n t a n d e f f e c t i v e p o l i c e f o r c e . T he police authority
    is obliged to keep itself informed as to the w orking o f ss 6 7 -7 6 post; see s 77 post.                                                ^
       S e c re ta ry o f S tate. See the note to s 4 ante.
       D e fin itio n s . For “ police authority” and “ police force , see s 101 (1) post.



         ^.ocal policing objectives
        (1) Every police authority established under Section 3 shall, before the beginning
     of each financial year, determine objectives for the policing of the authority s area
     during that year.
        (2) Objectives determined under this section may relate to matters to which
     objectives determined under section 37 also relate, or to other matters, but in any
     event shall be so framed as to be consistent with the objectives determined under
     that section.
         (3) Before determining objectives under this section, a police authority shall
             (a) consult the chief constable for the area, and
              (b) consider any views obtained by the authority in accordance with
                  arrangements made under section 96.

      NOTES
        T his section contains provisions form erly in the Police Act 1964, s 4A. as substituted by the 1 olice
      and M agistrates’ C ourts Act 1994, s 4.
        C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1996; see the note to s 1 ante.                              -1070 „ ;
        F in a n c ia l y e a r, [e the twelve m onths ending w ith 31 M arch; see the Interpretation Act 19 /» , s 3,

    ^ ^ I t ^ i n e o t j e S t In discharging its functions, every police authority es“ b|j ^ e d u nder s 3
    T n t e is to have regard to such objectives; see s 6(2) (b) ante. Pam culars o f any such objectives are to be
      given in the local policing plan; see s 8 (2 ) (b) post.                                                m .u .
          C h ie f c o n s ta b le . As to the general functions o f ch ief constables, see s 10 post, and as to the
      appointm ent and removal o f chief constables, see ss 11, 42 post.



        8 Local policing plans
            (1)    Everv police authority established under section 3 shall, before the beginning
        o f each financial year, issue a plan setting but the proposed arrangements or e
        policing o f the authority’s area during the year ( the local policing p an ).
           P) The local policing plan shall include a statement o f the authority’s priorities
I       for the year, o f the financial resources expected to be available and o f the proposed
        allocation o f those resources, and shall give particulars o f
-                (a) any objectives determined by the Secretary o f State under section 37,
                 (b) anv objectives determined by the authority under section 7. and
                 (c) any performance targets established by the authority-, whether in
                     compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise.
            (.V, A draft of the local policing plan shall be prepared by the chief constable for
         the area and submitted by him to the police authority for it to consider.
'•          (4) Before issuing a local policing plan which differs from the draft submitted
1266     VOL 33 POLICE

86 A dm issibility o f statem e n ts in su b se q u e n t pro ceeding s
   (1) Subject to subsection (2), no statement made by a person for the purpose of
the informal resolution o f a complaint shall be admissible in any subsequent
criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings.
   (2) A statement is not rendered inadmissible by subsection (1) if it consists o f or
includes an admission relating to a matter which does not fall to be resolved
informally.
   (3) In this section “ complaint” and “ disciplinary proceedings” have the
meanings given in section 65.

NOTES
   Sub-ss (1), (2) contain provisions formerly in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, s 104(3),
(4), respectively. Sub-s (3) is a drafting provision.
   C o m m e n c e m e n t. U p to 1 January 1997 no order had been made under s 104(2) post bringing
this section into force; see the note to s 50 ante.
   I n fo r m a l re s o lu tio n o f a c o m p la in t. See s 69(2)-(8) ante.
   T ra n s itio n a l p ro v isio n s a n d savin gs. See s 103(2), Sch 8, Pt 111, para 13 post.



 87 G u idance c o n c e rn in g disciplinary p ro ceed in g s etc
    (1) The Secretary ofState may issue guidance to police authorities, chief officers
 o f police and other members o f police forces concerning the discharge of their
 functions under regulations made under section 50 in relation to the matters
 mentioned in subsection (2)(e) o f that section, and they shall have regard to any
 such guidance in the discharge o f their functions.
     (2) Subsections (2) to (5) of section 83 shall apply in relation to guidance issued
 under subsection (1) above as they apply in relation to guidance issued under
 subsection (1) o f that section.

 NOTES
    Sub-s (I) contains provisions formerly in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, s 105(1) (in
 part) as am ended by the Police and Magistrates' Courts Act 1994, s 44, Sch 5, Pt 11, para 34(1), (2)(b),
 (c). Sub-s (2) contains provisions formerly in s K)5(2)-(5) (all in part) o f the 1984 Act, as substituted
 in the case o fs 105(3) by s 44 of, Sch 5, Pt II, para 34(1). (3) to, the 1994 Act and as repealed m pan
 (in the case o fs 105(4)) by ss 44. 93 of. Sch 5. Pt II. p a n 34(1). (4). Sch 9. Pt I to the 1994 Act.
     C o m m e n c e m e n t. U p to I January 1997 no order had been made under s 104(2) post bringing
 this
    14 section U*kV
                  into force; see the note to— -s -50 ante.
     S e c re ta ry o f S ta te . See the note to s 4 ante.             . . . .    ...       r     .■
     D e fin itio n s. For “ chief officer o f police", “ police authority' and police force . see s 101(1) post.
     T ra n s itio n a l p ro v isio n s a n d sav in gs. See s 103(2), Sch 8, Pt III. para 13 post.



  88 Liability for w ro n g fu l acts o f constables
     (1) The chief officer o f police for a police area shall be liable in respect o f torts
  committed by constables under his direction and control in the perfopnance or
  purported performance o f their functions in like manner as a master is liable in
  respect o f torts committed by his servants in the course o f their employment, ana
  accordingly shall in respect o f any such tort be treated for all purposes as a join
  tortfeasor.
      (2) There shall be paid out of the police fund—
          (a) any damages or costs awarded against the chief officer o f police in any
               proceedings brought against him by virtue of this section and any costs
               incurred by him in any such proceedings so far as not recovered by nun
               in the proceedings; and



                                         058
                                                                          P O L IC E A C T 1996 s 89            1267


        (b) any sum required in connection with the settlement o f any claim made
            against the chief officer o f police by virtue o f this section, if the
            settlement is approved by the police authority.
   (3) Any proceedings in respect o f a claim made by virtue o f this section shall be
brought against the chief officer o f police for the time being or, in the case o f a
vacancy in that office, against the person for the time being performing the
functions o f the chief officer o f police; and references in subsections (1) and (2) to
the chiet officer o f police shall be construed accordingly.
   (4) A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to it to
be appropriate, pay out o f the police fund—
         (a) any damages or costs awarded against a person to w hom this subsection
             applies in proceedings for a tort committed by that person,
         (b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a person in such
             proceedings, and
         (c) any sum required in connection with the settlement o f a claim that has
             or might have given rise to such proceedings.
   (5) Subsection (4) applies to a person w ho is—
         (a) a member o f the police force maintained by the police authority,
         (b) a constable for the time being required to serve with that force by virtue
             o f section 24 or 98, or
         (c) a special constable appointed for the authority’s police area.

NOTES
   Sub-ss (1)—(3) contain provisions formerly in th e Police Act 1964. s 48(1)—(3). Sub-ss (4), (5)
contain provisions formerly in s 48(4) o f that Act. as am en d ed by the C rim inal Justice and Public
O rd e r A ct 1994, s 168(2). Sch 10. para 13.
   C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1996: see the n o te to s 1 ante.
   Shall b e liab le in re sp e c t o f to rts. As to liability in respect o f torts com m itted by police officers
engaged o n service outside their force, see s 97(9) post. See further Hill i' Chief Constable o f H ’rsr
Yorkshire |1 ‘)89| A C 53, [1988] 2 All E li 238, H L (no liability in damages for negligence because ot
failure o f police to detect criminal).
   S p ecial c o n s ta b le . As to the a p p o in tm e n t o f special constables, see s 27 ante.
   D e fin itio n s . For “ ch ief officer o f p olice", "p o lic e a u th o rity ” , “ police force” and “ police fund ,
see s 101(1) post.
   T ra n s itio n a l p ro v isio n s a n d savings. See s 103(2). Sch 8. Pt 111. para 13 post.



                                                      PART V
                               M ISCELLANEOUS A N D G EN ER A L

                                                       Offcnccs

 89 A ssaults on constables
    (1) Any person w ho assaults a constable in the execution o f his duty, or a person
 assisting a constable in the execution ot his duty, shall be guilty o f an offence and
 liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
 months or to a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale, or to both.
    (2) Any person who resists or wilfully obstructs a constable in the execution ot
 his dutv. or a person assisting a constable in the execution ot his duty, shall be
 guilrv o f an offence and liable on summary conviction to imprisonment tor a term
 not exceeding one month or to .1 tine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale,
 or to both.
      (3; This se c ti o n also applies to a constable w h o is a m e m b e r ot a p o l ic e force
  n iau u .u n e d in Scot land or N o r t h e r n Ireland w h e n he is e x e c u t i n g a warrant, or
                                                                                     PPEND1X                         / '^

                                                                    i
H O C 4/199S                                                                                                  17 F eb ru ary 199S


T H IS C IR C U L A R IS A BO U T:            F IN A N C IA L A S S IS T A N C E T O P O L I C E O F F IC E R S IN
                                              L EG A L PROCEEDLNGS


FROM:       P O L I C E R E S O U R C E S U N IT                    EXPIRY DATE:             NONE

L A ST D A T E FO R
IM PL E M E N T A T IO N : I M M E D IA T E                         TH IS C A N CELS’ H O C :      77/19S7


'O R M O R E IN F O R M A T IO N CO N TACT:                          STEVESCHOLEY
                                                                     P O L I C E R E S O U R C E S U N IT
                                                                     R O O M 610
                                                                     50 Q U E E N A N N E ’S G A T E
                                                                     LONDON SW 1H 9A T
                                                                     TEL:
                                                                     FAX:


T H IS C iR C U L A R IS A D D R E S S E D TO:                       C H IE F O F F IC E R S O F P O L IC E
                                                                     (ENGLAND & W ALES)


C O P IE S A R E A L SO B EIN G S E N T TO:                          C L E R K S T O T H E P O L I C E A U T H O R I T IE S
                                                                     R E C E IV E R F O R T H E M E T R O P O L I T A N
                                                                     P O L I C E D IS T R I C T




          D ear Chief Officer/Clerk,

          This circulax:

          • provides updated guidance to police authorities on financial assistance to police
            officers in legal proceedings.

          • distinguishes between officers involved in civil proceedings, criminal
            proceedings and other types of legal proceedings.-

          • replaces HO Circulax 77/1987.




                                                               060
061
Introduction

1.     It is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
the confidence that their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith
and exercise theix judgement reasonably. The following guidance, which has been
prepared in consultation with ACPO, the Superintendents Association, the.Police
Federation and the Association o f Police Authorities, should be read against this
principle.

Civil P roceedings                                  .     /

2.      Under section 88 (1) of the Police Act 1996 which re-enacts section 48(1) of
the Police Act 1964, chief officers are liable for torts committed by ofncers under
their direction and control. Section SS(2) provides that any damages or costs
awarded against the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
recovered) should be met from police authority funds.

3.     Alternatively, a court may awaxd damages against individual police officers.
Section SS(4) of the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority ^to such an extent
as appears to it to be appropriate” to pay any damages or costs awarded against
officers (this includes both officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements and special constables), any costs incurred by the ofticers
themselves and any sum paid in connection with the settlement of a claim. It is for
police authorities to decide when to make assistance available, tailing account of the
circumstances o f a particular case.

4.     Police authorities are reminded that the discretionary powers in sections
SS(4) and (5) o f the Act, enabling them to provide financial assistance to ofiicers
involved in legal proceedings, apply to civil proceedings only. Sections SS(4) and
SS(5) may also apply to police officers who were members at the time oi the action
which gave rise to the claim but who are no longer members.

 C rim inal Proceedings

 5.      Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
 may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to
 provide such assistance (whether in respect of private prosecutions or prosecutions
 brought by the CPS). In this context, they may wish to note that section 111(1) of
 the Local Government Act 1972 enables police authorities to do an\ihing: "which is r-;
 calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge o f any of their
 fun ctio ns'. The provision applies to provincial authorities (but not the Metropolitan
 or City of London police) by virtue of Section 1*46A of the 1972 Act (as inserted^
 bv Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 19S5 and amended by Schedule 4 of
 the Police and Magistrates* Courts Act 1994). It could be argued that to allow
 payment to be made to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
 proceedings would in some way facilitate or be conducive 1 0 a police authority's
"broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance could
ad\ erselv affect the morale o f the force if officers had to meet their own costs after
an acquittal.

6.     It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
Oi a case, and on the basis o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
available to officers in criminal proceedings.

O th e r fr-nes of legal proceedings

i•      Similarly, there is no express statutory authority- for providing financial
assistance in proceedings brought against police officers in. tribunals other than the
courts. It is for police authorities outside London (hearing in m i n d the
recommendations o f chief officers) to decide whether to make f i n a n c i a l assistance
available to officers (either former or serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
Tribunals. Police authorities will therefore need to consider whether section 111(1)
o f the Local Government Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable financial
assistance to be given in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
pursuance o f their duties and the interest of the force as a whole is involved. It is to
be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
arrangements should be exhausted before there is recourse to legal proceedings.
These arrangements are set out in Home Office Circular 16/93, issued 10 March
1993.

8.     There are specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex
Discrimination Act 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses awarded against the
chief officer o f police and any sum required for settlement, if approved by the
police authority, to be paid from the police fund.

        There is no express statutory authority for providing financial assistance to
an officer wishing to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.




P O L IC E R ESO U R C ES UNIT
                                                                       Ar.r.c's G


                                                                            \•



                      ?CI/87           1027/1/2




 ine     C ierk       to    the     P o ll ce     A u thority

 The     C h ief      O fficer        of     P olice
                                                                                                            4 D e c e m b e r 1S87




 Tear      S ir


 HOMZ O F F I C E CIRCULAR NO 7 7 / 8 7

 F I N A N C I A L A S S I S TA N CE TO POLICE OFFICERS I N LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


T h e r e i s s z . a t u z . o r y a u t h o r i t y i n s e c t i o n 45 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1964 f o r
payr.er.wS t o b e r a c e fro :: t h e p o l i c e f u n d t o n e e t e x p e n d i t u r e i n c u r r e d
= i’ p o l i c e o f f i c e r s in d e f e n d in g p r o c e e d in g s i n t o r t .       A ls o , a c tin g in
p u r s u a n c e o f i t s g e n e r a l - s t a t u t o r y d u t y t o m a i n t a i n a n a d e q u a t e an d
efficie n t            p o lice      force       for     its     area,       the     p o lice   au th ority     has
D i s c r e t i o n t o r . e e t e x p e n d i t u r e i n c u r r e d b y o f f i c e r s i n a l l >:incs o f
^iegal        p r o c e e d i n g s where t h e o f f i c e r s h a v e a c t e d i n good f a i t h in
   • r s - a n c e o f t h e i r d u t i e s , o r th e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e f o r c e a s a w hole
 _re in v o lv ed .             The p u rp ose o f t h i s ' c i r c u l a r i s t o g i v e guidance to
p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s t o h e l p th e n in c o n s i d e r i n g r e q u e s t s on b e h a lf o f
o f f ic e r s for fin a n cia l a ssista n ce.                     T h is g u id a n c e h as been d iscu ssed
and        agreed         w ith     the     local       au th ority        and    w ith    the   p o lice    staff
a sso cia tio n s.

2.           The          central           p rin cip le          which          should         gu id e        con sid eration             of
i n d i v i d u a l c a s e s i s t h a t , w h e r e a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n s i d e r s t h a t an
o f f i c e r h a s a c t e d i n - g o o d : f a i t h ’ i n : p u r s u a n c e . ' o f h i s - . . d u t i e s •’o r t h a t
“ h e i n t e r e s t s o f a' f o r c e a s a w h o l e a r e i n v o l v e d , t h e o f f i c e r s h o u l d
h ave t h e s u p p o r t o f - t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y t o e n s u r e th a t- he has the
s e r v i c e s : . ; o f ; ; a v l a w y e r - a n d . t h a t I - h e - / s h o u l d ‘n o t - b e •'‘o u t K b ’f . p o c J c e t i ".-The
f o l l o w i n g . p a r a g r a p h s i p r o v i d e . - ' g e n e r a l ' - ' - 1 g u i d a n c e . • - t o ‘r- t h e ' d i f f e r e n t
c la s s e s o f p ro ceed in gs.                    Payr.ents" c a d e ' t o o f f i c e r s i n a c c o r d a n c e w it h
“h i s g u id a n c e w i l l be e l i g i b l e for p o lic e g r a n t.




                                                                    064
 IRIMIKAL PROCEEDINGS

                                                  Prosecution             Ser~-'ice

 -;            o f f i c e r wh o i s t h e s u b j e c t o f a p u b l i c p r o s e c u t i o n f c r ar.
 = i l e c e c o f ie r .c e c c m i t t e d whi 1e c a r r y ir .g o u t h i s d u t i e s a s a p o l i c e
 c f r i c s r i s i r. t h e s a n e p o s i t i o n a s a n y o t h e r d e f e n d a n t ar.d r . u s t be
e x p e c t so. t o b e a r t h e c o s t s o f h i s d e f e n c e .       I f h e i s a c q u i t t e d , he
 sh ou ld ,        lik e       any      eth er       defendant,       look      to' the      court          fcr
reinb ursem er.t c f h i s ex p en ses.                   I f th e c o s t s a re n o t p a id , or not
paid        m    fu ll      fr o n c e n tr a l funds,        th e p o l i c e a u th o r ity are in a
p o s i t i o n t o d e c i d e , on t h e f u l l f a c t s , * w h e t h e r o r n o t ' t o r a k e a
p a y n e n t t o t h e o f f i c e r or t o t h e P o l i c e F e d e r a t io n i f th e y have
p ro v id ed th e funding.                  T h e r e n a y be- c a s e s w h e r e i t i s p r o p e r t o
p rovid e       leg a l      a d v ic e and/or le g a l r e p r e s e n t a tio n      ev en where th e
o f f i c e r i s found g u i l t y .          T h is c a y a r i s e f o r exam p le in t e s t c a se s
where         the       o fficer       has    been      carrying      out-        practice-, h ith erto
a p p r o v e d o f b u t i s found g u i l t y a s a r e s u l t -of t h a t p r a c t i c e b e in g
^ u n d u n l a w f u l by t h e c o u r t in t h e l i g h t o f t h e c ir c u r .s ta r .c e s c f
^pLt p a rticu la r case.


  riv a te       .-rosscu tior.s

4.     A p o l i c e o f f i c e r sh ou ld be a b le t o c a r r y c u t h i s d u t ie s in the
co n fid en ce      that,         if    he acts   in     good     fa ith   and      exercises    his
jud gen er.t r e a s o n a b ly , h is p o l ic e a u th o r ity w i l l su p p o rt h in .      I f ,
in a c a s e where a nenber o f th e p u b lic b r in g s a p r o s e c u tio n a g a in st
an o f f i c e r ,   th e a u th o r ity i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t th e o f f i c e r has acted
in t h i s     vj,v.    th e author i t v      should u r o v id e o r      fund, l e g a l a d v i c e
a r.d /cr r e p r e s e n t a t i o n .

 5.        VThere a c o u r t d e c i d e s t h a t a p r o s e c u t i o n b r o u g h t a g a i n s t ar.
 o f f i c e r was n e t b r o u g h t in good f a i t h , i t n a y o r d e r t h e p r o s e c u to r
 t o p ay t h e w h o le o r any p a r t o f t h e c o s t s i n c u r r e d by t h e d e fe n c e ;
 again ,       i f t h e o f f i c e r i s a c q u i t t e d on i n d i c t n e n t , h i s c o s t s n a y be
 n et fr c n c e n tr a l funds.              In e it h e r o f t h e s e c a s e s , th e q u e stio n c f
   h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y p r o v i d i n g f i n a n c i a l s u p p o r t t o t h e o f f i c e r nav
Jfct a r is e .         H owever, where th e c o s t s o f an a c q u i t t e d o f f i c e r are
^rat aw arded by th e                  court        or awarded o n ly              in    part,      the jp clice
 a u th o rity       should        con sid er        w hether       to    rein cu rse       any^ c o s t s     no._
 covered,          tak in g     in to account the reason s,                      if    any,    g i v e n b y ■-he
 c o u r t f c r f a i l i n c r t o award a l l c o s t s c l a i n e d .


 C I V I L PROCEEDINGS .

 C iv il ' A ctio n s    A cainst-" th e                   C h ief       O fficer         for       W roncful            Acts— c l
 C on stab les        , :•vv.-'                                 ..                            zr-               "    •

 6.       U n d e r * s e c t i o n " 4 8 ( l U ' o f ^ t h ^ . - P o l i c e : j v c t : ' i 9 6 4 ‘, t h e " c h i e f o f f i c e r
 o f a f o r c e - i s l i a b l e - i n . r e s p e c t - of. t o r t s c o m m i t t e d b y - c o n s ^ a c i . e s
 u n d e r h i s d i r e c t i o n and c o n t r o l (w h ich i n c l u d e s s p e c i a l c o n s t a b l e s
 and o f f i c e r s         cf      other       forces          serving           in t h e           p o lice     a r e a u r . ce r
 nutual           a id       arrangem ents)                  in      the          p erform ance               or       purportec
 o erfo m a r.ee o f t h e ir fu n ction s.                       U nder s e c t i o n 4 8 ( 2 ) a n y c a n a c e s o-




                                                                       065
  ccsts        awarded a g a in s t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r            i r. s u e r , p r c c e e d i r . e s , a.-.v
  ccsts        h e i n c u r s " h i r . s e l f , a n d a n y s um p a i d i r. c o n n e c t i o n - i t h t ;-l
  s e t t l e m e n t o f a c l a i m , p r o v i d e d t h e s e c .t i e r .e n t . i s a p p r o v e d by th e
  p c_ ice au th o rity ,           r u s t be p a id c u t o f t h e p o l i c e fu n d .                     In such
  c a s e s , t h e r e f o r e , t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y ' s d i s c r e t i o n e x t e r . e s cr.Iy t o
  wr. e t h e r o r n o t t o a p p r o v e a p r o p o s e d s e t t l e m e n t c f t h e c l a i m .


  C ivil      A ction s       A gainst       *r.d vd 'ja^         P o lice      O fficers

  7.          A l t e r n a t i v e l y , t h e p l a i n t i f f n a y b e a w a r d e d d a m a g e s a g a i n s t an
  in d iv id u a l p o lice              officer,     t h o u g h h e c a n n o t r e c o v e r t h e damages
  tw ic e over a g a in st the c h ie f o f f ic e r a s - w e ll.                        S e c t i o n 4 8 (4 ) o f the
  P o l i c e A c t 1 9 6 4 s p e c i f i c a l l y e m p o w e r s a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y " t o such*
  e x t e n t a s t h e y t h i n k f i t " t o pa y * o u t o f t h e p o l i c e f u n d a n y d a m a g e s
  c r c o s t s a w a r d e d a g a i n s t a n o f f i c e r , any., d o s t s h e i n c u r s h i t - s e l f ,
  a n d a n y s u n s p a i d i n c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e .-?s e t t l e m e n t o f a c l a i m .
  T h is       p rovision              ap p lies    to      action s       a g a :i n s t      o fficers        of   the
^ u t h c r i t y ' s own f o r c e , o f f i c e r s o f a n o t h e r f o r c e s e r v i n g t h e p o l i c e
W e a u n d e r m utu al a id a rr a n g e m e n ts, and s p e c i a l c o n s t a b l e s f c r the
  p o lic e area.               In c o n sid e r in g w hether to c i v e f in a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e
  the       a u th o rity        w ill     w ish   to     co n sid er     in      p a rticu la r         w h eth er the
  o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d a c t e d in good f a i t h and e x e r c i s e d h i s judgement
  rea so n a b ly .         Where t h e c o u r t " f i n d s f o r t h e o f f i c e r , he n a y s e e k h is
  costs         from       the       p la in tiff;      should       the     costs          net       be   awarded or
. aw a rd ed o n l y in p a r t , th e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y s h o u ld c o n s i d e r whether
  to      reim b u rse          any       costs    not       covered,        tak in g ’ in to            account     the
  r e a s o n s , i f a n y , g i v e n by t h e c o u r t f o r f a i l i n g t o award a l l c o s t s
  cla im ed .

   o.         J o i n t a c t i o n s nam ing b o t h t h e c h               i e f o f f i c e r and an i n d i v i d u a l
   p o l i c e o f f i c e r may b e b r o u g h t i n so m e                  cases.         In such c a se s i t is
   im p o r ta n t t h a t any d is c u s s io n o f th e                       m erits       and quantum o f th e
•• p r o p o s e d    s e t t le m e n t should in v o lv e a l               l    t h e p a r t i e s named i n th e
   claim         together          w ith   ad visers  even     i              f     they      are     represented     by
   d iffe r e n t a d visers.


^^ L v il     A ctio n s      Under th e         Data      P rotection          Act      1984

  9.       U n d e r s e c t i o n s 2 2 a n d 23 o f t h e D a t a P r o t e c t i o n A c t 1SS4 an
  i n d i v i d u a l who s u f f e r s damage a s a r e s u l t o f t h e i n a c c u r a c y , l o s s
  or       u n au th orised           d isclosu re           of     personal              data         is     en titled           to
  c o m p e n sa tio n fr o n th e data u ser.'                    I n ' t h e a b s e n c e o f a n y c a s e l a w on
  these          p rovision s,           it    is' u n clear - w hether                     the       a c t s . c o v e r e d bv^
  sectio n s           22    a n d ' 2 3 ' a m o u n t —t o " t o r t s , 1 t o ' w h i c h - t h e “' g u i d a n c e _m
  D a r a g r a o h s 6 "and’7 above' a D p lie s .-                 I f n o t , s e c t i o n 48 o f t h e P o l i c e
  A c t I S 64 • d o e s         n o t •a p p l y . - ' H o w e v e r , ; ’t h e ^ p o s i t i o n ' / i s b r o a d l y - t . . e
  s a n e . - ’ - U n d e r ' s e c t i o n - 3 8 ( 3 ) (a)' - o f - t h e ' - - 1 9 8 4 A c t - _ _ c o n s t a b l e s ^
  t r e a t e d ' ' a s s e r v a n t s * o f v t h e 7 c h i e f o f f i c e r f o r - t h e - p u r p o s e s o'^
  A c t . •• *’‘;A c h i e f ? c o h s t a b i e F i s ‘/ t K e r e f o r e ^ i i a t f l e - ^ f o r ^ v t h e ^ c t s - o f - n i s •
  o f f i c e r s f a l l i n g w i t h i n s e c t i o n s 22 a n d 23 i n ' t h e sam e wav a s he - s
  lia b le        f o r t h e i r t o r t s under s e c t io n 48(1) .                        T h e p o s i t i o n c _ -.on
  c o l i c e o f f i c e r s i s l e s s c l e a r b u t i t i s p o s s i b l e t h a t i n some c i S ^
  t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e m ight be reg a rd ed as h a v in g l i a b i l i t y fo r t h e ir
  acts.          I t f o l l o w s t h a t i t w ould be p r o p e r f o r t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y




                                                                    086
         r.eet:        a                <?    ,*__         .•
                               . .
                                 w„ . '                   -~r a n y      a v a r c cr cc-pe:.s = ::cr., --isir.r
            ■      s       _ iaci j.i t y .      --    s h c u i d be    r.oted tr.a: t h e l i a b i l i t y --I
  .                                - • * '- e r   tr.e     A.ct    is   not       vicariou s         but     h is     : =r s - - ='
                       ‘       - - - £ - e ~ o r e r . i s c-T; c a r e i n h a v i n r i n s t i t u t e d a s v s ~ - - - -
  cctair.ir.r               c r--------
                                . e c K i-•r . g ar.d r a r c r d i n g d a t a . w h i c h w o u l d r e a s o n a b l y g u a r d




 _0. ^      k .* e r e c o m p e n s a t i o n i s s o u g h t from an i n d i v i d u a l o f f i c e r , th e
 ? ° ~ ~ ce- '    a u th o r ity w ill w ish , in                con sid erin g     w h e th e r t o n e e t the
  c o s us w h i c h w o u ld o t h e r w i s e f a l l on t h e o f f i c e r , t o t a k e a c c o u n t c f
  '"■Je ®a “'e m a t t e r s a s i n e x e r c i s i n g t h e i r p o w e r u n d e r s e c t i o n 4 S ( 4 )
  °*               ? d ic e      Act      1964      ( s e e p a r a g r a p h 7) . _ P o l i c e      au th orities
  s..o u lc apply            t h e s a n e br<Dad p r i n c i p l e s a n d i n - p a r t i c u l a r , , n e e t t h e
  cos^s o f            an y c o n p e n s a t i o n awarded a g a i n s t a c h i e f c o n s t a b l e where a
  ~ c n - p o l i c e o f r i c e r i s a t fa u lt, and t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e i s found re
^ ^ p v’e l i a b i l i t y f o r t h e a c t i o n s p e r f o m e d .


 c P . - i c e —O f f i c e r s      3 rin cin c      C ivil     A ction s     for     D efar.aticn

 11.         - h e r e n a v be o c c a s i o n s when f i n a n c i a l  a s s i s t a n c e i s sought
 - rcp~ a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o e n a b l e a n o f f i c e r t o b r i n g o r c o n s i d e r
 “ T- 2 ^ * 2 ^      a   c l v .-~ action        fcr    cefan ation .         An        au th ority    has
 ciscretio n           to give     such a s s i s t a n c e b u t i t    w ill      be e l i g i b l e fcr
 p o n c e g r a n t only i f the fc ilo w in g c r i t e r i a are a i l n e t : -

           (a)             the d efan aticn           is    seriou s;

           (b)               i c r e l a t e s t o t h e a c t i o n s o f an o f f i c e r a c t i n g               cr
          s a id       to      be a c t in g in th e d is c h a r g e o f h i s d u ty;

           (c)         it     has     attracted            p u b lic   atten tio n ;

          (c)         to  bring  the a c tio n is con sid ered                                     t o be in the
          in terests      c f the force cr of th e p o lic e                                      s e r v i c e as a
          w h o l e ; and

           (e)         the      action        stands        a reason ab le        chance       of    success.

C r i t e r i o n (d) i s c e n t r a l .               I f o n ly th e r e p u t a tio n o f th e in d ivid u al
officer           is   i n q u e s t i o n , he i s i n t h e s a n e p o s i t i o n a s any o th e r
citizen           and n u s t . be exp ected t o                         seek h is         own r e n e d y .         B u t an
a lleg a tio n        a g a i n s t a p a r t i c u l a r o f f i c e r n a y w e l l r e f l e c t on t h e
r e p u t a t i o n o f _ t h e w h o l e f o r c e o r . . b e an. e x a n p l e o f w i d e r a l l e g a t i o n s
a g a in s t- t h e -fo r c e o r ; a ; s i g n i f i c a n t s e c t i o n o f i t . • In such cases
the p o lic e          a u t h o r i t y , -p r o v id e d -.-th e - o t h e r - c r i t e r i a a r e s a t i s f i e d ,
r . a v r e a s o n a b l y _ b e ' ^ e x p e c t e d , ■p.o • h e l p • t o • d e f e n d t h e r e p u t a t i o n o f t h e




                                                                       067
     Legal        P.ejgreser.tatio n              for     Individual             Officers


     is                         r e ? resen t:a t-i0 ~ f o r in d iv id u a l::-'.o ffic e r s w hose i n t e — c-
    v ‘- e " “ r ^          a a y .be n ecessa ry .                        For e x a m p le , t h e r e w i l l be o c c a s io n s


•
     -Z" e v L L - p r i 6 c - i e f o f f i c e r ’ s l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e c a n n o t r e a s o r . a b i v
            “ Xu6s-w6Q       i.O     r e p r''Oe Cs eOnn 4,
                                     T*Pn,               t ^t hV>e^ s e p a >r- a-a —   t e i n t e r___e____   s t s o_ f^ <       ,  ^ « .

                                    i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n s i d e r s t h a t s u c h in.t
     and (b)          t h e pc
                                         I n such case s th e a u th o r ity sh ou ld c
    be r e p r e s e n t e d        the           o fficers.                      In       cons ic e rin g                  (b)
    a ssista n ce           r^
                                   .--':i-seu
                                            h u   i n- ‘ ipCaSr -t i5s -c u l a r ^ t o c oa n s ss ei ds se r iwn hg e t h (ebr)  above,    the
                   t-j             r'1
                                    'eir.g in       h e lpd a rt toi c b u llaamr e t of o r a sas ce tsi so n vs h ei tnh eco:r the o ffic e r s
             a ~                                    h e - d to b la r e fo r a c t i o n s in co n n ect
    i.      ? e ^ 'j"         ~ — C-• >~ns i n g u e s t r e l a t e s a n d w h e t h e r a n v s u c h r i n i m c r
                 g ~,T_e r i . t e r o l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g s f o r t h e c o s t s ' o f w h i c h ’ t h i
    i -       1 « . U" ‘° r i -wy Wou.1 ? b e . l i a b l e u n d e r s e c t i o n 4 8 ( 1 ) o f t h e P o l i c e
    ~;7JT._              c;    ~c r           ~ch f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e                        r.igh t be a p p ro p riate
    “ — n _ n _r.e " e r r . s c f t h i s c i r c u l a r .

    APPLICATIONS                FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

. ^1-! ; 0                ~ t cer    yis-^ing to           seek     fin a n cia l    a ssista n ce        from h i s
  w d i c e a u t n c r i t v sh o u ld have th e o p p o r t u n ity in advance c f as w ell
       ^                 con clu sion          of the p roceed in gs           t o su b r.it t o th e c h ie f
  c : ~ c e - a n a p p l i c a t i o n f o r f i n a n c i a l aa s s i s t a n c e .   The c h i e f o f f i c e r
  s .-.c 'j I g p u t ^t n i s ,  t o g- e t h e r w i t h h i s o v;n
                                                                    n r ecom m encation to th e p o lic e
               - " V . - c5 d e c i s i o n .      The o f f i c e r s h o u l d norm al l v be g i v e n t h e
  - p p c r t u n i t y b y t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o m a k e r e o r e s e n t a t •• o n s t o t h e n
  ir he w ish es to co so.

                                       to give fin a n c ia l             a ssista n ce,       th e authority
  snou_d^ in fo r a           th e o f f ic e r concerned th a t,                if    t h e i n f o r m a t i o n or.
 *'\r?wCn t : h e y b a s e d t h e i r d e c i s i o n t o g r a n t t h e a s s i s t a n c e i s s h o w n i n
                       f e g a l P roceed in gs to be in a c c u r a t e or in com p lete, the
 a u t h o r i t y w i l l n o r a i l l y e x p e c t t o r e c o v e r t h e m o n e y u nless i t i s
 s a t i s f i e d t h a t n o c : l p a b l e m i s r e p r e s e n t a t i o n w a s i n v o l v e d and t h a t
 5 ° ' r e c o v e r t h e r .o n e y w o u l d i n v o l v e t h e * a p p l i c a n t i n s u b s t a n t i a l
 n arash ip .          9 n    t h e o th e r hanc,        i f .an a u t h o r i t y r e f u s e s f in a n c ia l
 a s s i s t a n c e ’a n c ^ t h e n d i s c o v e r s i n t h e l i g h t        o f. subsecruent events
 «-hat        such    a ssista n ce       w ould h a v e b e e n w a r r a n t e d ,         the"n f i n a n c i a l
 a s s i s t a n c e s h o u l d b e g r a n t e d ir. c r c e r t o r . e e t t h e r e a s o n a b l e c c s t s
 i n c u r r e d by t h e o f f i c e r in s e e k i n g l e g a l a d v i c e c r a s s i s t a n c e .




                                                                0 68
                         j-sr^cicr.       tu r.- s. rr.a v   cs   us6-      ~'                              a   ~   r .   —
      (I 'II M




                                                                                     • —- —3>
          ..w      dciir.s*      r.z-rr. re*       ^r.   cnsr.cs          ur*.CLsr* c r.s
          ~er.:s fcir.er thar. cffences involving d r i v i n g vhe:
-r ir . c r          d ru gs cr ta-:i r.g a v e h i c l e 'without author:
c f f e n c e s cf causing the death cr injury of any per so n                                         :cr ar.v
ass a u i          or in ccr.nection vith his action for libel or slander,
o: ; ice r        see.-;m     financial a ss is ta nc e in c ire ur.stances cover ez cy
R e g u l a t i o n 15 s h o u:licd s e e - ; s u c h a s s i s t a n c e f r o m t h e p o l i c e a u t n c r i t y
in th e f i r s t in sta n c e ,             I f th e p o lic e a u th o r ity does not consid er
the       request          to  fa ll         Lthin     the        teres      of    th is    circu la r,        th®
F e d e r a tio n nay then c o n sid er th e a p p lic a t io n w ith in th e t e r t s cf
R e g u l a t i o n 1c         f the officer receives legal a ss is ta nc e frorr. tr.e
Fe d e r a t i e r ,           err.s of Hcr.e Of f i c e C i r c u l a r No                    26/1567 ’      -'ill
co n tin u e to acolv.




                                                                                                                    i)'
           G e n e r a l er.cuiries about the c o nt en t cf this ci rc u l a r r.ay




                                                                                                                    id
a d d r e s s e d to Mr Waghcrn, Hcr.a Office, FI D i v i s i o n or. (Cl) 213 4 2

                                                                               Vcurs      faithful1




                                                                                                                          6
(1) 8 08 1989 Police committee erred in relying on a report from a panel in legal costs
application; Law report
 The Times (106:Q1)


Queen's Bench Division. Regina v Derbyshire Police Authority, Ex parte Wil
son and Another
Before Lord Justice Ralph Gibson and M r Justice Nolan
(Judgment July 20)
Members o f a police committee deciding whether to indemnify police officers
and/or the Police Federation for the costs o f legal representation at a
district auditor's inquiry should all be fully aware o f the evidence and the
representations made by the officers and should exercise their own judgment
and not rely on the report o f a panel.
There was a presumption that where an officer could be shown to have acted
in good faith in pursuance o f his duties, any refusal to reimburse would be
a bad decision unless there were some relevant factor which could reasonably
justify the refusal.
The Queen's Bench Divisional Court so held when allowing the application o f
Inspector Wilson and Sergeant Dalton for a writ o f certiorari to quash the
Derbyshire Police Authority's decision o f July 26, 1988 refusing to
indemnify them out o f police funds for legal expenses.
M r Nicholas Underhill and M r Benedict Patten for the applicants; M r Alan
Newman, QC and M r Jacques Algazi for the police authority.
LORD JUSTICE RALPH GIBSON, delivering the judgment o f the court, said that a
complaint was made by two ratepayers concerning expenditure on the Chief
 Constable's offices when work to convert one o f them into a conference room
was carried out.
 That was intended to be paid for by an authorized change in the purpose o f
 sums in the annual estimates. The authorization o f the police committee was
 not obtained and the spending was therefore contrary to law.
 The auditor found that no one had made any personal gain, that none o f the
 officers had been shown to have been guilty o f wilful misconduct and in the
 circumstances it would not be proper to seek an order for repayment from
 them.
 The services o f solicitor and counsel had been made available for the two
 officers by the Police Federation with no stipulation as to personal
 contribution.
 When the result o f the inquiry was known, the federation applied to the
 police authority for the legal costs to be paid. The authority had power to
 make payment out o f police funds but decided to make no payment.
 The decision o f the authority had been attacked on three main grounds. It
 was said that the police authority, a committee with a full membership o f 24
 had left the decision to a panel o f five members appointed to do no more
 than hear submissions and report; that they had made the decision on an
incomplete report from the panel; in particular the panel had failed to tell
the authority what the applicants' submissions were.
Home Office Circular N o 77/87, dated December 4, 1987, provided guidance for
the police authority as to the circumstances in which police funds might be
used under section 48 o f the Police Act 1964 to meet expenditure 'incurred
by officers in all kinds o f legal proceedings where the officers have acted
in good faith in pursuance o f their duties'.
The circular was not a regulation and did not have the force o f statutory
law. It contained guidance with reference to a power to make payments but
had not created a specific duty to make payments.
The panel, all members o f the police committee, was set up to hear
representations and report. It was entitled to add a recommendation. B ut if
it was to do what it had been instructed to do, it was essential to report
fairly the substance o f the representations it had heard. It was useless to
recite that 'all the arguments have been carefully considered'.
N o further report or explanation o f their recommendation was intended upon
the submission o f the report to the police authority. The applicants were
entitled to have their representations considered by the police authority
itself.
The task given to the police authority under the 1964 Act, in the context o f
the guidance given in the circular, was o f considerable difficulty similar
to that which courts had to perform in deciding whether a successful
litigant, should despite his success, not be awarded his costs.
The panel, if it was to have made a decision, needed guidance on matters o f
law relevant to the exercise o f its discretion. In particular the authority
had to make its decision with reference to any ground o f application put
forward.
The authority had full power to delegate but did not use that power and the
discretion being exercised while administrative was not purely
administrative.
The power to consider and, if thought fit, to award reimbursement o f costs
arose under the general administrative powers given under the statute; but
once a particular claim was made, in dealing with it, the authority was
deciding a claim for financial redress based on a reasonable expectation o f
having the claim considered in accordance with the principles set out in the
Home Office circular.
The authority had decided to retain to itself the decision on the
applications, but having done that the members o f the authority were
required to decide them by their own decisions.
His Lordship accepted M r Underhill's submission that the central principle
in the circular meant that there was a presumption that if an officer was
shown to have acted in good faith in pursuance o f his duties he should be
entitled to reimbursement.
A refusal to reimburse would be a bad decision unless there was some
relevant factor which could reasonably justify the refusal.
Solicitors: Russell Jones & Walker; Kingsford Dorman & Routh Stacey.

The Times
Issue 63467.
Copyright (C) Times Newspapers Ltd, 1985-1997




                                          072
