 Dean Craig Woodcock Police Constable 2975»      D.O.B.
 South Yorkshire Police, loodseats Police Station. Tel: 500200
 Duty Scale 9am x 5pns Siturday 15 th April 1989 *


 At 8.^5^® arrived at Woodseats for Transport to Hillsborough.
 At 10.00axn Briefing in North Stand of football ground. Deployed to serial 8 with
 PS 1203 Jjlarples in the Spion Kop at Hillsborough. At 12.00noon I commenced duty at
 the rear of the turnstiles at the Pennistone Road end of the ground carrying out the
 occasional search of supporters as they entered the ground carrying out similar dtties
 with me at this time was Police Constable 265 Fletcher# Vve were visited regularly by
 Sargeant Marples who kept us updated as to the situation inside the ground. For tie next KK
 hour the flow of spectators remained steady but there were no problems of congestion.
 At 1.00pm we were told to take up our position in the Spion Kop and form a single man
 cordon in order to segregate Notts Forest fans and Liverpool fans who had aquired tickets
 for this end of the ground.
 2.30pn rest of serial forms double cordon to due thickening crowd and P.C. Fletcher
    d myself tod: up a position at the front of the area set aside for Liverpool fans
 in order to prevent bothsets of fans climbing over the wall at the front of     this area.
 3y 3.00pm there was verylittle roc::: to move in the Kop and M I X there was a certain amount
 of heckling going on between the Forest fans and the Liverpool fans in the designated
 area, and I feel that had the gfoftnX match continued there would have been trouble in this
 area of the ground. Just after kick off I saw a number of fans climbing over the barriers
 at the other end of the ground at first it appeared to be just a pitch invasion of some
 sort and this ap eared to upset the fans in the Kop end because they obviously wanted the
 game to continue but thought it it had been stopped because of this invasion. Liverpool
 fans at the Leppings Lane end were obviously aware of erectly what was going on much
 before the Notts Forest fans. The Forest fans obviously j&8£e°of the full circumstances
 began to taunt Jjerpool fans as they brought stretchers carrying HE injured and some
 dead people to the Pennistone Road end of the ground. These taunts provoked a number of
^^iverpool fans to charge towards the Pennistone Hoad end where the Kotts Forest fans were
 taunting them. This initial charge was forced bad: by Police officers who then formed a JDZi
 cordon accross the halfway line obviously to prevent a similar thing happening again.
 The cordon only appeared to break to allow stretchers and ambulances through into
 the leppings Lane half ofvthe pitch. Host of our serial remained in the same position
 in order to keep the rival fans segregated and we therefore took no part in the events
 which occured at the Lep ings Lane end of tie ground*
 The Kop was later cleared of all supporters before we were releived of this duty.
 ^•50pn approx Serial 8 Directed from the gymnasium area to mobile patrol Middlewood Road,
 report of trouble ir. Hillsborough shopping area. Cancelled on route. Standby at Parlzhead
 fioad.
 6.00pm Return to gymnasium area pending stand down and transport to V.'oodseifcs.
 7.00pm Off duty -oodseats.

                                                      D. Woodcock   P-r.-
