                                    MINUTES OF THE                      f
                          DE-BRIEFING FOR FA CUP SEMI-FINAL             |
            BETWEEN ,£D22ENHAM HOTSPUR FC AND WOLVERHAMPTON WANDERERS FC ^
                           HELD AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


 Present:

 Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), Mr R J Goslin -      Chairman
 Chief Superintendent Harold, 'F' Division
 Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson, Traffic Division
 Superintendent Chapman, Fl Sub-Division
 Acting Superintendent Ruddy, Operations Division
 Chief Inspector Smith, ’F 1 Division                                 «
 Inspector Greenwood)
 Inspector Calvert )
 Inspector Sykes     )~ F Division
 Sergeant Purdy      )
 Sergeant            —   Secretary


The Chairman opened the meeting by stating its intention of assessing the
planning, action and incidents relating to the FA Cup Semi-Final between
Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers held at Hillsborough on
Saturday 11 April 1981.

Certain problems had occurred but in his and the Chief Constable's opinion
we had acted correctly. One letter of complaint had been received from a member
of the public as well as one letter praising the police action in a dangerous
situation. Chief Superintendent Herold mentioned that other letters
congratulating the police on their actions had also been received.

Mr Goslin said that it was his decision to remove spectators from the Leppings
Lane end of the ground to the other side in order to ease a dangerous situation
where serious injuries or even fatalities were a real possibility. He then
read the letter of complaint, which contained an allegation that the police
herded more and more people into the Leppings Lane enclosure when it was obvious
that it was full.

The Chairman invited views on this point. Superintendent Chapman said that the
entrances to Leppings Lane were controlled to ensure an even distribution of
fans. However, as the gorund filled up the usual packing problems occurred.
There was space in the centre of the enclosure but fans refused to move over
and fill it. Police officers were placed into the crowd to ensure that the
best use was made of the available space. The Mounted Department also assisted
at the- rear of the crowd to prevent more people entering that part of the
ground.

Chief Superintendent Herold pointed out that the problem was exacerbated by a
series of incidents which culminated in the late arrival of a large number of
fans. This meant that instead of arriving over a period, they all-arrived
together very close to kick-off time.

At 11.25 am an accident occurred on the Ml Motorway involving 13 cars, causing
two of the three lanes to be closed down for one and a half hours. Just north
of this, and at about the same time, a PSV broke down. Passengers alighted from

                                                                  Continued/
 it and caused problems on the motorway. The pontoon bridges and extensive
 roadworks on the motorway in the Derbyshire Police Area also created delays.
This 90 minute delay resulted in a sudden flood of vehicles, all of them
-Spurs supporters, into Sheffield. Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson took
up this point and said that he accepted that the traffic route, designed to
 divide, the football supporters from the city centre shoppers, was too tortuous,
although this may not haveproved a problem had there been a steady flow of
 spectators rather than the sudden influx caused by the incidents described by
Mr Herold.

The Chairman then sought the views of the meeting over the crushing incidents
when several spectators were injured and which necessitated the removal of
some spectators from the Leppings Lane enclosure.

Mr Herold said that the capacity for the Leppings Lane enclosure, stated in
the certificate issued under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, is 10,100.
This must, of necessity, contain a safety margin. The actual turnstile
reading-was 10,435 to which must be added the 70 Spurs supporters who had
managed to obtain tickets which put them amongst the Wolves supporters. These
had been moved to Leppings Lane from the Kop for their own safety. This made
a total of 405 spectators over the authorised limit. Inspector Calvert pointed
out that this created a similar situation to last year when about 400 forged
tickets were printed for the Leppings Lane end, although the same problem was
•not experienced then.

Mr Herold had already referred to the late arrival of a large number of
spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane enclosure when
the match started. The flashpoint occurred when Tottenham scored after only
three minutes. The spectators just entering pushed forward to see what was
happening and caused a crush, which resulted in the injuries. Inspector
Greenwood also mentioned that there had been two or three fights, albeit of
a minor nature, at the same time. This had resulted in the order from Mr Goslin
to open the gates at the front of Leppings Lane in order to release some
spectators onto the pitch surround. This was done by opening the gates,
releasing a few spectators and then closing them to allow a steady flow. This
was difficult to maintain because as soon as pressure was relieved at the
front the crush from the back- filled the void.

The lack of a reserve serial between the South Stand and the Leppings Lane
stand (where one has normally been situated) caused a few minutes delay in
the 'deployment of officers to police this situation but this problem was soon
overcome. Superintendent Chapman stressed that there was still room in the
centre of the Leppings Lane enclosure although it was quite full. This was
only to be expected when there was a capacity crowd, but the refusal of
spectators to fill spaces had caused difficulties elsewhere in the enclosure.

The discussion progressed to the construction of the Leppings Lane enclosure.
Mr Goslin felt that it was inadequate and required more divisions .so that
spectators are not in such a solid mass. He also felt that the limit of
10,100 was tocr high, although Superintendent Chapman disagreed with this.
The Chairman disagreed with Mr Herold’s suggestion of a'6 ft to 8 ft wide
channel down the centre of the enclosure to divide spectators and segregate
opposing fans on the grounds that such a small segregation gap only encouraged
opposing spectators to throw articles at each other and at police officers
in the middle. Inspector Calvert expressed concern about the central


                                                                Continued/
entrance to the Leppings Lane area because it always causes delays and
blockages. It would benefit from reconstruction.

.The Chairman said that talks would take place with Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Club on the ground capacities and for any reconstruction thought to
 be necessary.

The discussion progressed to the fans who ran onto the pitch during the half
time interval.

Mr.Herold said that the trouble stemmed from the front central gate being
opened from where about   150 young fans were led onto the pitch surround.
These were the ones who   eventually ran onto the pitch      although at thetime
it was necessary for the gate to be opened to relieve crowd pressure. The
match referee, Clive Thomas, had said that he was unable to start the match
when he wanted to. This was, however, based on a five minute half-time
interval and not on the normal ten minute one. It was unfair to suggest
that the match was held up as a result of the fans on        the pitch.

Mr Goslin said that he may have made a wrong decision       at half-time totry
and get the fans from the pitch surround onto the Kop. They had not been
causing any trouble where they were, yet the decision to move them onto the
Kbp precipitated a minor pitch invasion. The half-time interval was, on
reflection, insufficient to carry out the necessary manoeuvre. Some of the
people who were being shepherded into the Kop refused to go in, resulting in
a minor 'break-out' which was quickly controlled. Mr Herold said that it was
apparent, for future reference, that when people have to be moved from the
Kop the area behind the hoardings is an ideal position to put them into. Chief
Inspector Smith also pointed out that 50-100 fans had been successfully removed
from the pitch and placed into the centre of the Kop. Mr Herold said that
this situation prompted the only criticism of the policeby the club in that
we seemed to be helping fans to climb over the railings.Inspector Sykes
replied to this criticism by saying that only the fans who had become stuck
whilst attempting to climb over the railings to avoid the crush had been
helped by police officers so they did not injure themselves. The other fans
were released, in small groups through a police controlled gate.

One problem which was totally unnecessary was that caused by the sale of
unwanted tickets by Wolverhampton Wanderers direct to Tottenham Hotspur. This
is contrary to FA directions and neither the FA, Sheffield Wednesday FC nor
the police were told of this decision. This made a nonsense of the
segregation arrangements and was a contributing factor to the difficulties
which occurred. Discussions were to take place about this situation.

The Chairman then asked for any comments or criticisms which could prove
useful for future occasions. The following points were raised:

Acting Chief Superintendent Thompson

The route for traffic from the motorway was too tortuous and the more direct
route, the Parkway, should be considered in the future.- Chief Superintendent
Herold pointed out that this would bring the fans through the city centre
and into .direct conflict with the bus routes for walking spectators.




                                                                Continued/
 Mr Thompson also relayed criticisms that officers outside the ground had
 made no attempt to direct traffic at blocked up junctions. This cricitism
■was not accepted because with the size of the crowd some delay must be
 accepted and anticipated.

Superintendent Chapman

The absence of a reserve serial between the South Stand and West Stand caused
a slight delay in the deployment of officers to the disorder situation and
there should be a reserve stationed there in future.

There should be female officers available at the turnstiles to assist in any
necessary searches. There was a marked absence of female officers-at the
gates.

The back to back radios are not useful in the situation when there is
extensive media coverage at the ground. There is a high degree of inter­
ference.

Acting Superintendent Ruddy

The communications had proved successful with three channels being used
 (1, 2 and 4). The splitting of the ground control and the public order control
meant that the caravan for public order control need no longer be situated
inside the ground and could be moved about outside for optimum reception.

Mr Ruddy also pointed out that the supervisory officers from foreign
                                                             ,
forces had made many complimentary remarks about the planning organisation
and operational aspects of this event. He felt that we were being over
critical of ourselves.

Inspector Calvert

Mr Calvert suggested the inclusion of a de-brief chart so that the comments
of any officers at the ground could be included for discussion.

Inspector Sykes

On this occasion officers from foreign forces had been employed on duties
inside the ground. Mr .Sykes felt that this should be the duty of the regular
officers ('F' Division)'who are familiar with the territory.

Mr Herold pointed out that the reverse situation had applied last year and
there were still difficulties. In fact, the local knowledge of the visiting
officers who were inside had helped to overcome situations, which our own
policemen may not have been able to deal with easily. There are also
logistical difficulties with the deployment of foreign officers outside the
ground.

Sergeant Purdy

Difficulties were experienced because officers from foreign forces had not
read or understood the correspondence sent to them. Despite having maps and
being taken on a tour of the ground, some had gone to a different part of



                                                               Continued/
                                         - 5 -


    the ground to where they had been deployed. This could have hadserious
    consequences when assistance was urgently needed.

    'The local call signs (eg Sierra 5 - Sergeant) should be stressed to visiting
     officers as the lack of this knowledge could lead to confusion.

    There had been too many people inside the control room - a maximum of nine
    persons during the critical stages in a room designed for three, and this
    had shown that the ventilation was inadequate. On this point Superintendent
    Chapman said that the number of senior officers in the control room at this
    time had caused confusion because on occasions conflicting instructions had
    been given and the control room staff did not know which particular
    Instruction to accept and relay.

    The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) agreed to consider all the points
    raised for future occasions and thanked all present for their attendance.

    The meeting closed at 7.20 pm.

0
