                                                Sheffield Archives Ref;                    jfc iR l            M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                        D a te and t i m e raised                                        Num ber




T itle
             ^         I
                  ("j ^—        j)          LLa
(Include source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions -       urg ent actio n -   Yp$2
                                                                           ^   W o iu i^ c J l-   ~f~
                                                                                                                                          Receiver


                                                                                                                                          5-7^9
                                                                                                                                          Indexer
D o c u m e n t re giste red/indexed as indicated

N o (s) o f actions raised                                                                                                             3rSo2
                                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
S t a te m e n t reader's instructions
                                                                                                                                        c- ^ - a

                                                                                                                                          Indexer
Ind e x e d as indicated

N o(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                                   S IO
E x a m in e d   f u r t h e r action to be taken



                                                                                                                                      5 3 \

                                                                                                                                           Indexer
F u r th e r action No(s)


W h e n satisfied all actions raised O f fic e M anager to endorse o th e r D o c u m e n t M aster N u m b e r F o r m
                                                                Cheshire 1

                                                                21st March 1989

Dear Sir,
Further to my conversation today regarding my observations on seat allocation
and crowd marshalling at the City v. Chelsea match on Saturday 18th March 1989,
I thought it worthwhile documenting the facts for investigation s-

1. My eldest son  purchased 10 x £4 tickets in the North Stand ;Section ’K ’,
   Row 19, Seats 1 to 10.
   Seats 1 to 4 were occupied by 4 people, 2 without tickets and 2 with tickets
   for Row 23. My lad thought they would at least use the 2 seats in Row 23 but
   found they were occupied - they didnt ask what tickets these people had. An
   official marshal investigated but said he couldnt do anything. This resulted
   in the four people sitting on the steps for the match, along with between 50
   and 100 other people in the immediate vicinity.
   As a designated club under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 you will
   know this is illegal (the point being we dont want another Bradford Disaster)

2.    My colleague, who had flown from Guernsey for the match, and myself, had 2 x
     £5 tickets in the Main Stand ; Section ’H ’, Row J, Seats 101 & 102.
     These two seats are next to the gangway at the North Stand end. Again, there
     were many people occupying seats without tickets, but as the genuine ticket
     holders arrived they moved. This resulted in an estimated 200 standing in the
     aisle and at the back of Section ’H ’ - I counted to 100 and stopped.
     I suggest this is more than a minor incident and cannot understand how this
     could happen legitimately, unless they were officials of the club.
     As the language used by most of these people, all of the time, is unprintable
     I suspect they had no formal connection with the club - although they all
     would see themselves as City supporters, and unfortunately are not untypical
     of the person attending football matches in England at present. Several had
     also been drinking.

Whilst I would not expect the clubs to tackle the problems of society in general
they could make some effort to target a different audience - as I mentioned,
these problems do not exist at rugby internationals, tennis, golf, motor racing,
athletics meetings, ice skating, the Palace or major concerts around the country
due, I believe, to a more aggressive pricing policy (Wimbledon tickets, for
example, on semi-finals day this year are £32 each and have been 10 times
oversubscribed). This would also help to fund the game properly and pay wages
to world class English players on a par with continental Europe.
There ARE enough people willing to support football if the majority of people
currently attending can be replaced - unfortunately until this happens none of
us are likely to attend.
                             Yours sincerely
