• I
                j Sheffield Archives Ref:           jbhftL.                                     M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date arid time raised                  /W        7                  Number
                                                   a / 2 -? y


Title         LtM&J rfrS*~
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — ^«f?No      A #              o ft                  uk*
                                                                                                                                 Receiver

                                                                                                                               <T7t- 9

                                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                     trr/r
                                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                  [JxJmM M X- ik lA             thC#                                OAAjP ^L C M L C U ^
                                                                              M u   iA u J o l j l . qc/teiK p i   .   / ^
                                                                                                                             ssm ,
                                                                                      C*>ACC(J <            Ut                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                          £*JM& ^qrvd QSl3by                                        oafer.                                   7g S § ,
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                        O/M         SIO




Further action No(s)
                                                                                                                                        er?££32i

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
    (I




I
!
Lord Justice Taylor,                                   24th April 1989
Royal Courts of Justice,
Strand,
London,
WC2A 2LL.


My Lord,

The Hillsborough Disaster


I am one of those fortunate and bewildered people who now share a survivor
guilt complex. I have felt a genuine need to put in writing my personal
observations following the Hillsborough disaster, although I have deliberately
delayed doing so in order to gather my thoughts and put forward an objective,
factual report of the events leading to, and during, the catastrophe. I
must state that my feelings are still a mixture of deep sorrow and bitterness.

I will not comment upon the choice of venue, the allocation of tickets,
or the condition of the stadium as there will be numerous accounts on these
points - the conclusion being painfully obvious! Instead I want to explain
the events of the disaster as I and thousands of people saw them, mindful
of many people's opinions that their voice will neither be heard nor
considered.

First of all I would mention that I am 27 years of age, have a wife and
a 4 year old son, and am employed by a very reputable Liverpool professional
firm. I am reasonably well educated, having sat the final part of my
professional qualifications on 14th April 1989, and I have never been
convicted for so much as exceeding the speed limit. However, none of this
makes me any different from the other supporters as I and my colleagues
have a drink before each game, and basically go out with high spirits to
enjoy ourselves. I actually drove to Sheffield and then drank two lagers
before the game (purchased from an off-licence which closed at 2.00 p.m.),
but none of the above makes me a thug or a drunken hooligan.

Now that the character reference is over, I wish to describe the change
in my nature when I tried to get into the ground at approximately 2.30 p.m.
I arrived to no queuing, no attempt by the police to form a queue, or to
stop people from joining the build-up of people at the few turnstiles
available, and two police horses walking into the crowd and causing panic.
The attitude of the mounted policemen was absolutely disgraceful, with one
of them basically acting like a crazed person. I then found myself being
knocked about by a horse, which led to my shouting at the police when they
totally ignored requests from everybody else to sort out the situation.

Eventually the exit gate was opened at approximately 2.40 / 2.45 p.m.,
resulting in a rush of people wanting to escape the pressure. Unfortunately
I, and one of my friends, was in the first group through the gates and ended
up being bundled to the floor, along with approximately twenty other people.
Having frantically picked ourselves up, in fear of the crowd behind, we
saw the gates closed with only about fifty people inside (I cannot be
definite about these figures). The police inside the gates had already
seen evidence of falling bodies on the first opening - luckily without
injuries!



                                                       /Continued
Page 2.



I then walked round the ground and entered the terracing by the c o m e r flag*
due to my experience of last year's game. Last year I entered the ground
at approximately 2.00 p.m., went straight through the tunnel behind the
goal, then came straight out again to go to the corner, as it was completely
full behind the goal at that time.

As the game started there was a feeling of unease in the centre of the
terracing, which as you know turned to screams and angry shouting and which
was, as you will be aware, initially ignored by the police - even to the
extent of making spectators re-enter the terracing after they had escaped
over the fences. At that time I was not aware of the gates being opened,
for the second time and after seeing the results of the first opening. I
must say that the police must have seen the same pictures to which we were
all subjected by the Daily Mirror, and consequently I can only assume that
the cries and shouts were completely ignored!

As the horror of Hillsborough began to unfold before us there was an immense
feeling of anger about the lack of attention given by the police as spectators ,
tried to revive friends, or complete strangers. The human barrier formed
across the pitch was of no use whatsoever, unnecessary, a complete waste
of manpower, and probably based upon the premise that hooliganism was at
the root of the problem. I am not saying that every police officer was
useless, or unmoved, as they obviously did what they could in the circumstances,
but there was no apparent lead from the top, no organisation, there were
no facilities of any note, no contingency plans - nothing!

The events seemed to last about an hour, during which time the media displayed
their true colours in filming, or photographing, as much detail as they
could. Why on earth couldn't they have acted as normal human beings, put
down their cameras and helped? Perhaps people in positions such as yours
can make this sort of vile conduct the subject of criminal law! It is also
worth bearing in mind that those spectators who hit out at the media, or
the police, were confused, upset and angry, and in the circumstances could
be said to be justified. This behaviour by a minority of people was not
an act of inherent hooliganism, but one of pure frustration and anger.

During the hour or so, the public address system was, first of all, used
to instruct everybody to retain their tickets for a replay, and, secondly,
to call for people in the crowd with medical knowledge. However, it could
hardly be heard, either due to the inadequacy of the system, or the frailty
of the operator. The only audible message came from Mr. Dalgleish, whose
words you will be familiar with.

Before I draw my conclusions, I wish to bring home to you the feelings of
people on Merseyside concerning this disaster. Before and during the tragedy
there was genuine and, I feel, justifiable anger which slowly turned to
sorrow and disbelief as the 15th April gradually expired. On 16th and 17th
April Merseyside was devastated. On 18th April the disgusting remarks of
the South Yorkshire Police Federation turned the tide towards anger once
again, and frankly I believe this feeling will exist for some time. The
sorrow will never disappear.




                                                         /Continued
                                                                                   3
Page 3.




To conclude, I have to say that careless neglect of the planning before
the game should be looked at, the overall lack of reaction, facilities and
liaison on the field appeared to be nothing short of gross negligence, and,
finally, the remarks of the South Yorkshire Police Federation can only be
regarded as criminal!

I acknowledge that the behaviour of some supporters outside the ground may
have been difficult, but please remember the reasons explained above. I
did not see one act of violence or hooliganism, and saw only a handful of
people drunk. At the end of the day with a crowd of 50,000 people the
police should have learned to expect problems given today's society. Why
could they not learn from decades of enormous crowds at Anfield or Goodison.
My friends and I always arrive at the Kop late, after having a drink beforehand
(sometimes for about two hours), and accept that we must queue up (even
with Season Tickets), but there is never a problem, and if anybody misbehaves
in the queue he is simply sent to the back!

Finally, turning again to last year’s match, Sheffield police actually
checked tickets before admitting people into the area in front of the
turnstiles. Also, there were stewards and police directing the flow once
inside the ground. The comments of Mr. Peter Wright of the South Yorkshire
Police Federation that there were no "significant alterations" from the
operation last year are not correct (London Evening Standard - 21/4/89,
page 2).

You may consider this letter to be bitter, biased and ill-conceived, but
I can assure you it has been carefully thought out after some soul-searching.
It is not a catalogue of bitter accusations - it is fact! A photocopy of
my unused ticket is enclosed.

I and thousands of others do not want the South Yorkshire Police to be
allowed to indulge in any cover-up!

I will gladly give this evidence at any enquiry in order to squash the smear
campaign against the many thousands of good people on Merseyside whose sense
of loss and unity cannot at this moment be described.




Yours faithfully,




Enc.




                                                                                  4
