                                                                                       M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised   AM If)'                        Number



Title
(Include source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No   CD                             .-----------
                                                                                                                 Receiver
                                                   @    Auk b                          < fl
                                            mL_______________ L                                                     Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicate*

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                    Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             O /M         SIO
Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                    Tndexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                       NJD/AMS
fork
                                       4 May 1989




Dear


I have been asked by the Chief Constable to
acknowledge receipt of your letter of 26 April
T989.

The contents of your letter have been noted.
Thank you for writing.


Yours sincerely




Staff Officer
to Chief Constable




                  Chief Inspector Dickerson      2012
                                                     YORK I




                                                     26 April 1989

West Midlands Police
Lloyd House
Uniform Operations
P 0 Box 52
Colmore Circus
Queensway
BIRMINGHAM Q k 6NQ


Sirs

Hillsborough disaster

On the Saturday of the disaster, l5/^/89» some American friends
travelled from London to York to visit us (routeAl, M 1 8) arriving
here (3 miles north of York) at 2.30 pm.  They asked us the reason
for so many people they had seen en route waving and wearing red &
white or blue & white and we said Moh, there'll be a soccer match
somewhere - one of the teams must be Liverpool".   (I come from
Liverpool and my friends knew this.)

They must have heard about the trouble after they left us at 8 pm
as when they arrived back in the US my friends wrote me and mentioned
the match.  I quote her comments in full; perhaps her remarks will be
helpful to you, as a completely unbiased report.

"Ihat soccer debacle was terrible.     I think we mentioned to you that
we saw so many people with red and white and blue and white towels
going up to ¥ork.     We stopped to get gas and the parking Lot was full
of buses with very unattractive boys - dyed hair and earrings.      They
were chanting and looked very manacing.     When I went inside to use
the bathroom, some man blew out the door — double glass reinforced
with steel.    Some of the glass went in my hair.         ] thought he
kicked it o u t , but I think he used something in his hand that looked
like a horn.     I was very relieved to get away without having the car
turned over.
I don't think they can blame the police for not controlling that
group."

Yours faithfully
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                  FU RN IVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            Furnival Gate
                                                     Sheffield S1 4QN
 HI L L SB OR OU G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M
                                                     Telephone: 0742 727599

WEST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ                        S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STA TIO N
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                               Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                             Telephone: 051-709 7190/7231
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                  Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
                                                     Our Ref:     J M J /S J A
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021-359 3332                              Date:       23 June 1969




York




Dear

1 am grateful for you advising me of your information about the tragic events
at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.  I have noted the information which has also
been made available to Secretary of the Inquiry as well as the Treasury
Solicitor, who is instructing Counsel to the Inquiry at the oral hearings.

Having considered your contribution I do not intend to arrange a personal visit
to obtain any further statement.  However, if you have any additional
information since you last contacted my investigation team or you feel that a
personal visit is essential please do not hesitate to make contact at any of my
offices listed above.  Alternatively you can write to the Secretary of the
Inquiry as below:-

M r R M Whalley
Secretary to The Inquiry
50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to convey his personal thanks for your taking
the trouble to make contact and  for the contribution you have made to his
Inquiry.

Yours sincerely




J M JONES
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
