                                                                                        M IR .15



OTHER     d o c u m en t form                   Date and tim e raised                              Number


T itle
(Include source and any document number i f relevant!


Receiver's instructions — urgent action    ^Yps/NcT_                    /ftrriA
                                                                                                                  Receiver


                                                                                                              ■S>Ur^j
                                                                                                                  In d e x e r
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                            S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  In d e x e r
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                    O/M              S IO




                                                                                                                  In d e x e r
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                               STATEMENT

                 tfill say:-



 I am employed as a mortuary technician at the Northern General

Hospital,   Sheffield.



On the day of the Hillsborough Disaster I was watching the

television.     I saw the major problems at the ground and

telephoned the Hospital at approximately 3.20 p.m.       I asked the

receptionist if I was needed and she said that there was a major

incident and that I should go to the Hospital.      I arrived at the

Hospital about 15 minutes later.



I went directly to the Casualty Department.      I asked the Matron

where the bodies were and I was told to go to the plaster room.

In the plaster room were 9 bodies on tables and on the floor.

Additionally, there was a body in a side room.     Later, a further
                                                     \

4 bodies were brought making a total of 14, bodies dealt with by

the Hospital.
                                   i




I went outside the plaster room and asked the police Liason Officer

if there was anyone available-to help me document and strip the

bodies.     I am not authorised to carry out this procedure without

the prescence of a police officer because of the presence of

personal belongings.
 I was told that 6 officers had been assigned to carry out this

 procedure and they were pointed out to me.      One of the police

 officers, a young female officer, was placed on the door to stop

 unauthorised entry to the plaster room.      The other officers and

myself went into the plaster room.      A female officer made a

personal property register and personal details were also taken of

the bodies to include approximate age, height and distinguishing

marks.    The personal property was kept with the patients and put

into a brown envelope and marked with the Major Disaster Plan

Number.   The other officers and myself continued to log in the

patients and carry out the stripping procedures.



I went over and opened up the Mortuary and contacted                    ,

an unqualified mortuary technician.      I made an attempt to contact

another technician but without success.



Without me notifying him,                   , the Chief M.L.S.O.   in

Histopathology arrived at the Hospital.      j. assessed the space in

the Mortuary and asked          to assist in the Mortuary area,
Also,              turned up at the Hospital.      He is also

employed as a M.L.S.O.      I asked if he could book the bodies in to

the Mortuary that had arrived on the Friday night and Saturday

morning so that they did not become confused with the bodies

arriving from Hillsborough.
 I went back to the plaster room and continued to strip and

 identify the bodies.     At this stage only 1 body had been roughly

identified.     None of them had any real identification.     Later

on, a further body, that of one of the Hicks girls, was

identified.



As the bodies were stripped,    each was catalogued and identified

and I then asked the porters to move them from the plaster room to

the Mortuary.      Before each body went out the leg was marked in

indelible ink with the Major Disaster Plan Number.



At the Mortuary,                            or any of the other

technicians who had arrived then placed the bodies into the

refrigerators and a label was placed on the refrigerator door with

the Major Disaster Plan Number.      The clothes accompanied the

bodies but the personal possessions and belongings remained with

the police officers.      This process continued until all the bodies

had been removed to the Mortuary.



Myself,                 the police Liason Officer and 2 other police

officers went to the dining room which was being used by the

relatives of the injured.      A list of the injured was read out and

a description of the bodies being held by the Hospital together

with distinguishing marks of each body was also read out.
 Following the announcement, a large number of people came towards

 myself and the police officer who was holding the descriptions

 asking for further information.     We then went back to the

Mortuary.      I was accompanied by a police officer at all times.

 I was informed that some relatives had gone to the Mortuary

wanting to look at the bodies to try and identify their     own      !

people.     This, however, is not my way of dealing with

identification and I insisted that before anyone personally saw a

body the staff should be satisfied that there was no reasonable

doubt that the body they described was the one that they were

going to be shown.     On our arrival back at the Mortuary, one of

the Hicks girls had been positively identified.



A telephone call was received later in the afternoon by one of the

staff in the Mortuary.     I was not present at the time.

Apparently, they were told that the bodies were to be removed to

the ground.     Shortly afterwards, a further telephone call was

received saying that this was no longer thg intention and that

they bodies were to remain in the Mortuary.



About 1/2 hour later a call came from Casualty to say that about 6

ambulances had arrived to take bodies back to the ground on the

Coroner's orders.     I wanted to know what was happening and went

to Casualty.    When I arrived, the ambulances had already been

sent round to the Mortuary and I asked the Liason Officer what was
 happening.      He said that the bodies were to be moved to the
 ground.



 I then returned to the Mortuary and informed the technicians there

that the bodies were to be removed and that I would go with the

first bodies in the ambulance to be responsible for their

continued identification.      There were a large number of people in

the Mortuary at this time with approximately 12 ambulance drivers,

a number of police officers, the Mortuary technician staff and

other social workers who had arrived from the main part of the
Hospital.



Systematically, the bodies were taken out of the refrigerators and

each ambulance was to take between 3 and 4 bodies.        I went with

the first ambulance down to the ground.      On arrival, a senior

police officer asked where the police constables were.         I said

that I did not know which officers he was talking about and I was
                                                     \

told that about 12 or 13 officers had been,sent to the Hospital,

each to accompany one body down to the ground.      I said that I was

not aware of those officers and attempts were then made to contact

them by radio.      Eventually, they were contacted and    4   returned

to the ground to be responsible for the 4 bodies that had been

taken in the first ambulance along with myself.      It would have

been approximately 30 minutes later that they arrived.         The

remainder of the officers went to the Hospital and presumably
 contact was made through the police and ambulance Liason Services

with the Hospital to halt the transport of any further bodies

until the officers arrived.   I say this as it would have been

approximately 1 hour later that the next ambulance arrived with

any of the bodies and they were accompanied by the police

°fficers.    As each body arrived I would notify the officer of its

number and identity and then the police officer specifically

assigned became responsible for that body.



When all of the bodies had been identified my girlfriend picked me

up from the ground and took me back to the Hospital.    This was

approximately 8.30 p.m.



I went to the Mortuary and was told by the staff there that

everything was in order and under control and that there was

little else that could be done.   I therefore left the Department

and went home once this had been cleared with                 who was

on the administrative team at the Hospital,for the purposes of the

Major Disaster.   I was told that there was just one further body

from G.I.T.U. and that it was to be sent round to the ground by

ambulance.



Signed



Dated
