                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                         R ef :           dcc A

        From :          Deputy Chief Constable                           Stfltion / Dept: Headquarters

       To               Chief Constable                                  Date:            8 May ig g i



                 SUBJECT:           claims by south Yorkshire police officers
                                    FOR DAMAGES AGAINST THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                    ARISING OUT OF HILLSBOROUGH


                 Had a meeting this date with Peter Metcalf     (Hammond Suddards),
                         and              (Municipal Mutual     Insurance) to discuss             the
                 above.


                 History

                 Currently 77 police officers from inspector down, mainly constables,
                 through the Federation solicitors Russell Jones & Walker have intimated
                 their intention to sue the Chief Constable for damages for pain and
                 suffering (psychological) endured by them at Hillsborough on 15 April
                 1989.  All have undergone medical (psychiatric) examination and have
                 evidence to substantiate their claims.      An additional 19 would-be
                 claimants have withdrawn their claims.

                 These claims arise from advice given to those concerned and others
                 by Constable Paul Middup (Joint Branch Board Secretary) shortly after
                 the Hillsborough disaster.    The then Chief Constable, Peter Wright,
                 was greatly concerned of the possible effect of these actions in that
                 (a) police officers have a duty to attend and deal with incidents
                 such as that which occurred at Hillsborough, (b) claims of this kind
                 appear at this time to be somewhat novel, and (c) if they succeed
                 the whole ethos of policing may shift towards a position where the
                 damages now sought are almost routine.    He expressed these fears to
                 ACPO and to the Federation Executive at national level.


                 Legal Position

                 Whilst we have never formally admitted liability for what occurred
                 at Hillsborough, we have not disputed the claims made by others that
                 by opening the emergency gates and failing to protect the tunnel under
                 the West Stand thereby allowing spectator access to pens three and
                 four when they were already full, we allowed a dangerous situation
                 to develop.

                 By implication and general assumption,      even   by    the     High   Court,   we
%                are’assumed to have conceded this point.

                 I was advised by seven separate lawyers at ameeting some18 months
                 ago that in terms of civil negligence we are liable asstated above
                 and our position is absolutely indefensible.

                 We heed to categorise our police claimants into:-

                   a.    non-rescuers - that is officers not involved in the activities
                                        at the pens, handling bodies or at the mortuary;
                                        and,

                   b.    rescuers     - officers so involved.
    GEN/2
                              -   2   -



Our lawyers feel that we have a powerful case for resisting claims
by non-rescuers on the grounds of remoteness and this is strengthened
by the recent Appeal decisions in the High Court apropos Hillsborough
on Friday 3 May 1991.

Regarding rescuers, we are in part caught by the Ogwo case, a House
of Lords decision where a fireman, injured whilst attending a house
fire, claimed damages.    The circumstances were that the house-owner
was held liable for causing the fire through his negligence.       The
defence against the claim was that as a professional fire-fighter
the fireman must expect, as part of his job, risk of injury and that
had other householders or innocent third parties been injured whilst
they could claim the fireman could not.     Their Lordships held there
was no difference and the fireman was entitled to damages.

Another significant decision is that of Hughes -v- North Yorkshire
Police.  This arose when a Lancashire police officer, working in North
Yorkshire on mutual aid during the miners' dispute, was injured when
police officers confronted miners on a picket line. He claimed against
the NUM and also North Yorkshire Police Authority on the grounds that
his deployment and the actions of senior officers placed him at
unnecessary risk.   It was held senior officers do not have such a
duty of care and emphasised that police officers exercise an original
jurisdiction and allied responsibilities.      This will probably be
subject to Appeal.


Foreseeability

This in terms of police rescuers could be the main plank of our
defence.   Our lawyers advise that it was not reasonable that the Chief
Constable could foresee the possibility of nervous shock from the
police arrangements at Hillsborough.    Furthermore, in the recent High
Court (Hillsborough)    3 May decision, the Judge when speaking of
relatives said that "...people in certain situations can reasonably
be expected to have sufficient fortitude and phlegm not to be adversely
affected in terms of nervous shock by incidents of this kind..." and
this may well be held to apply more so to police officers because
of their training, experience and reasonable expectation of their
job demands.

__________________M M I ) advised the fact that Russell Jones & Walker
have not issued writs is a clear indication that they lack confidence
in their own case and currently are hoping for an out-of-court
settlement instead of testing the issue.

The advice from both our lawyers and insurers, the latter being
particularly concerned about the wider and longer term implications
should these cases succeed, as we need to be similarly concerned for
the Service as a whole, is that we resist on the possible grounds
of lack of foreseeability, no duty of care, public policy and the
fortitude and phlegm argument.

For information of previous actions       regarding   this   matter,   please
see copy correspondence attached.




Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                                                                r
Alan I. Bottomley                            lan R, Shuttleworth                            M ark W . Hilton             Andrew H. McDougall             Offices also at:
D. Trevor Lewis                              Peter C. Metcalf                               Richard Bums                 Peter F. Kunzlik
Michael E. Gregson                           Christopher W . Jones                          David W . K. Armitage        David Goodman                   2 P ark Lane, L eeds LS3 tE S
John D. De Main                              Andrew R. Jordan                               J. Patrick Mitchell          David J. Williams               T e le p h o n e (0^32) 343500
Michael L Shepherd                           Simon R, B. Stell                              Christopher Marks            Helen F. Kavanagh               T elex >57202. Fax (0532) 343600.
Peter N . W ilbraham                         Simon R. Inman                                 Michael S. Henley
J. Richard Archer                            Richard W . W ade-Smith                        Rosamond J. Marshall Smith   Consultants:                    A v e n u e d es A rts 41,
Barbara W . France                           John G. Beckett                                Philip W . Harling           Roger W . Suddards c b e   dl   1040 B russels
C. N oel H utton                             G. N . lan Greenfield                          William N . Downs            Sir Desmond Heap                T e le p h o n e ( o to ) 32 2 y tt 1620
John H. G. Heller                            Stephen Gale                                   Lucd Dammone                 lan W . W hitson                Fax (010) 32 2 J tt 5 6 2 6 .




O u r Ref:                PCM/PAB                                            Your Ref:                                            Date.       9 th May,               1991




 Dear Peter,

 Hillsborough
 I enclose herewith a copy of my note of our meeting yesterday,
 which I hope is helpful.

 Thank you for your hospitality.  I am pleased to say that I ma
 to leave the car park without incident this timef


 Yours sincerely,




 Peter C. Metcalf




 PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL
P. Hayes E s q . ,
Deputy Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD S3 8 L Y .


This firm is regulated by the   La w   Society in the c onduc t o f investm ent business.
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     8th May, 1991


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE CLAIMS - PTSD




Attending meeting at Snig Hill.       Present were:


           Peter Hayes    - South Yorkshire Police
                          - MMI
                          - MMI
           PCM


The purpose of the meeting was to discuss tactics in
relation to claims for nervous shock presented by
Officers of the South Yorkshire Police who had been
on duty during the disaster.

              said that to date 96 claims had been
recei v e d, of which 19 had subsequently been withdrawn.
Although a number of claims had been put forward within
the first few months after the disaster, they were
still coming in and 4 or 5 had been received over the
last few weeks.     In no case, however, had a Writ been
served, notwithstanding two distinct threats from
Russell Jones and Walker to issue if liability was not
admitted.     This suggested very clearly that Russell
Jones and Walker were not confident of their case,
because it was not like them to make idle threats.

PCM then gave a resume of the legal position as
follows:


1.      Whilst we have made no admissions, we have
        accepted responsibility to pay claimants injured
        as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster
        and have accepted that this extends to nervous
        shock in proper cases.  It is not, therefore,
        open to us to re-argue the question of liability,
        nor to put forward any defences specific to the
        position of the Chief Constable since, in that
        event, it would be open to the claimants to sue
        other parties, whom we would then have to
        indemnify.
                               t^ ^ :^ ;* ifA :'ii^ i* > * i« V /u ^ > ? 3 ^ ^ '* V > * V » v :,'.V ^ >£ 1v * ' V -i kv » r   *.'•>•;tj«‘.'«u'&i>:: - , ' . ' • . ? : « ,'v-.«.V'




                         - 2        -




2.   Prima facie the Police would appear to be in the
     position of rescuers, although we would have to
     ensure in each case that that was so.   A Police
     Officer who was present and witnessed the events
     but took no direct part in the rescue or
     immediate aftermath should be in no better
     posi tion than a bystander or indeed a relative
     other than a parent, child or spouse.


3.   By analogy with the Ogwo case, it would probably
     not avail us to run a defence that a risk of
     suffering nervous shock in these circumstances
     was a normal incident of a Police Officer's work.
     It was noted, however, that there was no case
     directly in point relating to Police Officers as
     opposed to Fire Officers.

     (N.B.   It may be helpful to study the transcript
             of the decision in the Reading United
             case as something similar may there have
             been pleaded by the Club, in which case
             it must have been rejected by the Trial
             Judge)


4.   This left the question of reasonable
     foreseeability.   PCM indicated that he thought
     it reasonable to argue that even though nervous
     shock might be anticipated in the case of a close
     relative present at the scene or in the case of
     a passe r-by who became involved as a rescuer, it
     should not be reasonably foreseeable in respect
     of Police Officers, whose training and experience
     might be expected regularly to bring them into
     contact with death, injury and mutilation.



PCM thought that the final point, although clearly
arguable, was a good one and might well be sufficient
to mount a successful defence.

   [then asked PH for the Police view in relation to
these claims.   He said that there was certainly,
particularly in the early stages, considerable anger
and bitterness that these claims should be brought at
all and it was noted that some 19 of the claims
originally put forward had been withdrawn.   It
certainly appeared that, whilst there were clearly
some genuine serious psychiatric problems as a result
of the disaster, a considerable number of Officers
were simply jumping on a bandwagon.




                                                                                                              /...                 contd.
                        - 3 -




PH mentioned that when the claims first arose the then
Chief Constable, Peter Wright, had written to ACPO
formally advising them of the claims and expressing -
his misgivings at the principle which might be
established if they were to succeed.   PH's own view
was in accordance with this, i.e. that the claims
ought to be resisted, but he said that he would discuss
the matter with the present Chief Constable and revert
to insurers with his considered views.

It was agreed that, subject to views which might be
expressed, these claims would be defended.  As there
were no proceedings currently in being, the next step
lay with Russell Jones and Walker and no action was
required from us.

Finally, there was a brief discussion of the position
in relation to limitation.   PCM expressed the view that
these Officers might obtain a short extension of the
normal three year period on the basis that it may have
taken them some weeks or months to realise that they
were ill and that this illness was as a result of their
Hillsborough experience.   However, in no case could the
extension be longer than the period between the
disaster and the first day on which Solicitors were
consulted.  The feeling was that if Russell Jones and
Walker were going to take these matters further, they
would not risk limitation problems and would issue and
serve within the period of three years from 15th April,
1989.




                    Peter Metcalf
                                                       DCC/
                                                       2 February 1990

NOTE FOR FILE;

CLAIMS FOR NEGLIGENCE AND BREACH OF
STATUTORY DUTY BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE OFFICERS

On 1 February 1990, 26 letters were received from Russell, Jones & Walker,
Federation solicitors, lodging claims as above on behalf of South Yorkshire
Police officers in respect of personal injury suffered on 15 April 1989 at
Hillsborough.  There is thought to be approximately a further 100 similar
claims in the pipeline.

History of the Claims

According to PC Middup (SYP Federation Secretary), after the Hillsborough
tragedy he was advised that West Yorkshire officers following the Bradford
Football Fire Disaster claimed and received damages for personal injuries
suffered.

He drew this to the attention of those federated members he believed had
suffered personal injury with the assistance of the Chief Constable through
the mechanism of the Principal Welfare Officer,                     contacting
them individually about their rights in this regard (see letters attached
dated 9 October and 12 October 1989).

Consultation was then made with the federation solicitors with a view at that
stage to recovering damages, possibly from parties such as the football club
and the Health & Safety Executive. This was the intended South Yorkshire
Police Federation stance. The lawyers quickly advised that the claims would
need to be made against the Chief Constable.  This was seen as reinforced by
Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and the lawyers seemingly take the
obvious view that claims for damages will best succeed against those parties
seen to be mainly culpable for what has occurred - in this instance the South
Yorkshire Police.

Mr Peter Metcalf shares my view that claims of this kind are on one level
unfortunate, distasteful, may adversely affect the morale and image of the
Force and furthermore operate negatively in terms of those officers when
giving evidence to be as objective as they might otherwise be.

It may be that when the claims are considered that an out-of-court settlement
is appropriate and if not (the claims are all believed to be for psychological
damage) then test cases will need to be arranged to provide the basis of
liability and if appropriate settlement.

It appears essential that any such test cases would best be conducted after
the conclusion of the Inquests, any criminal proceedings and the Apportionment
Hearing. To date we have received letters not writs and the timing
arrangements as above can possibly be negotiated by our respective lawyers.

I told PC Middup that the Chief Constable is concerned about the possible
deleterious effect of these legal actions on the Force per se and may well
express this concern at national Federation executive level.




Deputy Chief Constable

copy to - Chief Constable
                                                           Federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                         Police Headquarters
                                                           Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                     Sheffield S3 8LY
JOINT   B RANCH    BOARD                                   Telephone (0742) 768522
                                                           Fax. No. 0742 729126



                                                           YOUR REFERENCE




                                                           OUR REFERENCE




 Dear Member,                                           9 October 1989.
 Hillsborough Disaster
 The Police Federation lawyers have now advised that the time has
 arrived when claims on behalf of our members who were involved at
 Hillsborough should be commenced.
 Initially claims would be lodged against the football club/or the
 Health and Safety Executive.
 It may be that you have grounds for a claim and the Welfare Officer has
 agreed (because I do not know the names of officers who have received
 help from her department or               ) to forward this letter and
 the Civil Claim application forms to you.
 Would vou please complete the form in duplicate and return
 nnrfer confidential cover to me, as soon as possible, at the
 Police Federation Office at Headquarters - NOT to the Welfare
 Officer. If you have any queries please contact the Federation Office
 at Headquarters on extensions
 You may, perhaps, know of another officer or officers who, although
 involved at Hillsborough, did not seek any help and consequently will
 not get a similar letter to this. I would be very grateful if you do
 know of anyone in that category if you would ask them to contact the
 Federation Office.
 Please, do not be hesitant about making a claim. All the claims made
 on behalf of our people after the Bradford fire were successful and
 incidentally, they all also claimed from the Disaster Fund itself and
 they too were all successful. There is absolutely no reason why we
 should not be equally successful. If you have not as yet made a claim
 on the Disaster Fund, give it careful consideration - you may well be
 losing out.
 Yours sincerely

 Paul Middup, B.E.M., M.B.I.M.,
 Secretary.
                                                          DCC/
                                                          5 February 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:


CLAIMS FOR NEGLIGENCE AND BREACH OF
STATUTORY DUTY BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE OFFICERS


This 'Note' should be read in conjunction with the earlier 'Note' on the same
subject dated 2 February 1990.


Chronology of Events

1.   Some time before 30 June 1989, PC Middup asks the Chief Constable if he
will allow circulation through Force Orders about the possibility of officers
claiming from the Hillsborough Appeal Fund. The Chief Constable disagrees but
arranges for circulation of this information through                (Force
Welfare Officer) to those officers she believes may be properly concerned in
any such claims. Attached see report dated 30 June from the Chief Constable
to Penny Grimshaw together with letter from PC Middup dated 27 June 1989 which
relates unequivocally to claims from the Disaster Fund.


2.   At some point in time a decision is made by the Federation to pursue
compensation through legal action for negligence against SWFC and the Health &
Safety Executive.  This decision is made without consultation with the Chief
Constable and PC Middup this date in discussion said he thought he was right
in that. He circulated further correspondence through
including his letter dated 9 October now encouraging officers to consider
civil action.


3.   At some point in time (undetermined but according to PC Middup before the
Chief Constable announces out-of-court settlement) the Federation lawyers
advise officers that the Chief Constable would be joined in the action.   It
has emerged that officers have been advised by their Federation
representatives that the Chief Constable agrees fully with such action and
sees civil claims of this kind by them to be entirely proper and legitimate.
This apparently was discussed at a Federation meeting on 6 December 1989. The
relevant question is 'On what authority has this view been propounded?'.


4.   With the Chief Constable had a meeting with PC Middup this date and
pointed out our concern, indeed displeasure, at what had occurred and that the
action is potentially/constitutionally dangerous in that it may affect the
objectivity of the evidence given by claimants in other proceedings, ie,
civil, criminal, Coroner's etc. Also one must consider who is suing who, eg,
tunnel and sergeants/constables' responsibility for.

Another danger is that the image of the Force will suffer greatly in this
unprecedented action.

PC Middup attempts analogy with the Bradford Fire but this is essentially
different in terms of culpability.
                                       - 2 -


    5.   PC Middup informs us that                 senior solicitor acting for the
    Federation, is willing to attend Police Headquarters to discuss the
    ramifications of what is occurring with a view to being as helpful as
    possible.




    Deputy Chief Constable




*
                                                            Federation Office
POLICE FEDERA TION                                          Police Headquarters
                                                            Snig Hill
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                      Sheffield S3 8LY
JO INT   BRANCH    BOARD                                    Telephone (0 7 4 2 ) 768522
                                                            Fax. No. 0 7 4 2 523243
27 June 1989.
                                                            YOUR REFERENCE




The Chief Constable,                                        OUR REFERENCE     PM^

Police Headquarters,
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY




Dear Mr. Wright,
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
It has been announced on local radio that the Trustees of the Hillsborough
Disaster Appeal Fund would like anyone who thinks that they may be entitled
to make a claim for either physical or psychological reasons should contact
them.
A number of West Yorkshire officers successfully claimed from the Bradford
Fire Disaster Appeal Fund and I see no reason why our officers should not
claim from the Hillsborough one, if indeed, they feel that they have been
affected. There must be a good chance that out of the 200 plus officers
who had to be counselled after the tragedy some will be eligible to claim.
Unfortunately, if they did not hear the announcement on local radio they
may not know anything about making a claim. I believe that it is important
that it be brought to the notice of everyone who may be eligible.
I ask, please, if you will give instructions for an item to appear on Force
Orders bringing the matter to everyone's notice. The name and address of
the person to contact is :-

                       Trust Fund Manager,
                       Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund,
                       P.O. Box 270,
                       LIVERPOOL L69 2PN

Yours sincerely,




Paul Middup, Secretary.
                                                      DCC/
                                                      11 April 1990


NOTE FOR F I L E i -



Was informed by Superintendent Pratt (Force Press Officer) that 'The Star'
newspaper this date, as part of a three-day publication on the anniversary
of Hillsborough, will highlight the fact that claims are being made against
the Chief Constable by South Yorkshire Police officers for injuries suffered
on 15 April 1989.

They will be referring to 200   claims in fact to date we have received   60.

Without sight of the article,  having taken legal advice from Belinda Norcliffe
of Hammond Suddards, I have instructed Mr Pratt the response from the Chief
Constable will be as set out below:-


    "It is correct a number of  claims against the Chief Constable have
    been intimated on behalf of members of the South Yorkshire Police
    who were involved in the policing of Hillsborough football stadium
    on the 15th April 1989, but no proceedings have in fact been served
    on the Chief Constable".




-----w-----1
Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                  i f l o b W esterdale, C hief R eporter

                                                         M ORE than 150 South Yorkshire
                                                         police officers are threatening to sue
                     “The pubUc will see M$              their own chief constable for damages
                  »s bobhwi •jtespms o                   over the Hillsborough disaster — a move
                  financial bandwagon.”
                                                         which could split the force on the eve of
                                                         the tragedy’s first anniversary.
                     H e legal action is being
                  handled by Police Feder­                   Solicitors are lodging dozens o f identical
                  a tio n 's o lic ito rs Russell.        c la im s for c o m p e n s a tio n a l l e g i n g Peter
                  Jones and Walker. Partner               Wright’s “negligence and breach o f statutory
                  lan Walker said around 200               responsibilites” as an employer.
                  officers were to be involved
                  in the action.                             The officers co m p lain they suffered psychological
                     “ Al l th e s e m e n a n d           injuries m the trauma of the tragedy w h ich claim ed
II,,     ^        women were deeply affected               95 lives . . . although m o st h a v t continued to work
                  by what they saw or went                 at grounds like Hillsborough and B ram all Lane.
k      a u ; io   th rough. They have had                  ■ f a his report cat the disaster Lord Justice Taylor
                  some degree of counseling,               fceip d m uefcW iie blatte on senior, officer*. N#w
                  but these are classic cases of         ' M r Wright’s own bobbies have warned writs could
                  p o s t-tjra u m a tic stress
                                                         ; be issue! unlesf Cjjpspensation is paid out for stress,
                        He s « I r m M m . M
                      directed against the chief         f 'r S im ilar notices h m e g o n e t o l S f ^ ^ e d i t e s d a y
                      constable because force in         ! FC in case they are judged to share in the blame.
                      surer* had                                                                Four © feet* from Lin-
                                                            Hillsborough                     colnihire, Manchester and
                                                                                             Merseyside — just specta­
                                                                                             tor! at the semi-final — arc

                  i
                              O PIN IO N ■
                        “Officers have their own
                                                                                     I       also applying for payment.
                                                                                                The decision to press for
                                                                                             pay-outs could divide the
                                           ttc w e d ,
                      they feel slightly ambivalent                                          South Yorkshire force —
                      about claiming against their                                           already rocked by enormous
                      own force. They have no                                                debts incurred by the Hills­
                                                                                             borough inq uiry — and
                      choice.
                                                                                             affect moral.
                        " I t is not something they
                      chose to do, they hold the                                              stdiiSea tda5yT"When there
                      view.the tragedy was caused
                      by 1,000 drunken Liverpool                                              is a disaster tt is pur, job to
                                                                                              cleat up. T to t is what we are
                      fans. The alternative to su­                                            trained te r ^ o and that is
                      ing the force was to sue                                                what, we are paid for
                      anonymous fans.
                                                          A    /O   CJ
                                                          PC



TELEPHONE:                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 76*522                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                            SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 SLY


P WRIGHT CBE
CHIEF CONSTABLE

J A Dellow Esq CBE
Deputy Commissioner
President, ACPO
Metropolitan Police
New Scotland Yard
Broadway
London SW1H OBG




Following the events at Hillsborough and the inauguration of an appeal
fund, I received an approach from the South Yorkshire Police Joint Branch
Board to bring to the attention of officers the existence of this fund
in the event that they might wish to lodge a claim against it. I agreed
that the Force Welfare Officer should be made aware of it and therefore
be in a position to bring it to the notice of those officers who felt
they had suffered as a result of the disaster.   The Federation Secretary
then through the Welfare Officer circulated a letter to those officers
whose identity was unknown to him.

My understanding is that without further recourse to me the Federation
Secretary using the same channel of communication sent a further letter
to those same officers, encouraging them to take legal action against
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield City Council, and the
Health and Safety Executive.    Later the Federation on the advice of
their own solicitors advised action instead against me as Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire.

On 30 January 1990 I received notice of intended action against me for
negligence and breach of statutory duty.   So far 62 letters giving such
notice have been received and I am advised another 100 may be expected.

I have always expressed the view to the Federation that if they disagreed
with my interpretation of regulations or other areas of possible
conflict, I would not consider it personal if they took action against
me.   Unfortunately this principle has been projected to give an
indication to members of the Force that I was unconcerned about this
particular legal action.
                                                                         4

You will be aware that normally when action is taken against the Chief
Constable by a member of the public it arises as a direct result of
action or inaction by a particular member of the Force.     My concern
in the situation in which I now find myself is that I am unable to
establish which particular member of the Force is being accused of
negligence and breach of statutory duty.
J A Dellow Esq CBE                   - 2 -                        25 April 1990



I view with extreme concern actions taken by one police officer against
another, particularly in circumstances such as Hillsborough.       Whilst
it might be legally correct, the legal advices will have no concern
about Force morale, about mutual reliance between officers, or about
the effect that such action may have on subsequent day-to-day operational
matters.   I think the Federation has some responsibility to consider
these factors when they embark on legal proceedings similar to those
arising out of Hillsborough.

I think   this matter    is worthy   of   discussion   at   the    next   Joint
Consultative Committee meeting.
                                                South Yorkshire Police
                                                POLICE HEA DQ UARTE RS
                                                SNIO H IL L
                                                S H E FF IE L D S 3 8LY
                                                TELEPHO NE (0742) 76 8522
                                                TE L E X 547996




31 July 1991



HILLSBOROUGH WRITS




We can confirm that writs on behalf of South Yorkshire police officers were

issued on Monday afternoon against the Chief Constable, Richard Wells.




The writs are in respect of the shock and stress                    suffered by officers who

dealt with the Hillsborough disaster in April 1989 and this action has been

taken on their behalf by solicitors representing the Police Federation.




South Yorkshire Police intends to defend this action.




The Chief Constable has already gone on record expressing his disappointment

that   some   officers   feel   the   need    to pursue claims.             "There are well-tried

avenues in the South Yorkshire Police for helping officers to overcome grief

and mental anguish and I'll do all I can personally to help them and their

families      to   recover.     An    expression    of    some    understanding       and   shared

responsibilities      from Merseyside        to match our own expression of sorrow and

shared   liability would be enormously helpful.                  But meanwhile,      I think   the

claims   are as much symbolic - a bid for mental                 suffering to be recognised

- as about search for compensation".




Ends
                                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
TELEPHONE:
                                                           POLICE HEADQUARTERS
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522
                                                             SNIG HILL
TELEX: 547996
                                                                 SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
FAX: (0742) 523243


P HAYES QPM LLB MA                                        DCC^
                                                          9 August 1991
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE



       P C Metcalf Esq
       Hammond Suddards
       Solicitors
       Empire House
       10 Piccadilly
       Bradford BD1 3LR




                \     /
        Dear

        HILLSBOROUGH:      POLICE PTSD CLAIMS

        Thank you for your letter of 31 July concerning the above.

        As requested, set out on the attached schedule are details of
        those officers making claims showing their full name and rank,
        whether they are serving officers or otherwise, and individual
        National Insurance numbers.

        I hope       this is sufficient for your needs but if not simply let
        me know.

        With best wishes.

        Yours sincerely
OFFICER'S NAME   RANK   NATIONAL INSURANCE NO.
                        -   2   -




O F F IC E R 'S NAME   RANK         NATIONAL INSURANCE NO.
                                                                                                DCG___
                                                                                        12 November 1991


NOTE FOR FILE:


MEETING WITH PETER METCALF (HAMMOND SUDDARDS)
- CLAIMS BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OFFICERS

Meeting held this date with Peter Metcalf regarding the above.


Foreseeability

We concluded that to argue that some nervous shock would probably occur was unforeseeable by the
Chief Officer is unrealistic against the position adopted by all three staff associations in the last 10
years on this and the efforts through welfare, counselling and medical support facilities being employed
across the country to offset the effects of this. To foresee it occurring to the extent it is claimed to have
occurred at Hillsborough is another question.

In any event the officers are simply claiming they did suffer PTSD and the event which caused this was
in turn caused in part by the negligence of the South Yorkshire Police - notionally the Chief Constable.


Public Policy

We can argue on the grounds of public policy that the Chief Officer and his senior managers concerned
had no option but to direct officers to deal with the disaster and therefore expose themselves to the risk
of PTSD not least because of their common law duty to protect and save life.


Present Stance

Currently we are adopting the stance that we must defend these actions at all costs in whatever way
we can, in the event of the uniqueness of Hillsborough however it may in fact be more sensible to
settle.

We await with interest the House of Lords nervous shock decision after which a meeting with Counsel
will be needed to explore these matters further.




Deputy Chief Constable
                     R U SSE L L JONES & WALKER
                     _________________________________________ ,___________________________ S O L I C I T O R S                                                                _____________


                     Q uebec House 9 Q uebec Street l.ceds LSI 2i IA 'telephone: 0532 450765 Fax: 0532 421357 DX 12046




                 Municipal Mutual Insurance Limited
                 Park House                                                                                                                         Your Ref:        KGH/JW 03 90 30 77001
                 57-59 Well Street                                                                                                                   Our Ref:        SA/KJD/HILLSBOROUGH
                 Bradford BD1 5SN
                                                                                                                                                          Da,c: 22nd November 1991


                 Dear Sirs                                                                                                                                                          2 5 NOV 1991                          :ij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;!•
                 RE; HILLSBOROUGH CLAIMS - POLICE OFFICERS - 15.4 .,89

                 As you are aware, we act for a number of Police Officers who are
                 claiming damages for psychiatric illness caused by the tragic events
                 at Hillsborough in 1989 - As you are also aware, a large number of
                 those who commenced proceedings have now abandoned them.

                 A number of our clients have complained to us that senior officers
                 have brought undue pressure on them to drop their claim. Some have
                 succumbed to this pressure.

              Our attention has been drawn by some of our clients to a news item and
              leading article in the Sheffield Star of 4th June 1991. So far as the
              leading article is concerned - and we appreciate that your client can
              have no responsibility for it - we have been advised that it sailed
              very close to the wind of contempt of Court; it's relevance is that it
            I reflects to a large extent the comments alleged to have been        madeby
            f senior officers in "one to one" interviews with plaintiffs.
             i
                 We wish to make it clear that we are not instructed to make formal
                 complaints about past pressure. It is water under the bridge; indeed
                 those officers who have succumbed to such pressure would naturally,
                 for obvious reasons, be the last to wish formal complaints to be
                 made.

                 However, in an endeavour to prevent any further problems, we do think
                 that it would be wise for you to request„the Chief Constable to advise
                 his senior officers of the dangers involvecTTn any suggestions that
                 they may make - albeit with good intentions - relating to the current
                 litigiation; many laymen and woman (and it would appear, journalists)
                 are unaware of the rules relating to contempt of Court.

                 So far a s c o n c e r n e d , we do not ourselves see any
                 justification for the inflammatory headline, which does not appear to
                 reflect his actual quoted words, nor do we suggest that those words
                 involve a contempt of Court. However, we think it worth making the
                 following points for his - and your - consideration.


                                                                                                                                                                      (Cont...)




     J.M . W ebljcr T .D .B . Taylor I.J. Walker A T W h ite h e a d R. M AM>ey I.R . H c ic b c r ({.’< ! Solly W .D . O 'B rie n R -V P la n e P J. D avis R .C . L a n g u m D .R . I x m w J T . R askin S. R askin
E J .O . C o o p e r S .G . Ingram N.B . H olroyd J.C . ('larkeAV illiam s S .I,. W ehb D A B 'Iw igg I*R. A s h u m J.M . Pirrie S.J.N. Allen I.K W alker R . ( l P iim cy Consultants: J.C . Walker J.M .P. C'olman


                                                         R e g u la te d b v T h e L a w S<R-iet\ in t h e c o n d u c t of I n v e s tm e n t Bu siness
                                                                  Page N o
     V
*'                                                                           2




         Municipal Mutual Insurance Limited
         Bradford BD1 5SN




               (a)   the Plaintiffs are suing the Football Club and the
                     Engineer - who have both admitted negligence - as
                     well as the Chief Constable; if a Police Officer is
                     injured on duty due to the negligence of a member
                     of the public, it is not usually regarded by Chief
                     Constables as reprehensible if they sue;

               (b)   the claims are, of course, only about money: indeed,
                     if they were brought for any other reason, we doubt
                     whether the Plaintiffs could be supported either by
                     Legal Aid or their Federation;

               (c)   the comment relating to conscience was unfortunate
                     and qualiTies tRe__prTSce9ing^stated^ principle. It
                     should not be repeated; it could be interpreted as
                     the opening step on the road that eventually leads
                     to contempt of Court.

         We are sure that you, like ourselves, would prefer to see these claims
         pursued on both sides as normal litigation, and we are writing in order
         to prevent future problems arising rather than making complaint about
         those which are past. We look forward to your, and your client's
         co-operation.




                         WALKER
                              STRICTLY            CONFIDENTIAL


                                                                                               DCC^
                                                                                       25 February 1992


NOTE FOR FILE:


POLICE PTSD CLAIMS - MEETING WITH COUNSEL


Together with Peter Metcalf (Hammond Suddards),                 and             (MMI), attended
a meeting in Nottingham with William Woodward QC and Richard Payne, his junior. The purpose of
the meeting was to consider our response to the 50 police PTSD claims.


Relevant Information

Mr Woodward said the claims fall into three categories:-

     i.   those directly involved in dealing with the tragedy;
    ii.   those who became rescuers; and,
   iii.   those who became rescuers with a small r. in that their involvement was only slight.

He made the further point that in terms of the claimants the organisation of the mortuary arrangements
is not so far criticised.

The point of the claims is the failure to properly direct and organise crowd control and, after the
disaster, the rescue operation which led to unnecessary confusion difficulties and trauma.

Notwithstanding the well established position that police officers exercise an original jurisdiction, there
is in this situation a quasi duty of care (as if a master and servant relationship did exist) and the law
is that those with such a duty are under a duty not to harm their servants or put them into dangerous
predicaments without adequate safeguards.

                  raised an interesting point in that the Metropolitan Police seem somehow to avoid this
problem.

We must remember there are three defendants - ourselves, the Club and Eastwoods - and that as part
of the out-of-court settlement we have agreed to indemnify the other two against the costs of all actions.
There is clearly no master and servant relationship between the Club and Eastwoods and the officers
concerned.

The well used defence in terms of ‘rescuers’ in that they are expected as part of life itself to have such
fortitude and phlegm to withstand shocks and unpleasant experiences, is already over-turned by the
plaintiffs psychiatric evidence. It will be difficult, perhaps even impossible, because of the unprovable
nature of the symptoms claimed to rebut these.

In our recent House of Lords nervous shock decision, Lord Allcock expressed the view that even by­
standers may now be included if the experience is sufficiently horrific.

Lord Oliver expressed the view that nervous shock is now definable as an injury. Lord Ackner
expressed the contrary view, namely, that nervous shock is now a separate head of damage.

All the above are obiter.
                                                    2

The question of remoteness was discussed in terms of its relevance to the category three officers.
Richard Payne felt the law takes a very wide view and that the term ‘rescuer’ is more descriptive than
restrictive and that it would include people traumatised even as far away as the hospitals.

The dictum of volenti was discussed. This is where individuals knowing of the risks volunteer to take
that risk. Stock car drivers would be one example.

I made the point that I considered this a good argument. The police are in the duty of dealing with
disasters, large and small, and certainly dealing with bodies is not a probability but an absolute
certainty. I raised the question ‘Could an undertaker claim because of the nature of his duties?’ and
the answer must be clearly no.

Mr Woodward made the point it is not a breach of duty to expose an employee to risk provided you
prepare him properly, warn him of the risk and make every effort to avoid or minimise it. So, for
example, workers on building sites wear hard hats, are offered the use of more protective clothing, and,
are usually clearly briefed as to the dangerous nature of the tasks they perform.

I pointed out the training given in terms of stress awareness, the frequent reference to this and how
it might be recognised and minimised, in many of our Force Orders, and how in terms of care after the
disaster South Yorkshire had done a great deal.

Public policy was then discussed. I argued this as a strong line of defence on our part. We have a
duty, not least at common law, to save and protect life. This meant that officers had to be directed to
deal with the disaster notwithstanding the unpleasant repercussions for some thereafter. As a Chief
Officer I had no choice in directing what is clearly a fundamental duty and for that to be actionable must
in some way be paradoxical. The Hughes case (North Yorkshire) was seen as persuasive to some
extent to support this argument.


Conclusion

Mr Woodward expressed the view to defend this case would be difficult. The Chief Constable has a
clear duty of care towards his employees, so, if a cupboard falls on them or they trip on a loose stair
rod he will be liable. The duty of care establishes a ground for a negligence action by employees.
Whilst we settled out-of-court without any admission of liability for the purpose of such actions we have
admitted sufficient liability to ground these actions.

I made it clear that we wished to defend the actions because of the repercussions nationally which may
well flow if we were to settle out-of-court and the effect on the Service in future years.

                  said he too wanted to defend the action because he sees this as an enormous
potential flood gate.

It was agreed that Messrs Woodward and Payne would prepare a defence which Mr Payne would set
out in the form of Counsel’s opinion with a copy to be supplied to ourselves through Hammond
Suddards. This will take some months and in the interval the plaintiffs will be told of our intended
defence and willingness to go to the House of Lords if necessary.




Deputy Chief Constable


copy to : Chief Constabl
                              ATTENDANCE NOTE



Client Name:        MMI

Matter:             Hillsborough     - Police PTSD
Fee Earner:         PCM
Date:               20 November1992


Note:




Attending meeting at Snig Hill.        Present were:


              Peter Hayes
                           (MMI)
              stepnen waixer (Police Authority)

              Peter Metcalf


             said that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss
how we might deal with these claims in the light of Bill
Woodward's opinion.   His view was that at least some of the
claims would have to be settled but, so far as possible, he
wanted to carry the insured with them in this decision.

He then invited me to go through the facts in the light of Bill
Woodward's opinion.    I said that in relation to Officers who
were engaged in rescue work in the pens within the period up to
3.20 we did not see any way in which these claims could be
successfully defended.    Chadwick was good authority for the
proposition that rescuers could recover and Ogwo was good
authority for the proposition that the same rules applied to
professional rescuers as to amateurs.   Whilst it was true that
the House of Lords had confirmed claims for PTSD to be in a
different category to claims for physical injury, it was
difficult to see how that principle could be used to justify a
distinction between amateur and professional rescuers in
relation to PTSD which did not apply in relation to physical
injury.

If it was once accepted that some of the claims would have to be
settled then obviously there were good grounds for extending the
range so as to avoid pointless and costly litigation. Where the
cases were less likely to succeed offers could be made on a
percentage basis.   My view was that we had to keep in mind the
necessity emphasised by the Law Lords on proximity to the
"horrific scene" in time and place.        So far as time was
concerned, it might well be that we would extend some way beyond
the period when all the fatalities had in fact occurred because
the horrific scene remained.     However, my feeling was that
whilst liability could well extend to those who were engaged in
rescue work at or near the pens, I had doubts about the position
of Officers in the mortuary or even of Officers giving first aid
at remote locations.     Indeed, there would be arguments for
saying that the person giving first aid was not strictly a
rescuer, but rather someone attempting to apply treatment.   The
rescue from the scene had by then taken place.      Steve Walker
felt that we might be in difficulty in trying to reject claims
from those who had given first aid at remote locations,
effectively because the injured person was part of the horrific
scene, so that the necessary proximity was established.

I said that I thought we ought to seek to categorise the
claimants into groups, offering effectively full recovery only
to those who were in the pens at an early stage, but seeking
reductions for litigation risk in respect of the other groups
and refusing settlement altogether in relation to those who were
entirely remote from the scene of the tragedy.   The creation of
the categories would necessitate careful consideration of all
information provided by each Plaintiff in terms of statements,
inquiry evidence,   inquest evidence,    counselling notes and
medical reports. Inconsistencies would have to be noted.

Peter Hayes said that whilst there was considerable reluctance
to set any sort of precedent, he could understand why these
particular cases were unique. We were not being sued because we
had sent the Officers in to deal with a situation which was not
of our making, but rather because we had admitted, jointly with
the Club and the Engineers, a measure of responsibility for
creating the situation in the first place.             In those
circumstances, the Police would not object to settlement,
although they would wish to be kept closely advised of progress
in negotiations and, specifically, would wish to know as and
when the first settlements might be likely to be effected.

I said that I thought that, so far as precedent was concerned,
we might create a worse situation by allowing these cases to go
on and losing them than by effecting settlements in what we
would suggest were unique circumstances.    My argument was that
if we ran these cases to trial and lost at least some of them,
as I thought we would, the publicity might generate expectations
amongst other Officers which would lead them to start pressing
this sort of claim even in circumstances where the Police had
not contributed in any way to the creation of the original
"horrific scene".   Of course, in many such cases, claims would
be directed not against the Chief Constable, but against the
tortfeasor responsible     for the creation of that scene.
Nevertheless, that would not always be the case and my view was
that any decision which appeared to encourage the idea that
Officers can successfully sue their own Chief Constable would be
unwelcome.
                             -   3 -



It was agreed, in principle, that we should proceed accordingly,
but it was also agreed that as we were not under any great
pressure at the moment, we would not take steps to implement
settlements. The point was that the passage of time brought the
limitation factor into play and made it less likely that we
would be met with a flood of new claims as and when settlement
discussions opened.




                         Peter Metcalf
                                                                                                     f iL iL

                                                                                                1)UJ?L\CA
                                                                                                     C j^-k

                                                                                             DCCj
                                                                                     20 November 1992


NOTE FOR FILE:-

HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE CLAIMS

Meeting this date with            MMI;                         MMI; Stephen Walker, Secretariat; Peter
Metcalf, Hammond Suddard and myself.

Introduction:

The purpose was to discuss how to proceed with the police claims. It was agreed that the Opinion -
copy attached - prepared by Mr W C Woodward QC was very helpful.

Agreement:

Mr                  MMI, made the point that as the representative of the insurers involved, in the event
of significant disagreement, he thought it right that his view would prevail, but wanted if possible
agreement from all parties as to the appropriate way forward.

There are 50 officers who have lodged claims. Up to 20 of these on the evidence now available are
obviously within the "rescuer" category and in view of the precedents, especially the Chadwick and
Ogwood cases, we have no defence and an out-of-court settlement is obviously appropriate. There
are about 10 officers who appear to have acted so far from the scene in both distance and time that
they were not rescuers and should not be compensated.

The remaining 20 officers fall within these two extremes and it may be appropriate to offer all of them
compensation, but the offer will be reduced as they are found to be further away from the clear
"rescuer" category.

After a long discussion, the above was agreed on the grounds that an out-of-court settlement would
produce no new principle at law, would be made on the grounds that the defendant (South Yorkshire
Police) caused the event resulting in the injuries, those compensated were definable as rescuers, a
clear duty of care exists between the plaintiffs and the defendant and that the injuries sustained were
foreseeable.

If we resist the claims in the case of the middle 20, the probability is that we will lose, attract
considerable adverse publicity, lose credibility with our workforce, pay costs on top of damages, and
because of the way this will be reported, give the mistaken impression that when Chief Constables
expose officers to extremely difficult, dangerous or unpleasant events and psychiatric injury results,
claims are almost certain to succeed. The important distinction in this case being that the South
Yorkshire Police were found liable for the disaster occurring.

Claims could total £1 million. This is covered by the Public Liability Policy and not by the Hillsborough
insurance cover which is almost expended and so there are no financial provision problems.

Details of the officers’ health and work situation since 15 April 1989 will need to be discovered.




Deputy Chief Constable

Circulation:

Chief Constable

                V
                '
