inc ident      '105   080589 0P5012                          TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT
                                                                             OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER            R343

                                                                                                              Stat i on

Surname                   NCE                        A/
Forenames              MALCOLM

Age

Address


Oc cupation            POL P S 1829
                             .jfflffiwiwwry i wmiK                            r:<
Te 1 e phoni

Number of Pages

Dated                  080589


                                                           n the South Yorkshire Police,           at present

            stationed at Rotherham.

            At 08,30 hours on Saturday 15 April                         1989 I came on duty at Main

            Street Police Station,                        Rotherham for transport to Hillsborough

            Football Ground by Force                        coach.   I was    in charge of Serial         36 which

            comprised of the following officers;
                   /V                   / ,/ ^ 5 ^  M4c"S"/ -   /V           'V '‘x S •?
 /t         PC 2403 M o r t on, PC 13 Rose, PC 72 Lipski , PC 3183 Trc-ek, PC 3044
 A
 Jt <<£<"                             w"                                /v    ^"srs~                /v.   &
           Donnell, PC 1429 Bashforth, PC 2 9 ID Cammock' and PC 1266 A dshe ad.
  A            —  ------"     ———                        ^   / ^-0
  ^ a < U We were part of Sector 14 commanded by Inspector Ellis of Rotherham
  '^     i
           Division.   We attended briefing at Hillsborough Stadium as directed,

            and then deployed to Wads 1ey Station,                           Penistone R o a d .   We were to

            work with mounted officers                        in the supervision of Liver pool

            supporters,     leaving the trains at Wads ley Station.                            We were    to

            marshall them,         carry out searches where necessary,                       and then     escort

            them to the ground.

            The first thing that surprised me was the fact that there was only

            one special    train,                    carrying reportedly 550 supporters.             I expected

            more trains than this.

            On reflection I think that the supporters are aware that these trains
                                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                                R343

are met by the Police;, and they are then marshalled straight to the

ground,   so to avoid this they come by other means.

The special    train was not expected until shortly after             1400 hours but

we deployed early at about        10.23 hours and took up duties         in

Penistone Road,     outside the Station.

Between our location and Hi ll sborough Stadium was the main coach park

for Liverpool    supporters at Claywheels Lane and all the local                public

houses    in this area were closed and boarded up.

It was a nice sunny day and there became a constant stream of

Liverpool supporters going up the hill away from the ground in search

of somewhere to obtain a drink.

It became a waste of time telling them that they would have a fair

distance to go as such advice was disregarded.               I remember one

particular    request for directions to Grenoside Working Mens Club,

which is all of two miles away,          they still    set off walking.

Just   prior to the special      trains arrival at about        13.50 hours I heard

a report of a disturbance        in a Trading E s t a t e off Halifax R o a d just

above our location.        1 attended with other officers and saw that a

grassed area in the vicinity of Gateways Supermarket was crowded with

L iverpool supporters dr i nki n£_fj^ojij_car>s__gi2^— bot_t_les_.   There was no

disorderly behaviour and we were told to resume.               I only got to the

entrance of the Trading Estate area but that must have jj^n^avned in

excess of 1,000 foot b a ll supporters all sitting drinki n g .           The

special   train arrived just after        1400 hours and we were told that in

fact   it contained only 440 Liverpool         supporters.     As they left the

train we marshal led them as per instructions,            the first thing that

struck me was that there were none of the usual              (idiots) among them.

They were all decent orderly people,           who seemed surprised at the

amount of Police attention they were           receiving.     As soon as we got

them in a group we began to escort them to the Sta,diurn en route they
                                                                        PAGE    3
                                                                        R343

were well behaved, and laughed and joked with us.         We arrived at the

Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough shortly afterwards and these

supporters joined the queues to enter the ground.

Because there were no more special       trains   I remained with my serial

at the Leppings Lane just generally supervising supporters.           Because

it became progressively busier as it approached kick aff time, we did

not go to Claywheels Lane for a meal.

The area outside the turnstiles     in Lep^dry^J-ane^was     crowded with

supporters most of whom were drinking from cans and enjoying the

sunny weather.      There seemed to be a general    reluctance to enter the

ground, and at about     14.30 hours mounted officers made an attempt to

clear these supporters     in towards the turnstiles but most just

filtered back.      There was a disturbance at one stage towards the

Middlewood Road side of Leppings Lane but it was brought quickly

under   control   by mounted officers.

I remained in Leppings Lane towards the junction with Vere Road, and

as kick off time approached the flow of fans coming towards me became

heavier.    1 became fully occupied in directing fans as to which

turnstiles they should use.      They were running up to me and showing

me their tickets,     asking where they should go.     I was also aware of

supporters approaching these fans shouting        "Have you got any

spares".    The first   indication I had that things were not right, was

when a woman came back to me and told me that there was another woman

with a leg injury near the outer gates at the entrance to the

Leppings Lane entrance.      I went to the metal gates at the North side

of Leppings Lane and saw a mounted officer just outside the gates,

his horse was hemmed in by supporters and there was a solid mass of

people in front of him,     I told him about the    injured woman but he

already knew and said it was impossible       for him to assist because of

the crush of people. She was apparently       reasonably safe at this time
                                                                          PAGE     4
                                                                          R343

in the Lee side of the metal gate.         I then began trying to prevent

people from entering this area but it was useless.         A Police Land

Rover arrived and loud speakers used to try and get the fans to move

back from the turnstiles.      I saw Inspector Ellis with a hand held

loud hailer get on the roof of a Land Rover requesting the fans to

get back.    By this timer it was obvious that the game had kicked off,

and there was then no reasoning with the        crowd as they pressed

forward toward the turnstiles.      Supporters were going under the

bellies of Police horses to get through.         I was in possession of a

personal    radio which I had in the top pocket of my tunic underneath

my Police anorak.     Due to crowd noise     it was very difficult to pick

up messages.     Only officers working     inside the ground had been issued

with ear pieces.     Some of my officers who are Community Constables

with their own radios had extension mikes        clipped on the   lapels of

their jackets and appeared to have       picked up more radio traffic than

1' did.    The only messages   I can clearly remember hearing was a

request for all traffic to be stopped from entering Leppings Lane

because of     the amount of people using    it just before kick off.      I

then heard     a voice on the air saying   "There's   going to be a

catastrophe".

I have no knowledge    of the gates being o pe ne d just a sudden

realisation th at the crush had eased.

The Liverpool    supporters had obviously been drinking,      their mood was

boisterous but    reasonably good humoured.

As every Police officer knows     it is difficult to reason with someone

who has been drinking.      It was obvious that the game had started and

when there was one     particular loud roar from inside the ground there

was a big surge forward towards the turnstiles.

I have never seen mounted officers so helpless        iti controlling a    crowd

situation,     and on foot we were just useless.
                                                                                  PAGE       5
                                                                                  R343

The next message       I received on the       radio was for all available

officers to go into the stadium as Liverpool               supporters were on the

pitch.

I entered the ground with other officers fay Gate A, as we did this we

had to prevent Liverpool         supporters from trying to enter with us.                I

Xhetx ran to the back of the North stand and went up the first

entrance to get onto the pitch.             PC 1429 Bashforth was with me at

this time.     When I got to the        playing area the game was no longer           in

progress.     There were a lot of Liverpool            supporters on the pitch, and

a Police cordon was forming across the pitch towards the half way line.

I went towards the front of the West Stand and if I had felt useless

outside the ground,        it was nothing      compared to what      I was to

experience.        I approached the central North standing area of Leppings

Lane end at    its junction with the North standing area.                There was a

huge   crush of supporters        in the central North terrace area and fans

were   pushed right up against the perimeter fence.

At this stage there was absolutely nothing we could do to help them.

Because we were       in u n i f o r m Liverpool   supporters were    coming up to us

screaming and swearing at us to do something.

There was nothing they could do,            but they expected us to do

something.     I    have never felt as helpless         in my life.     Some of the

supporters    in    that area were managing to get over the            dividing

railing   into the North terraced area,            and we evacuated them onto the

pitch through       the perimeter gate of this area.

The perimeter       gates at the Leppings Lane end are narrow only allowing

one person through at a time and there was only one perimeter gate

for the central North terracing which was further over towards the

centre of the stand.          There were already Police officers there so I

remained where       I was.

Eventually fans managed to get up to climb over the perimeter fence,
                                                                                      PAGE
                                                                                      R343

     and I climbed up the fence on the pitch side and began to help them

     over the top.

     I was greatly hampered in this by the fact that the strands of metal

     mesh fencing,had been continued past the top bar to form a row of

     spikes which was catching on their c 1othi n g .            I began bending the

     spikes down'to prevent them from doing this.                Eventually the crush ifi

     this     compound eased further and I could see the body of a man lying

     on the floor at the base of the perimeter fence near to the dividing

     fence to the North terrace.

     He was apparently ded.

      e then turned our attention to the perimeter fence which consisted

     of a strong metal mesh welded to metal               supporters.   It had been

      elded on the inside of the metal supports so it could not be pul1ed

     outwards towards the pitch.
fo
     It had to be peeled inwards towards the stand and this we managed to

     do with some difficulty.

     Persons were then able to escape through this and bodies began to be

     l if t e d t h r o u g h .

     I remained on the               playing field and began to give the kiss of life to

     casualties.            I had no success at all which was absolutely soul

     destroying.

     1 was with a woman aged about 26 years who had not responded to

     resuscitation she had an abrasion over I believe her left eye.                    When

     some Liverpool               supporters arrived with some broken down hoarding to

     transport her to the               casualty station there weren't enough to carry

     her so I helped to lift her onto the boards.                She was dressed in

     jeans, and jumper as we moved her her               clothing became displaced



     I covered her with my anorak and helped to carry her to the

     gymnasium.           As we approached the door to the gymnasium we had to stop
                                                                                   PAGE     7
                                                                                   R343
         as someone had become violent and was having to be restrained by

         Police officers.       This occurred while   casula'ties were    lying all around.

         We were unable to get the hoarding through the doorway .and I had to

         lift the woman off and carry her bodily through the gym.             The woman ,

         was apparently dead and I remember seeing Detective Sergeant John

         Smith who was part of the team receiving        casualties.

         I returned to help carry a body that of a young man aged about            17 to

         18 years, who      I first tried to resuscitate.     He was slimly built,

                                        dressed, in jeans and *T’ shirt

         I have no clear recollections after this everything seems to have been

         done in a daze.       I ended up outside the gymnasium understandably no

         one seemed to have much time for the minor         casualties,   so I assisted

         them where I could and put them on the mini        bus type of ambulance to

         be transported to hospital.

         I then assisted with persons who had lost relatives and helped them

         where   I could.

         I have worked several matches at the Hillsborough ground including

         the last three semi finals.      My usual    duties have been on the

         Catchbar Lane/parkside area of the ground but I worked the Leppings

         Lane turnstiles for the Leeds v. Coventry semi final and we

         experienced no difficulties on this occasion.

         I have never seen so many supporters        in Leppings Lane still arriving

         so close to and after kick off time.



END OF REPORT
STATEMENT OF MALCOLM FRANCE OVER 21, POLICE SERGEANT 1829

MAIN STREET POLICE STATION, ROTHERHAM.



I am   a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police,

at present stationed at Rotherham.

At 08.30 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989, I came on

duty at Main Street Police Station, Rotherham for transport

to Hillsborough Football ground by Force Coach.   I was in

charge of Serial 36 which comprised of the following

Officers:

PC 2403 Morton, PC 13 Rose, PC 72 Lipski, PC 3183 Trcek,

PC 3044 Donnell, PC 1429 Bashforth, PC 2910 Cammock, and

PC 1266 Adshead.

We were part of Sector 14 commanded by Inspector Ellis

of Rotherham Division.   We attended briefing at Hillsborough

Stadium as directed, and then deployed to Wadsley Station,

Penistone Road. We were to work with mounted officers in

the supervision of Liverpool supporters, leaving the

trains at Wadsley Station. We were to marshall them, carry

out searches where necessary, and then escort them to the

ground.

The first thing that surprised me was the fact that there

was only one special train, carrying reportedly 550

supporters. I expected more trains than this.

On reflection I think that the supporters are aware that

these trains are met by the Police, and they are then marshalled

straight to the ground, so to avoid this they come by other

means.

The special train was not expected until shortly after 1400 hours.
                    - 2 -



but we deployed early at about 10.25 hours and took up

duties in Penistone Road, outside the Station.

Between our location and Hillsborough Stadium was the main

Coach Park for Liverpool supporters at Claywheels Lane

and all the local Public Houses in this area were closed

and boarded up.

It was a nice sunny day and there became a constant stream

of Liverpool supporters going up the hill away from the

ground in search of somewhere to obtain a drink.

It became a waste of time telling them that they would have

a fair distance to go as such advice was disregarded.     I

remember one particular request for directions to Grenoside

Working Mens Club,     which is all of two miles away, they

still set off walking.

Just prior to the special trains arrival at about 13.50 hours

I heard a report of a disturbance in a Trading Estate

off Halifax Road just above our location.     I attended with

other officers and saw that a grassed area in the vicinity

of Gateways Supermarket was crowded with Liverpool supporters

drinking from cans and bottles.     There was no disorderly

behaviour and we were told to resume.     I only got to the

entrance of the Trading Estate area but that must have

contained in excess of 1,000 football supporters all sitting

drinking.     The special train arrived just after 1400 hours

and we were told that infact it contained only 440 Liverpool

supporters.    As they left the train we marshalled them as

per instructions, the first thing that struck me was that

there were non of the usual (Idiots) among them.     They were

all decent orderly people, who seemed surprised at the amount
                                                                 Vs


                     - 3 -



of Police attention they were receiving.    As soon as we got

them in a group we began to escort them to the Stadium en

route they were well behaved, and laughed and joked with us.

We arrived at the Leppins Lane end of Hillsborough shortly

afterwards and these supporters joined the queues to enter

the ground.

Because there were no more special trains I remained with

my Serial at the Leppings Lane just generally supervising

supporters.   Because it became progressively busier as

it approached kick off time, we did not go to Claywheels Lane

for a meal.

The area outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane was crowded

with supporters most of whom were drinking from cans and

enjoying the sunny weather.    There seemed to be a general

reluctance to enter the ground, and at about 14.30 hours

mounted officers made an attempt to clear these supporters

in towards the turnstiles but most just filtered back.

There was a disturbance at one stage towards the Middlewood

Road side of Leppings Lane but it was brought quickly under

control by mounted officers.

I remained in Leppings Lane towards the junction with

Vere Road, and   as kick off time approached the flow of fans

coming towards me became heavier.    I became fully occupied

in directing fans as to which turnstiles they should use.

They were running up to me and showing me their tickets,

asking where they should go.    I was also aware of supporters

approaching these fans shouting: "Have you got any spares."

The first indication I had that things were not right,

was when a woman came back to me and told me that there

wa^~~-pUDOther woman with a leg injury near the outer gates
                      - 4 -



at the entrance to the Leppings Lane entrance.      I went to

the metal gates at the North side of Leppings Lane and saw

a mounted officer just outside the gates, his horse was

hemmed in by supporters and there was a solid mass of people

infront of him, I told him about the injured woman but he

already knew and said it was impossible for him to assist

because of the crush of people.     She was apparently reasonably

safe at this time in the Lee side of the metal gate.        I

then began trying to prevent people from entering this area

but it was useless.     A Police Land Rover arrived and loud

speakers used to try and      get the fans to move back from

the turnstiles.   I saw Inspector    Ellis with a hand held loud

hailer get on the roof of a Land Rover requesting the fans

to get back.   By this time it was obvious that the game

had kicked off, and there was then no reasoning with the

crowd as they pressed forward towards the turnstiles.           Supporters

were going under the bellies of Police horses to get through.

I was in possession of a personal radio which I had in the

top pocket of my tunic underneath my Police anorak.

Due to crowd noise it was very difficult to pick up

messages.   Only officers     working inside the groundhad been

issued with ear pieces.       Some of my officers who are

Community Constables with their own radios had extension

mikes clipped on the lapels of their jackets and appeared

to have picked up more radio traffic than I did.

The only messages I can clearly remember hearing was

a request for all traffic to be stopped from entering

Leppings Lane because of the amount of people using it

just before kick off.     I then heard a voice on the air saying

"There's going to be a catastrophe."
                       - 5 -



I have no knowledge of the gates being opened just a sudden

realisation that the crush had eased.

The Liverpool supporters had obviously been drinking, their

mood was boisterous but reasonably good humoured.

As every Police Officer knows it is difficult to reason

with someone who has been drinking.       It was obvious that the

game had started and when there was one particular loud roar

from inside the ground there was a big surge forward

towards the turnstiles.

I have never seen mounted officers so helpless in controlling

a crowd situation, and on foot we were just useless.

The next message I received on the radio was for all available

officers to go into the stadium as Liverpool supporters

were on the pitch.

I entered the ground with other officers by Gate A, as we

did this we had to prevent Liverpool supporters from trying

to enter with u s .   I then ran to the back of the North stand

and went up the first entrance to get onto the pitch.         PC 1429

Bashforth was with me at this time.       When I got to the

playing area the game was no longer in progress.       There were

a lot of Liverpool supporters on the pitch, and a Police

cordon was forming across the pitch towards the half way line.

I went towards the front of the West Stand and if I had felt

useless outside the ground, it was nothing compared to what

I was to experience.     I approached the central North

standing area of Leppings Lane end at it's junction with

the North standing area.       There was a huge crush of supporters

in the central North terrace area and fans were pushed right

up against the perimeter fence.

a±"this~~5~b6i^e there was absolutely nothing we could do to
                                                                  >
                       - 6 -


help    them.   Because we were in uniform Liverpool supporters

were    coming up to us screaming and swearing at us to do

something.

There was nothing they could do, but they expected us to

do something.     I have never felt as helpless in my life.

Some    of the supporters in that area were managing to get

over    the dividing railing intothe North terraced area, and.

we evacuated them onto the pitch through the perimeter gate

of this area.

The perimeter gates at the Leppings Lane end are narrow

only allowing one person through at a time and there was

only one perimeter gate for the central North terracing

which was further over towards the centre of the stand.

There were already Police Officers there so I remained

where I w a s .

Eventually fans managed to get up to climb over the

perimeter fence, and I climbed up the fence on the pitch

side and began to help them over the top.

I was greatly hampered in this by the fact that the strands

of metal mesh fencing had been continued past the top

bar to form a row of spikes which was catching on their clothing,

I began bending the spikes down to prevent them from doing

this.    Eventually the crush in this compound eased further

and I could see the body of a man lying on the floor at

the base of the perimeter fence near to the dividing fence

to the North terrace.

He was apparently dead.

We then turned our attention to the perimeter fence which

consisted of a strong metal mesh welded to metal supports.

^~"KacT 15eeTt\we 1ded on the inside of the metal supports
                            - 7 -



so it could not be pulled outwards towards the pitch.

It had to be peeled inwards towards the stand and this we

managed to do with some difficulty.

Persons were then able to escape through this and bodies

began to be lifted through.

I remained on the playing field and began to give the kiss

of life to casualties.        I had no success at all which was

absolutely           destroying.

I was with a woman aged about 26 years who had not responded

to recussitation she had an abrasion over I believe her

left eye.     When some Liverpool supporters arrived with some

broken down hoarding to transport her to the casualty station

there   weren't enough to carry her so I helped to lift her

onto the boards.        She was dressed in jeans, and jumper as

we moved her her clothing became displaced



I covered her with my anorak and helped to carry her to the

gymnasium.        As we approached the door to the gymnasion we

had to stop        as someone had become violent and was having

to be restrained by Police Officers.        This occurred while

casualties were lying all around.

We were unable to get the hoarding through the doorway

and I had to lift the woman off and carry her bodily through

the gym.     The woman was apparently dead and I remember seeing

Detectice Sergeant John Smith who was part of the team

receiving casualties.

I returned to help carry a body that of a young man aged about

17 to 18 years, who I first tried to recussitate.        He was

slimly built,                                 dressed in jeans and

'T' ■■shoxt-^__
                                                             npp>



                      - 8 -



I have no clear recollections after this everything seems

to have been done in a daze.   I ended up outside the

gymnasium understandably no-one seemed to have much time

for the minor casualties, so I assisted them where I could

and put them on the Mini bus type of ambulance to be

transported to hospital.

I then assisted with persons who had lost relatives and helped

them where I could.

I have worked several matches at the Hillsborough ground

including the last three Semi finals.   My usual duties

have been on the Catchbar Lane/parkside area of the ground

but I worked the Leppings Lane turnstiles for the Leeds V

Coventry semi final and we experienced no difficulties on

this occasion.

I have never seen so many supporters in Leppings Lane

still arriving so close to and after kick off time.
