St atement   Pages
 227    -    2456
                                                                                         STATION
                RAYMOND SIDNEY           Sheffield Archives Ref;              ^I j   ^
                LEWIS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 45

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                           R S LEWIS (SIGNED)



           I was the F.A. appointed referee for the semi final at Hillsborough
       on Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489) between Liverpool and Nottingham
       Forest.

           I arrived at the ground at 12.20pm (1220) and went to the referee's

       rocm.      I then put the kit out and went to look for the club

       secretary, I found him and informed him the match officials were there.

           I, in order to see the club      secretary, had to go outside theground,

       this was at the rear of the          South Stand.           I did not notice
       anything unusual when I went outside.

       At about 2pm (1400) a senior police officer, of Chief

       Superintendent rank, wearing glasses, entered the referee's rocm.

       There was a Superintendent with him.

       The Chief Superintendent discussed the policy for the match, he said

       that basically the responsibility for the field of play rested with

       me and he would look after the ground.               He said there would be a

           sergeant at the bottom of the tunnel, who would be there as a means

           of communication to the police, and the Sergeant             would be

           responsible for our safety.       He informed me that the code wordin the



                                                                                                   2271
LEWIS                  RAYMOND   SIDNEY                                   2


event of any emergencies would be "MR MEDDOWS". He did not discuss

the emergency evacuation procedure, but did tell me in the event of

trcuble, that communication would be made to us as to which side of

the pitch to ccme off.    He did not discuss with me the procedure to be

used in the event of a pitch invasion.     This briefing did not differ

frcm normal pre-match briefings, the role was undertaken by a Chief

Superintendent, in seme places it is a Sergeant.

Prior to the pre-match briefing I went out on the pitch with the two

linesmen and the reserve official.    Spectators were in the ground, at

this time there seemed more in the Notts Forest end, but everything

appeared to be normal.

I then went back into my room and saw the two team captains, Kenny

DALGLISH and Liam OKANE, and they gave me the team sheets.     There

was nothing unusual about that meeting.

The next significant stage was when I rang the teams bell at five to

three (1455) and went onto the pitch with the two linesmen, about

twe to three minutes before 3 pm (1457 - 1458).     I went straight to

the centre spot and the two team captains joined me, the two linesmen

and the reserve official.    The normal conversation and normal

procedure took place. Prior to blowing the whistle for kick off at 3

pm (1500) I did not see anything wrong or form any impression that

there were problems.     I was not approached at any time by anyone to

delay the kick off. If I had have been approached I would have delayed

the kick off.   The request would have to ccme frcm a senior police

officer. The situation between the kick off and when play was stopped

was that I was aware of disturbance and spectators      behind the goal

at the West Stand end of the ground.      It appeared that police were

moving fans frcm one crowded area to another on the terraces.

The next thing that happened was that a senior police officer, I
LEWIS                   RAYMOND   SIDNEY                                      3


believe of Inspector rank, ran onto the pitch directly towards ire.       I

car.not remember the exact words, but words to effect,     "Would you

please get the players off, we have major problems".

Prior to this I had not heard any loudspeaker announcements.

The players went off the pitch I made sure they had left the tunnel and

I vent back to the tunnel.

I stood in the tunnel looking towards the West Stand end and it was a

gradual progression of people coming over the West Stand terraces

onto the pitch.      I saw people using the advertising boards as

stretchers.

I vas in contact with Graham KELLY and the two club chairmen

discussing the situation and we went to the boardroom and I saw the

Chief Superintendent and an Assistant Chief Constable in plain

clcthes.    The decision was made to abandon the match nearly towards

4prr (1600).     It was not until about 3.30pm (1530) and towards 3.40pm

(1540) that I was becoming aware of fatalities.

The only Public Address announcement I heard was made by Kenny

Dalglish.      I think this was after I knew there was fatalities. It

was inaudible to me.

After this, about 4 to 4.15 (1600 - 1615) I saw the Chief

Superintendent in the police control box who confirmed that the match

had been abandoned.     On walking to the police control, I actually

heard an announcement to this effect and this was confirmed by the

Chief Superintendent.

I have been a referee for the football league for 15 years, prior to

that I was a linesman.      I am also a FIFA referee and have refereed on

the continent.      I have never refereed at Hillsborough before, but I

have refereed at a semi final at Villa Park in 1987 (000087), between

Tottenham Hotspur and Watford.     On that occasion the kick was delayed
        LEWIS                  RAYM3ND   SIDNEY


        for 15 minutes.   In total I have been a referee for 27 years in all

        kir.ds of football.

        On the way to the ground between 12 noon (1200) and 12.20pm (1220) I

        saw seme spectators walking in good humour, they were pissed.

        They were drinking outside pubs and frcm cans but generally an

        atrrosphere of good humour. There seemed to be a general unawareness

        for seme time of the seriousness of the problems in the West Stand.

        People were not aware exactly what was going on. After we had made the

        pitch inspection which was around 2 pm (1400), the four of us

        strolled behind the South Stand for five minutes. I did not see

        anything untoward or indeed any problems. After the players had been

        in the dressing room for ten minutes I informed them what was

        happening and kept in touch with them.

        R.S. LEWIS                                               B MASON Supt



        Taken down by me between 6.30pm (1830) and 8.35pm (2035) 6.5.89

        (060589).                                 D MASON Supt



                                                       RAYMOND S LEWIS SIGNED

^pVTEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:       B MASON SUPT5810




                                                                                 2274
                                                                        STATION



•
NAME:           KENNETH MATHIESON
                DALGLISH

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 38

OCCUPATION:     FOOTBALL TEAM MANAGER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                         KENNETH DALGLISH (SIGNED)



           States:-

           I have been the Manager of Liverpool Football Club since May 1985

           (0C0585) and prior to that I was a player with the club frcm August

           1977 (000877) until ray appointment as Manager.

        On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I arrived at Hillsborough,

           Sheffield on the team coach at about 1.30 pn (1330 hrs) to 1.40 pn

           (1340 hrs). We had a police escort frcm our hotel, the Hallam Towers

        at Sheffield to the ground and on our arrival there was nothing

        unusual about the crowds gathering outside the ground.

           Everybody on the coach went straight to the teams dressing room for a

           normal pre-match discussion.   Seme of the players went out onto the

           pitch about 2 pn (1400 hrs) and again at about 2.30 pn (1420 hrs) in

           their kit for a warm-up.   On both the occasions I stayed either in

           the dressing room or the immediate vicinity, doing various things such

           as supplying the referee with the final team list.   I did not go out

           onto the pitch until the teams went out a few minutes before 3 pn

           (1500 hrs) for the kick-off.   A couple of minutes after the team left

           the dressing room Ronnie MORAN, Roy EVANS and myself went onto the
DALGLISH               KENNETH   MATHIESON                                 2


field through the players tunnel and into the Liverpool dug-out on

the touch-line in front of the main stand.

As I went into the dug-out I did not notice anything particularly

unusual or significant around the ground.

The match started and the first indication I had that anything was

wrcng was when I noticed a few people behind the Liverpool goal.       They

just seaned to be standing there and then the referee blew the whistle

anc signalled to the players to go off the pitch.     I did not see a

policeman run onto the pitch and speak to the referee.

As the players were leaving the pitch I walked onto the field and

approached the referee to find out what was happening.     He said we

were going off the field until the police sorted out the problem

behind the Liverpool goal.     I did not know at that stage what the

problem was and I left the field with the players and returned to the

dressing room.

During the time immediately after the game was stopped the Liverpool

players remained in the dressing room area.     I was either with my team

or in the corridor outside or on a couple of occasions I went down the

players tunnel to the pitch.     I only went to the touchline at the

mouth of the tunnel and could not see what was happening frcm there.

I lost track of time, but I was then approached by a referee and a

police officer and asked if Brian CL0UC3J the manager of Nottingham

Forest and I would make a public announcement.     I didn't know who the

police officer was but assumed he was a senior officer as he was with

the referee.     The officer told me his name, but I cannot remember it

or anything about him.     I cannot recall if Brian CL0UC3J was also there

at that time.     I was asked if the two of us would make an announcement

to try and calm things down.     I don't know if the officer told me what

was happening outside, but other people had already spoken to me
DALGLISH             KENNETH   MATHIESON                                  3


in the dressing room area and said that people had been killed.

I agreed to make an announcement and somebody took Brian CL0UC3J and I

through the kitchen area under the stand to the police control room.

I think an officer came with us but not the referee.

In the police control box there was another senior officer who said

during a discussion with Brian CLOUGH and myself about the game that

he thought it should be stopped.    Brian CLOUGH and I agreed but

the officer said he would have to speak to the Football

Association about calling the game off.    Brian CL0UC3J then left the

box without making any announcement.    I then said I had been asked to

care to the control box to make an announcement.    There was another

officer in the box who switched on the microphone in front of him.

The only thing I recall about this officer is that he was wearing a

white short sleeved shirt.I started to speak into the microphone and

as I did so I saw a few people on the front row of the Leppings Lane

stand only a few yards (yds) away.They were obviously able to see what

I was doing and they were gesturing to me with their hands to the

effect that they obviously couldn't hear me.    I asked the officer with

the white shirt if the microphone was switched on.     He said it was,

but I pointed out that the people in the stand near the box clearly

couldn't hear me.The officer pressed a couple of buttons and told me

to try again.   I did and met with the same gestures frcm the people in

the stand.   The microphone was obviously not working properly and

after seme discussion which I cannot fully recall, I went to a room

underneath the police box which is used by the disc jockey who plays

records overthe public address system. I used the microphone in this

rocm and made an announcement.     I told the crowd who was speaking,

said there were one or two problems and asked people who could to

assist the police and first aid people.     I asked for calm and said
DALGLISH               KENNETH   MATHIESGN                                   4


that if there were no more accidents it would be the greatest victory

for Liverpool Football Club.     When I finished speaking there was

imrrediate cheering and applause from the crowd which told me that my

announcement had gone out frcm this microphone.    The only crowd

reaction to my two previous attempts to broadcast from the police box

was the gestures of people who could not hear me.When I broadcast frcm

the DJ's box, there was a woman in there who said the DJ had popped

out.     I then walked back to the team dressing roan the same way and

restember hearing a radio with half time football scores, so by then it

was at least 3.50 pn (1550 hrs).    After I got back to the dressing

rocm area I did not really see or do anything significant with regard

to what had happened.By the time I got to the police box the pitch

was crowded with people and I did not see anything significant in the

terrace where the crush had occurred.    At no time before the match did

I go to the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end where the Liverpool

supporters entered the ground.

When I got to the police control box the situation seaned chaotic.       I

hac been asked to go there to make an announcement, but when I got

there nobody was expecting me.There was obviously a breakdown in

cortnuncation.

If for any reason before a match there are grounds for considering

delaying the kick-off the referee would normally speak to the team

managers to inform them of the wishes of the police officer in charge

of the crowd.    At the semi-final at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989

(150489) no mention was made to me before the kick off of delaying the

start.
        DALGLISH           KENNETH   MATHIESON                             5


                                                 KENNETH DALGLISH SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     D A FANCOTT SUPT1207




                                                                               2279
                                                                          STATION
NAME:          BRIAN HOWARD
A              CLOUGH

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 54

OCCUPATION:     FOOTBALL MANAGER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                              BRIAN CLOUGH (SIG®D)



           States:

           I have been the Manager at Nottingham Forest Football Club, since

           January 1975.   I have been involved with professional football as a

        player then manager since 1952.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I arrived at the Hillsborough

           grcund, Sheffield, on the team coach at about 1.45pm (1345).   We

        were given a Police escort from our overnight hotel, the Ardsley

        House Hotel near Barnsley, all the way to the ground, and experienced

           no problems getting to the stadium.   It was noticeable that we were

           taken by a very quiet route through back roads and housing estates

           straight to the ground.   It was a marvellous route.On arrival at the

           ground two mounted Police Officers guided the coach down to the

           players' entrance.   There was a crowd of good natured, friendly

           Nottingham supporters around the coach as we got off and made our way

           to the dressing room without incident.   There was no sign of anything

           unusual or of a disorderly nature when we arrived at the ground.

           I went into the dressing room with the team and stayed there until the

           teems left the room just before the kick-off.   All of the players
CLCUGH                  BRIAN   HOWARD                                       2


went onto the pitch very soon after we arrived to ascertain as to

which studs, etc, to wear.      Some time later seme of the players went

back onto the pitch for a warm up.       That would have been about 2.30pm

(1430).    I did not leave the dressing before the match was due

to start. When the team went onto the pitch just before 3pm (1500).

I let the teams get onto the pitch with the referee & at one minute

before kick off I went and sat in the third row of seats in the main

stand behind the team dug-out and alongside the players' tunnel.

The Stadium was packed, weather was fine & the atmosphere was no

different to any other capacity crowd at the start of a match.      There

were three or four Officers in the tunnel, certainly a Sergeant

amcngst them and a Senior Officer who I had seen before at

Hillsborough.     I spent a few seconds exchanging pleasantries with this

Senior Officer.     There was no sign of any tension at all.

The match started and my concentration was totally on the play.

Liverpool hit the Nottingham Forest cross bar very early.      Play then

went into the Liverpool half and Nottingham got two, possibly three,

corners.    It was a very exciting start to the match for the crowd and

noise frcm the spectators was incredible.      The noise was such that I

am sure people outside the ground may well have thought one of the

teams had scored.

I then noticed spectators milling on the track behind the Liverpool

goal and encroaching onto the pitch.       Professional footballers are

always apprehensive about spectators going onto the pitch because they

don't know the motive of the spectator.      When I saw the fans on the

pitch my first thought was purely selfish and that was for the safety

of my son, Nigel.     I knew that was the Liverpool end and with my son

being a centre forward, I also knew he would be at that end of the

field.     I saw Nigel in or very close to the Liverpool penalty area.
CLCUGH                  BRIAN   HOWARD                                        3


He was quietly asking the fans to leave the pitch.

I could not see at that time why the fans wereon the pitch, but a

Policeman then ran onto the pitch and spoke tothe referee. The

Officer was holding his hat as he ran.

At this time I believed it was a pitch invasion of seme kind.     The

gaire had stopped and the Liverpool players were leaving the field and

I saw Peter BEARDSLEY go into the players' tunnel.     I told our coach,

Liam OKANE to go onto the pitch and get out players into the

dressing rocm.     I left the pitch as my team were doing so.   When we

were all in the dressing rocm I locked the door.     I still did not have

the remotest idea about the seriousness of the situation.

Ws had no reason to doubt the match would not restart and I told the

players to keep warm.

Minutes later, I've no idea how long, Liam OKANE,     Archie GEMMILL and

Ronnie FENTON, all of whom had been out of the dressing rocm for short

periods, came back and told me it was a bit more serious than I first

thought.

A Police Sergeant then came into the dressing rocm and asked if I

would make an announcement frcm the pitch to try and keep the

spectators calm.     It was suggested that if Kenny DALGLISH and I did

it together it would have a good effect on the crowd.     There was

another Officer with the Sergeant.

When I left the dressing rocm Graham KELLY of the Football Association

was outside.     The corridor was full of people and with Kenny DALGLISH,

the two Officers and I went down the tunnel onto the pitch.

We turned left towards the Liverpool end for 15yds or so and

stepped.   We were surrounded by people and the pitch was crowded.        I

thought that I was going to be able to use a portable loudhailer, but

the Officers did not have one.      I pointed out that it was useless
0X1X31                  BRIAN   HOWARD                                     4


trying to make any announcement with the situation as it was there. I

said we were wasting our time and I went back to the dressing rocm.

Then somebody, I cannot be sure who, asked me to go to the Police

Control box to make an announcement.     I said I would do it with

pleasure and I vas escorted with Kenny DALGLISH to the Police Control

through the kitchens.

At the Control Box I asked an Officer if he was in charge.    He said he

was but when I asked for his name, he told me but I couldn't or didn't

hesr him because he was quietly spoken.     I asked him again and

it was an unusual name which I can only recall as something

like CUCKOLD.   I believe he was wearing glasses.

I had already made my mind up that the game could not restart and that

we should go home.     I had expressed this opinion before going to the

Police Control but could not get a decision on whether the garre

was to be abandoned.     I asked this Senior Officer who said he was in

charge if he would abandon the game.     He agreed the game would not

restart and asked me not to announce this at that time because he

didn't want any more agitation between the two sets of supporters.

The question of me making an announcement was considered, but not

thought appropriate at that time.

I thanked the Officer for making the decision nobody else would or

could make that the game would not restart.     I told him I would return

to the dressing rocm, get the players changed and ready to leave, but

would not leave the ground until permission was given.

It is important to say that when I was in the Police Control the

Senior Officer was under pressure and had his hands full.

I returned to the dressing rocm and told my players the match was off.

When I was in the Control, there were crowds of fans all over the

place, but I still did not know properly what had happened.     I wasn't
        CLCUGH               BRIAN   HCWARD


        even aware there had been fatalities.   There were Officers watching TV

        monitors and whilst I was there they took no notice of me.   They just

        did their job watching the screens.



                                                         BRIAN CLOUGH SIQJED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     120589
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      D A FANCOIT SUPT1207




                                                                                  2284
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          MALCOLM JOHN
£              BRANDWOCD

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 35

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                             M J BRANDWOCD (SIQJED)



           I am a married man and I live at the above address with ray wife and

        twc children.

                I am a football League Linesman.

           I vas appointed by the Football Association to act as linesman at the

           F.A. Challenge Cup Semi-Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest at Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday, 15th April, 1989

           (150489).

        On Friday, 14th April,(140489) I travelled up to Sheffield and booked

           into ray hotel at 6.30pm.   Also staying at the hotel was the referee

        and reserve official.      The other linesman David AXELL was staying at

           another hotel.   All we did on the Friday evening was get to know each

        other and relax before the game.

        On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 we all had a late breakfast at about

           9.30am (0930) and then went for a walk in the grounds of the hotel.

           David AXELL who was staying in another hotel, had joined us for the

        walk. Following the walk we all went back to one of the lounges in the

           hotel and had the team talk.    Following this I had about half an hour

           to myself and then we booked out at about 11.30am (1130).
BR£NDWOOD             MALCOLM   JOHN                                     2


I travelled to the ground in ray car and entered the ground by the

Per.istone Road entrance. I parked ray car in a bay at the rear of the

South Stand which was reserved for match officals.    Ray LEWIS the

referee and the reserve official Rod Jenkinson had arrived at the

saire time and we all entered the South Stand via the players and

officials entrance.

On my journey to the ground I had not experienced any problems due to

traffic or heavy build up of pedestrians.    The fans that were making

their way to the ground were doing so in an orderly fashion but I did

notice near to the ground a large group of fans drinking outside a

putlie house which was open.    These fans were also orderly and causing

no problem.

Having entered the ground we all went and deposited our kit in the

officials changing room and awaited the arrival of David AXELL the

other linesman.   The time would be a little after noon.   The secretary

of the club Graham MACKRELL had seen us in the dressing room for a

shcrt time.

David AXELL arrived within a few minutes and then we all left the

dressing room.    I cannot remember which way around we did the

following but we all ate in a room set aside for us and inspected the

pitch but as I have said I cannot remember in which order we did so.

When we first went out onto the pitch I was not aware of a great

nurrber of fans already being in the ground.    I do remember thinking

though the playing surface was in very good condition and the weather

was fine and sunny which made conditions ideal for a good game of

foctball.

We all then went out for a walk around and we all visited the area

where an official luncheon was being held.     We stayed there a few

minutes and then left.    I can ranember that Ray had spoken to one or
BR£NDWOOD              MALCOLM   JOHN                                      3


twc F.A. members.

I noticed that fans had started to build up at the rear of the South

Stand but no more than I would have expected for a match of this

nature.    Also all the fans seemed well behaved.   I can also remember

going to the rear of the South Stand again about an hour before kick

off and on this occasion I saw that the number of fans had really

built up and the area was crowded, but all were again good natured and

well behaved.     I think it was on the first occasion that we went oat

that I was approached by a couple of young fans who asked me if I had

any spare tickets.

Frcm about 2pm (1400) onwards we were all in the changing room having

been onto the pitch again.    The team sheets were brought at about

2.15pm (1415).    The usual procedure was followed whereby the team

representatives exchange sheets and the referee has a copy.

I can then recall John MOTSON coming into the dressing room and asking

to see the team sheets.    This was allowed and John sat at a table

making notes.    We were all now at this time getting changed into our

kit for the game.    While John MOTSON was in the dressing room I can

rerrember two policemen coming in one of whom was certainly a very

senior officer but I cannot remember their names.     I can recall that

both these officers were very relaxed and stated that they didn't

anticipate any problems and the match was being policed as per la?t

year.     I can remember being told that if there was a major incident

and that the game would have to be stopped then the code word "Mr

MEADOWS" would be used, and also the linesman on the nearside would be

told so he could attract the referee.     I remember that a conversation

followed on the lines that this was a ccranon code in South

Yorkshire.     I then mentioned that I had seen a boarded up pub open

near the ground and I was informed that the licensee had been advised
BRP.NDWOOD             MALCOLM   JOHN                                       4


to close.

We remained in the dressing room until about 2.55pm (1455) when the

referee would press the bell for the teams to go out onto the pitch

and then we all went down the tunnel and onto the pitch.     We all went

to the centre circle, met the captains and had a photograph taken.

I then went to the West Stand end to check the net in the goal.      As I

approached this end I was aware that it was tightly packed with fans

but when I got to the goal and checked the net I deliberately did not

lock into the crowd because this does invite reaction frcm the crowd

when you do so.    I cannot however recall any conments being passed in

my direction about fans being uncomfortable nor did I hear any cries

of distress.

I then took up my position on the line.     I was running the line on the

South Stand side towards the West Stand.     At kick off I would be about

10 yards frcm the centre line towards the West Stand.     The referee

blew for kick off, the game started and my attention was totally on

the pitch and the movement of the game.     The game got off to a good

start and I can remember thinking this is going to be a cracking

garre.   Because of my intense concentration on the game I was not aware

of any problems in the crowd at all.

I can remember Liverpool attacking and a shot from Beardsley hit the

cross bar and came back into play.      The game then swung back towards

the Liverpool goal.     I then heard a voice behind me saying words to

the effect     "Hey linesman we've got problems, you'll have to get the

referee to stop play"     I didn't look behind me to see who had said

this.    I automatically presumed it was a policeman as there were

only policemen on the touch line and this was the procedure which

had been explained in the dressing rocm.      I still did not look into

the crowd because I didn't know what area was being referred to.
BR2NDW00D               MALCOLM   JOHN                                      5


I then looked to see how I could attract the referees attention but

the ball went out of play anyway and I ran onto the pitch towards the

referee waving my flag initially.        However it is at this point that

I saw that numerous fans had spilled over onto the pitch frcm the West

Stand and I saw a policeman run onto the pitch and speak to the

referee. I then looked at the fans who were on the pitch and many of

them were speaking to the players and pointing into the crowd it

became obvious to me that this was not a pitch invasion but that

scrrething was wrong in the crowd.

The referee pulled all the players back to the centre line near to the

tunnel and we were joined by Dave and Rod the other two officials as

well.   We stood there for about 5-10 minutes watching but after just a

few minutes the players went to their dressing rooms. I can remember

jurrpers being brought out to us.

While I was stood there watching I could see more and more people

coring over the fence onto the pitch but I was not aware that anyone

hac been injured.     At the same time the Notts Forest fans are getting

restless and starting to chant loudly about the game being stopped.         I

rarranber a young Liverpool fan running the length of the pitch towards

the Spion Kop end and when he got within 10 yards (10 yds) of the

Forest fans he stopped and started to gesticulate towards them in a

provocative manner.     He was taken away by the police.

I can remember seeing one or two St Johns ambulancemen moving into the

area which made me think there may be people injured.        I cannot

remember anything specific regarding police action but the police

seemed to be containing the fans at that end of the ground.        I can

renember at this stage seeing fans being pulled up into the upper

level which I can remember thinking was a bit dangerous but I did not

at that time realise the extent of the disaster.
BR2NDW00D              MALCOLM   JOHN                                    6


We then all left the pitch and initially went to our own changing room

but only for a few minutes. I then went with the referee to the

Nottingham Forest dressing rocm where the referee up dated Brian

Clcugh and stated that he would let him know when the game could be re

started.    We then went and did likewise with the Liverpool team.

We returned to the end of the tunnel by the pitch and by now people

had reached this area.    I did not see any injured people but seme were

clearly in a state of shock.     Ccmments were being made to us that

pecple had been badly injured, crushed and stood upon.     I was also

told that things had gone wrong when the crowd surged forward at

Beardsley hitting the bar.     I also saw F.A. officials etc caning in

for seme criticism by fans.      I also saw a photographer punched and

assaulted.    We started to assist those in stock and for this purpose

we used our dressing rocm.     There were at times between 10 and 20

pecple in there.

I can remember around now the police forming a line across the pitch

because it looked like the Liverpool fans were going to get at the

Forest fans.    I can also remember Steve Watford of the B.B.C. saying

that outside his van there were bodies lined up.     I remember seeing

a lot of activity in relation to first aid and the movement of

casualties.    Lots of people were being moved on make shift

stretchers such as advertising boards.      It was at about this time that

the Forest fans went quiet.      I can also recall talking to a man in our

dressing room who was bleeding from a cut to his head.     He

informed me he was a doctor and that he had been helping out. He also

informed me that many of the oxygen tanks were half empty and there

were insufficient medical supplies in any event.

Things remained very hectic for seme considerable time and I continued

to assist where possible between the tunnel entrance and changing room
BR2NEW00D              MALCOLM   JOHN                                     7


I was giving out tea etc and generally helping.

Eventually an announcement was made that the match was being abandoned

anc the fans were told to keep their ticket stubs etc. They were also

asked to remain in their seats while the emergency vehicles were in

and out of the ground.     I can recall seme Notts Forest fans in the

Spion Kop getting up to go and being booed by the others.

At about 4.40pm (1640) or 4.50pm (1650) we went to the dressing rocm

and began to change.     By this time Mrs AXELL was in there with ter

son.   We all got changed and went into the refreshment area where we

had been earlier.    I met up with my two guests, there was food and we

ate a little and sat around waiting for news.     It was at this stage

that the true horror of the tragedy began to unfold.     In fact we

rerrained until about 6.30pm (1830) when we all left.

In conclusion I can only say that we were cushioned frcm the horror of

the incident and I did not witness any of the dead or the events of

such death.    I did see though numerous people in shock.

I would also like to state that I have read in the press that the

referee was asked to delay the match.     I know this to be untrue as I

was with him before kick off.     I would also state that I cannot remark

on the distribution of the fans prior to kick off due to my commitment

to the game.

I can remember and should state that whilst I was in the tunnel area

after the game had been stopped I heard that the gates had been opened

outside and I remember a Liverpool fan waving his whole ticket in

front of me and saying they just let us in.

                 M G BRANDWOCD
        BR2NDW00D          MALCOLM   JOHN                          8


                                            M J BRANCWOOD SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:    140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     D L SMITH INS3078




                                                                       2292
                                                                          STATION
NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 44

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                            (SIGNED)



           States:

        My full time occupation is



                 (Tel.

           I have been a Football League referee for eight seasons and prior to

           that five seasons as a linesman.

           I was appointed by the Football Association as a linesman for the

           F.A. Cup semi-final at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on Saturday

           15 April 1989 (150489) between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

        Although I am a senior referee I was appointed as a linesman for this

           match because of its importance and to deputise for the official

           match referee, Ray LEWIS, if he was forced to leave the field.

           I arrived at the ground by car with my wife and 14 years old son at

           abcut 12.30pm (1230).     I initially drove to the wrong entrance, I

           went to Leppings Lane where I was directed by a police officer to the

           main car park entrance.

           At that time at the Leppings Lane entrance there were lots of people

           milling around outside the entrance.    We did not get near enough to
the turnstiles to actually see people entering the ground.

There were numerous police officers on foot and mounted around this

entrance where the atmosphere appeared normal and good humoured.

There was nothing untoward at that time and no more or less

spectators around than I would have expected over two hours before

the kick-off.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane end by mistake only because we got

lost on our way to the ground frcm our hotel.    Despite my long

experience with football matches and grounds, this was the first time

I had ever been to Hillsborough, either as a referee, linesman or

spectator.    As a referee I have a booklet listing the grounds with

their locations, but on the day it is my responsibility to find my

owr way to the ground.

On arrival in the car park, my wife and son went to a guest lounge

and I went to the referee's official dressing roam where I was the

last to arrive.    The referee, Ray LEWIS, linesman,               and

the reserve official and I then stayed as a group and went to the

guest lounge where my wife was.

Scrre time later, probably just before 2pm (1400) the other match

officials and I went out onto the pitch.     I remember noticing at that

tiire that on the terrace at the opposite end of the ground to

Leppings Lane it was quite full already with Nottingham Forest

supporters.     At the Leppings Lane end the terraces by comparison there

were quite empty.     There were people on the terraces but in nowhere

near the numbers than at the Nottingham Forest end.

The four of us then returned to our roam, around 2pm (1400) and when

we got there John MOTSON, the BBC TV commentator was in our roam

apparently working on his pre-match notes.    After a brief friendly

discussion, John MOTSON left.     Either whilst we were talking to John
MDISQN or not long after he left, two police officers came into the

rocm.     I know they were senior officers by reason of their uniform,

by senior officers I mean Superintendent or above because they have

white braid on their caps.     I don't know the officers' names and

carnot describe them.

It is normal practice for senior police officers of their rank to

visit the referee before a match to inform us of match incident

procedures. On this day the officers spoke to Ray LEWIS as the

referee.    I was introduced to them by Ray LEWIS, as his official

deputy for the match.     I was probably aware of what they said but I

car.not recall any of their conversation now, possibly because of the

subsequent more serious events.

The four of us went out onto the pitch two or three times, but I

think the last time was about 2pm (1400), before we met John ICTSON

and then the police officers.     After the officers left, the official

team sheets arrived, we got changed and went out onto the pitch after

the teams, two or three minutes before the scheduled kick-off at 3pm

(1500).

During the morning before the match all four officals met at Ray

LEWIS'S hotel where we discussed the finer details for the match.        At

this meeting it was decided that for the first half I would run the

lire on the far side of the pitch opposite the player's tunnel, from

the centre line to the end, I later found was the Nottingham Forest

end. This would allow me as the senior linesman in the secondhalf to

control the line under the main stand where the trainer's boxes are

and from where substitutions are made.

When I went onto the pitch just before kick-off, I went to the centre

circle, then after introductions to the team captains and witnessing

the toss, I went to check the netting around the goal which by then I
                                                                           4


knew Nottingham Forest would be defending.     From the goal I then went

across to my line to await the kick-off.     During this sequence of

events I paid no attention at all to any of the spectator areas in

the ground.

Not long after the kick-off, there was a Forest attack into the

Liverpool half and it was then that I first noticed spectators coming

over the security fencing in the comer to the left of the Liverpool

goal as I was looking towards the Leppings Lane end.     People were on

the track behind the goal and seemed to be being led around the pitch

in a quite orderly fashion towards the stand on my side of the

ground.     They were leaving the pitch into the stand in the far right

corner.

My attention was not attracted to the terraces behind the Liverpool

goal.     The match was in progress and my priority was to watch the play.

After this Forest attack Liverpool counter-attacked towards the

Forest end from where the ball was cleared upfield into the Liverpool

half going out of play on my line 5-6 yards (5-6 yds) short of the

corner flag.     At this time a police officer ran onto the pitch,

approached the referee and the game was stopped.

The players left the field, but I and the other officials stood on the

touch line near the player's tunnel.      It becomes impossible now to

recall lengths of time as the situation in the ground deteriorated.

We eventually went back to our roam, but returned four or five times

to the pitch to see what was happening.     After some time our roam was

used as a first aid roam for those suffering relatively minor

injuries and shock.     I personally carried a 5-6 years old boy off the

pitch.     He was suffering from shock.   He was with two Liverpool

supporters about 24-25 years old, one with a deep head wound, the

other suffering shock.     I have no idea who these people were.
__________________________________                                         5


We probably had four or five injured people in our roam at a time and

there was always one of the four of us in the roam.     It was proving

very difficult to find out what was happening officially.    Ray LEWIS

went away several times to find F.A. officals.

During the pre-match time just before the kick-off, the short period

of play and after the game was stopped, I personally did not go into

the Liverpool half towards Leppings Lane, I had no contact with any of

the dead and my contact with the injured was limited to the way I

have just described.

When I was on the pitch after the game was stopped, there was a alot

of verbal abuse and chanting by Nottingham Forest supporters towards

the Liverpool fans.     I did see a number of skirmishes between

spectators on the line where I had been patrolling.     There was also a

lot of verbal abuse by Liverpool fans who said they had come from the

Leppings Lane end.     Their abuse was directed towards the police for

all manner of reasons and F.A. Councillors similarly.     Names and

addresses were being offered to the police and F.A. Councillors and

seemed to be being accepted.    One particular incident I recall was a

Liverpool fan going down the pitch to the Forest end and

gesticulating obscenely.    He failed to behave when approached by a

nurrber of police officers, one of whan finally rugby tackled him and

he was led away.     The only other specific incident I recall was

alrrost a charge of Liverpool fans towards the Forest end.    I did not

see how this incident finished because we retreated to our roam.

I cannot recall being aware of the official procedure or method of

warning for evacuation of the ground in an emergency.     At no time

after the match was I spoken to by any senior police officer about

whether the match was to be abandoned.     Ray LEWIS finally told me the

match was off.
                                                   6




                                          SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     D FANCOTT SUPT




                                                       2298
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          BRUCE DAVID
A              GROBBELAAR

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31

OCCUPATION:    PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALLER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                           B D GROBBELAAR (SIGNED)



           I em a professional football and goal keeper for Liverpool City

           Foctball Club.   I have been with Liverpool City Football club for

           eight years prior to that I was in Vancouver in the North American

           Soccer league which no longer exists.   I have been first team goal

           keeper for eight years consistentley, since the season 1981/1982

           (0C0081) (000082) . My work has made me familiar with Hillsborough

           foctball stadium at Sheffield.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was selected as goal keeper for

           the team for the FA Cup Semi-final match against Nottingham Forest

           that was to take place at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.   I

           travelled to the stadium with the team in the team coach under Police

           escort from our Sheffield hotel, we went into the ground past the KOP

           end and got out of the coach behind the main stand where the changing

           areas are.

           We went into the dressing room for the team talk and to be told the

           team and for usual pre-match preparations.   After this a number of us

           went out on to the playing area to get the atmosphere and my

           recollection of things at that time was of a normal cup semi-final
GRCBBELAAR              BRUCE   DAVID                                           2


build-up.    The atmosphere was good I went and waved to some

supporters I knew in the West Stand and after signing a few autographs

abcut the tunnel I went in to get changed.        I went out with a number

of other players about 1425 to 1430 for the first warm-up.        I stayed

out about ten minutes at that time and I noticed then that the crowd

was building up well.    The centre sector of the Leppings Lane End

terracing was about three-quarters full and that the areas at each

end were pretty empty, particularly the area away to my right as I

locked at Leppings Lane that was the least full of the lot.

I went back in and then about five or six minutes before kick-off the

whcle team went out, me with them, for final warm-up to the kick-off.

I remember that I kicked the ball and it went over missing the goal,

into the Leppings Lane end terraces.        I saw then how full it was.     I

noticed again how the two end sections had plenty of space, especially

the one away to my right as I stood and looked at the terraces.           The

ball was thrown back over to me and I went into my normal routine of

warm up and whenever the ball went past me I entered into banter with

regular supporters and familiar faces that I recognised in the centre

section at the back of the goal.        Kick off happened and we got into

our stride pretty quickly - we from a comer pretty early on and the

ball came down to my end - I rolled it out to the full back once and

pley went on until    Peter BEARDSLEY hit the crossbar of the Nottingham

Forest goal forcing a comer and came back into play.         I remember just

after that that there were shouts and screams from the crowd just

behind me, it was different not the ordinary crowd noise and I turned

arcund to look.    What amazed me first was the concentration and squash

of fans in the centre section, the end areas still had plenty of space

it was only then I became conscious that the crowd was squashing

forward and wasn't able to go sideways and thats when I noticed the
GRCBBELAAR            BRUCE   DAVID                                        3


fencing alongside them holding them in.      I saw fans being pulled up

into the stand above the terraces, I saw fans climbing over into the

empty areas at the side and I saw fans climbing out over the front

onto the pitch which was particularly difficult because of the spikes

on the top of the fencing but they were getting out.     Play was still

going on and I was in a terrible position trying to concentrate on

pley and having my attention taken by what was happening behind me.

The ball came down to our end and Nottingham Forest won a comer, it

was taken and we cleared our box area and as play was going forward

over the centre line I heard a shout 'Bruce please help' - a desperate

shcut from a fan squashed up against the fencing to the right of my

goal as I looked at Leppings Lane terraces.     He screamed "Please get

the fucking gate open" - "Help - Help" - all the people who could

speak were pleading for HELP.   There were two policemen near the gate

right alongside the fan who had shouted to me and so I shouted to them

'GET THE GATE OPEN'   I was still trying to concentrate on play and

was still having my attention taken by what was happening behind me -

there were lots of fans on the pitch behind the goal area by then too.

I called again to the policman ' OPEN THE FUCKING GATE' and one just

turned away from me and looked back at the crowd but the other went to

the gate and opened it and it was like taking the top off of a shaken

coke bottle - people were everywhere on the play area around my goal.

Play was still going on and it came down towards me again to the left

hand comer.   It was a Nottingham Forest throw in away to my left the

ball was out of play and a fan came up to me on the pitch and said,

"BRUCE THEY'RE KILLING US"    I said, "WHOSE KILLING YOU" and he said

"THEY'RE CRUSHING US - OUR FANS"      I said, "GO AND GET SOME HELP" and

then a Policeman came on and spoke to this fan.     I don't know who the

far was and then he led him off. It was about this time I saw a
GRCBBELAAR            BRUCE   DAVID                                         4


Policeman running onto the pitch from my right across my box and to

the referee who blew-up recovered the ball and told all players to

clear the pitch.   I had to go back into the goal to collect my glove

bac.    I had to go through 1 large group of people to get back to my

goal and I saw distress and crying I didn't concentrate on anyone

specifically but I recall people lying on the floor and people doing

deep breathing on the ground.    I jogged back through the groups of

pecple and went off the field of play as directed by the referee.      As

we went off, Graham KELLY was standing there in the tunnel one of the

players called to him about the situation at both ends inferring that

the ticket allocation had been wrong and then we went to the dressing

rocm.   The referee updated us at seme stage, we remained in there for

abcut three quarters of an hour until Mr ROBINSON came and told us

formally the match was abandoned.     My overiding feeling is that the

ticket allocation was wrong and that we should have been allocated the

Kop end but I feel it was unfair that it was at Sheffield anyway

having had the identical game at Sheffield last year, the venue for

the replay was at Manchester United.     I wonder why it couldn't have

been held there in the first place.     I was in the team the previous

year at the semi-final, to me as I recall it was such a smooth

operation although there was congestion at the Leppings Lane end then

which tells me that the FA had got the allocations wrong then.

The point I am emphasising in making the point about having the semi

firal at Manchester United ground is the distance of travel for the

far.s two years in succession.   Last year they had to travel all the

way to Sheffield and Notts Forest had the short trip and the FA did

the same this year which I think was unfair.
        GRCBBELAAR          BRUCE   DAVID                            5


                                               B GROBBELAAR SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          IIME:           DATE:     110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     W R CHIDLEY SUPT7703




                                                                         2303
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                        S YORKSHIRE,
AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250190                                                             SIGNED)



           I am a single man & live at the above address with my parents




           Prior to that I was employed on a YTS Trainee Scheme

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) together with the other YTS

           Trainees I was to perform duties as a ball boy at the FA Cup Semi

           Final between Liverpool F.C. & Nottingham Forest F.C. at the

           Hillsborough ground.

           During that morning we played an Intermediate team game at the clubs

           training ground at Middlewood Road, Sheffield.

           I left there at about 1 pm (1300) & walked down to theground which is

           abcut 5 minutes away.

           Whilst walking to the ground I was approached on a number of occasions

           by fans, all Liverpool supporters and asked if I had any tickets for

           the match.

           At that time I was wearing the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. tracksuit

           which we were to wear whilst acting as ball boys.

           I cot to the ground at about 1.10 pm (1310) & enteredvia   the players
entrance.    I then had lunch & stayed within the dressing room area.

At about 2.45 pm (1445) we would have formed up at the bottom of the

players tunnel waiting for the players to come out, once the players

cane out we went to our designated positions.

My position was

                                           I sat there with



I was too busy at that stage to notice any problems at the Leppings

Lane end, but I had noticed that about the time we first came out

there didn't seem to be as many supporters as you would expect in the

leppings Lane terracing as the rest of the ground was almost full.

Just after Kick off I did notice that people were coming over the

fencing at the Leppings Lane end and getting onto the pitch, but I

dicn't know why but I presumed it was a fight or a pitch invasion.

I was then approached by

he told me to go and get the lads away from that end & out of any

trouble.    The lads up there were David LYCETT, Mark DICKINSON &

possibly

I inrmediately ran round, by this time the match had stopped.   I could

see the people all crushed up against the fencing & photographers

snapping away & a lot of people milling about, but I couldn't see any

of the lads.

I went back round & found that most of the lads had goneback    to the

tur.nel. The only ones missing were David LYCETT &

I could see there were by now bodies lying       on the pitch.Itooksome

of the lads up to the Leppings Lane end to try & find the

I saw that people were being treated all over the place, with various

resuscitation techniques.    I went back to the players tunnel & found

that the              had gone back there by going the long way round
the pitch.

Initially we were just standing there but then I organised the lads

into going to the Kop end & removing some hoardings & taking them to

the other end of the ground.

Having got there we started asking the Police who they wanted moved &

eventually one officer pointed out a lad about my own age lying on the

floor in some distress.

Tocether with             E started to put this lad on a board & then we

were joined by fans who helped us carry this lad to the other end of

the ground.

When we got there we were met by a man who I presumed to be a doctor,

he asked if he was breathing we said he was & put him on the floor &

left him with the doctor.   As far as I am aware this lad was alive

when we left him, but I cannot really describe him.

I then became involved in handing out drinks and water to people on

the pitch.    We continued doing this until everyone had cleared frcm

the pitch.

I have been shown a video film of the events of this afternoon & on

film reference          at the time marked 15.30.51.04.

I can see myself &             ;ogether with some fans carrying a

hoarding.

    is to my left and we are both wearing the clubs blue tracksuits

which are made by HUMBRO.

This hoarding is the one I referred to earlier which is the lad we

left with the doctor.

That was the only hoarding I carried.
                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PS




                                              2307
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                               SHEFFIELD,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240190                                                            (SIGNED)




           On the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I was an apprentice at the ground.

           As was customary, the apprentices and YTS employees were to be used

           on semi-final day as 'Ball Boys'.

           I reported to the ground at about 1 pm (1300) and basically 'hung

           arcund' the dressing room area to ensure that both teams were

           comfortable and had everything they needed.    I had already decided

           with the rest of the 'ball boys' where we were going to place

           ourselves around the ground.     I had decided to go



           I took up my position at about 2.55 pm (1455) leaving the tunnel area

           when the teams came out.



           The game kicked off and there was movement end to end from both

           teems.   There was a point when Peter Beardsley hit the cross bar

           anc very nearly scored.    There was a tremendous roar from the
Liverpool end of the ground and it was this that brought my

attention to the Leppings Lane end of the ground. I could see that

there were fans behind the goal on the pitch and also fans climbing

over.   My immediate thought was that there was fighting in the

crcwd and people were climbing over to escape it.    Minutes later

I saw a policeman on the pitch and then the referee stopped

the game and took the teams off the pitch.

I was then aware of a Liverpool fan who came running down the pitch

and was making gestures at the Nottingham fans.     He was restrained

by the stewards and led away.

I then walked up to the half way line near to the players tunnel.

There were one or two of the other apprentices there and I just

entered into conversation with them.   We still all thought it was

fighting in the crowd.

I then walked with               up to the Leppings Lane end.   We stood

by the goal post and it was at this stage that I noticed that the fans

at the front of the pens were pushed right up against the fencing and

were in a lot of distress.   There were numerous policemen and fans

stcod up on the fence pulling the fans over.   I also remember that

the gates onto the pitch were open although people were unable to get

out of them due to the sheer pressure on them. It was obvious at this

stage that a lot of people had been injured and there were possibly

fatalities.   I returned to the halfway line and began breaking up the

advertising hoardings so that they could be used as temporary

stretchers.   Fans were going back and forth with these carrying people.

I could see that people were attempting to resuscitate fans all over

the pitch.    I remember one particular lad who was lying on the pitch

in front of the Kqp about 5 yards (5 yds) from the goal line.     There

was a fan giving him the kiss of life.    I went over to see if I could
       help and the lad asked me if I knew what to do.     I have had basic

       first aid training and went to help him.    He continued giving mouth to

       mouth and I gave the heart massage.     I did this for about a couple of

       minutes. I can't remember why I stopped.    Whether someone took over

       from me, I couldn't tell you.     All I can remember of the fan I treated

       is that he was a male, probably in his 30's.     I can't remember

       anything about his clothing or description.     I don't know if he lived

       or died. I then assisted in helping fans carry some of the bodies on

       the stretchers towards the gymnasium, I never left the pitch and just

       helped out where I could.   I remember at some stage the catering staff

       bought water down onto the pitch and I helped handing it out to people

       whc needed it.

       The majority of the fans were very grateful towards us and thanked us

       for our help.

       Of the bodies that I helped to carry I can't remember what any of them

       were like with the exception of one who was a very big fat man with a

       bic beer belly.



       Description of maker - White male, 5'10" (5'10), slim build, fairish/

       blcndish hair, wearing navy blue 'Umbro' track suit. (On 15/4/89).



                                                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 DJ
                                                                        STATION

NAME:          DAVID RUSSELL
               LYCETT

ADDRESS:
                         SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:    PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALLER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240190                                             DAVID LYCETT (SIGNED)



           I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the Semi Final between

           Nottingham Forest and Liverpool, at Hillsborough Sheffield, at this

           tiire I was an apprentice Footballer with Sheffield Wednesday F.C., on

           that day I was employed as a ball boy.   This is a regular job given to

           the apprentices at Sheffield, I always had the position at the

           Leppings Lane end of the ground, and used to sit on the perimeter

           track directly in front of Pen 5, which is a dividing corridor

           between Pen 4 and 6.   Sat with me on this day was Mark Dickenson, at

           the other end of Leppings Lane near to Pen 1 was

           On the morning of the Semi Final I was playing in a Youth Team game at

           Micdlewood Road which is the Clubs Training ground about a 1/4 mile

           frcm Hillsborough.

           After the game about 1 pm (1300) I walked to Hillsborough in order to

           ball boy for the Semi Final, the streets were beginning to get crowded

           with Liverpool fans, most seemed to be drinking from cans, and a lot

           were sat on the roadside drinking, there were cans everywhere.   They

           were good humoured, as I walked past.
LYCETT                 DAVID   RUSSELL                                       2


I arrived at the ground about 1.20 pm (1320), and got changed into my

ball boy gear, which if I remember correctly were dark blue

tracksuits with the 'UMBRO' make diamond on the back, and UMBRO

written underneath.

As the players were on the pitch wanning up before the kick off, I and

Mark DICKENS®! walked out of the players tunnel onto the perimeter

track, turned right along the Spion Kop, and North Stand, and took up

our position on the perimeter track directly in front of the Pen 5

gate.    Also there was a Policeman, he is the regular one posted

there, I don't know his name.     I positioned myself in the re-cess at

this point.    In fact as I sat down I saw some young fans in Pen 5,

they were shouting at us to get out of the way.

The game had just started as I sat down with Mark, the Match started.

The crowd were shouting, it just sounded as normal.

After a few minutes, I looked round, and thought it was a bit empty in

Per 6. Pen 4 looked just the same as last years match (1988) (000088).

I then heard a womans voice shouting from Pen 6, that they were

getting crushed in the other pens.       By this time fans were climbing

over the perimeter fence onto the track and into Pen 5 behind me.      The

Police were helping fans over at this time.

I didn't remember any Police pushing fans back into the Pens, the

first I saw of the Police was them helping fans over the fence.

When I first went to my seat, I can remember several Police being

arcund gate 4.    I can't remember if it was open or not.

Pecple were generally shouting for assistance in the Pen 4, the

Police appeared to be doing what they could to get them out.

At this time the Match was still going on, I didn't quite know what

was happening.    I thought it could be just a pitch invasion.     I was

still there after the game was stopped.       As crowds gradually built up
       LYCETT                DAVID   RUSSELL                                    3


       on the track, as they climbed over, I walked round to the North Stand

       by the halfway line, I was talking to some blokes nearby, it was still

       sorretime before I realised what was happening, but then some of my

        fellow ball boys began to help carrying some of the injured on the

       hoardings.

        I wanted to help but was prevented because of a knee injury, by this

       tiire I had walked round to the players entrance, where most of the

       ball boys had gathered.

        I assisted in giving drinks out to some of the fans who were still

       dazed.

       Thsts about all of any significance on that day.   Some fans got a bit

        aggressive, having obviously being upset.

                                          David Lycett



                                                          DAVID LYCETT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

         TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  )£
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240190                                                             SIGNED)




           Apprentices at Sheffield act as ball boys for all 1st Division games,

           and of course were employed at the Semi Final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough on Saturday April 15th 1989 (150489).

           On that morning I was playing in a Youth Team Match at the Clubs

           Training Ground at Middlewood Rd.

           Arcund 1 pm (1300) after thegame we all walked to Hillsborough about

           1/4 mile away.   As we walked down there was a lot of Liverpool

           Supporters.   There seemed tobe beer    cans everywhere, fans were on the

           roadway side drinking from beer cans.

           I got to the ground about 1.20 pm (1320), and got changed into the

           bal 1-boy tracksuits, which are dark blue with the 'Umbro' diamond on

           the back and the words 'UMBRO'.

           As the players ran onto the pitch for the run about, I followed and

           went to my normal position which is in front of the South Stand where

           it joins the terraces at Leppings Lane (Pen 1).    I sat back on the

           wall, and within a couple of minutes the game was underway.
When I first got to ray position I could see people climbing out of the

terraces over the fence, this was right behind the goal, as the game

progressed more and more fans were climbing over the perimeter fence

behind the goal.   My first reaction was that there was crowd trouble,

but whilst the game was still going on I could see people walking onto

the pitch and falling over, as if they were having trouble breathing.

When I first got there I was aware of the gate immediately behind the

goal was open, and a Policeman, & a Policewoman helping fans out.

I didn't hear any particular shouts from the crowd it was just

continual noise.

As more people poured onto the pitch, a Policeman ran on and stopped

the game.   I spoke to the                               and we went

over to the Leppings Lane end behind the goal to look for Dave LYCETT,

and Mark DICKENS®!, but we couldn't find them.    I could see fans

milling everywhere and fans lying on the floor.

I iret one of the other ball boys, who said we were all to meet over by

the Players Tunnel.

We were instructed to assist the injured, we all ran over to the Kop

end and ripped the advertisement hoardings from the fence.    I ran over

towards Leppings Lane end, and with the help of other people who I

don't know I loaded injured and unconscious fans onto the hoardings

and ran over towards the Kop End, near the North Stand, where we were

instructed to leave the conscious injured near the comer flag, those

unconscious out of sight by the ramp.

I irade countless similar journeys with the injured fans.    I don't know

if any were dead, a lot were vomiting, and smelt of booze.     I cannot

rerrember descriptions of any person I carried on the hoardings, or who

assisted me.   I just did it by instinct to help anyway I could, that

part of the day is just a flash which happened so quickly.
        Later on I helped give drinks out to fans standing on the pitch.

        I have been shown a video of that day Marked        Although I can

        see two ball boys carrying a casualty on a hoardings, neither is me.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURES

  riCERS SIGNATURE:                 DS
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 290190                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a single man & live at the above address with my parents.




           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was work at the Hillsborough

           grcund as a ball boy during the FA Cup Semi Final between Liverpool &

           Nottingham Forest.

           During the morning of that day I played in an Intermediate League

           match at our training ground in Middlewood Road.

           After that match all of the apprentices walked down towards

           Hillsborough; this would have been between 1 pm (1300) & 1.15 pm

           (1315).   Whilst walking to the ground I saw a lot of Liverpool

           supporters around.   A number of fans were asking for tickets & a lot

           hac been drinking although I didn't see anyone drunk they were just

           merry.    Once we arrived at the ground we just passed the time away

           until it got nearer to kick off time.

           Once the players had gone on we followed them out through the players'

           tunnel in the South Stand.
                                                                             2


My designated position for that day was




I walked round the pitch with David LYCETT.   We turned right out of

the tunnel & round the pitch in front of the Spion Kop.    At this time

I didn't notice anything unusual at the Leppings Lane end in fact I

didn't really look.

Eventually the match started & I was concentrating on that.       A short

tine I became aware of people coming out of the Leppings Lane

terracing and onto the pitch, seme were caning round & jumping into

the North Stand near me.

I did not know why this was happening.    I initially thought there were

sore Forest supporters in there causing trouble.

David LYCETT joined me after the match had been stepped, he'd been at

the Leppings Lane end, he said he couldn't see exactly what was

happening but it appeared there was seme crushing.

Whilst standing there a man came past with a badly broken arm &

another with what appeared to be a broken leg, that I thought was it &

the match would start again soon as I could see no more injured people.

About 5 minutes later we were joined by                it he asked us to

go back to the players' entrance in case there was any trouble.       This

we did by going back the way we came via the Spion Kop.

We stood round the tunnel area for a few minutes, one of the ground

staff,        told us not to get involved as there were sane fans

verbally abusing the Sheffield Wednesday staff.

By this time we could see it was more serious than we initially

thought as there were people lying on the ground & others being

carried on hoardings being t o m down by supporters.

We then decided to go & see if we could help.     I then became
                                                                               3


       involved in carrying obviously dead bodies across the pitch.

       I didn't actually put any bodies on the hoarding, I just helped with

       these already on.

       I cannot remember anything about the bodies I helped carry, other than

       they were all male.

       After helping with, I think, 3 bodies, I then started helping other

       club staff handing out water & cold flannels.   That carried on for

       sore time & we left the pitch when everything had finished that would

       have been about 4.45 pm (1645).




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          FLACE

         TIME:               DATE:   290190

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURES
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          MARK ANDREW
A              DICKINSON

ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:    APPRENTICE FOOTBALLER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260190                                           MARK DICKINSON (SIGNED)



           I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as an Apprentice

           Footballer.   I signed at the beginning of the '88 (000088) season.

           On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489), I and the rest of the

           apprentices and YTS, were required to perform duties as ball boys for

           the FA Cup Semi Final.   This is common practice for the larger games.

           I arrived at the ground at about 1.30 pin (1330).   I went to the

           dressing rocm area and we just had to make sure that the visiting

           teams were comfortable and had everything they needed.

           We had previously sorted out where we were going to go on the track

           anc I was to go to the Leppings Lane end.

           The players came out for their pre-match kick about and I stood with

           the rest of the lads at the end of the players tunnel.   After the kick

           abcut we collected the balls up and then me and Dave LYCETT walked up

           to the Leppings Lane end.

           I sat on a wooden seat on the wall at the front of the gangway between

           Pens 4 and 5.   I think we were just sitting down as the game kicked

           off. There was a lot of singing and shouting coming from the terraces.

           The noise really was overwhelming and the atmosphere was electric.
DICKINSON              MARK   ANDREW                                          2


A couple of minutes into the game fans began to climb over the fences

into the 'sterile' area between 4 and 5.    They were coming out of the

gate behind me so I had to stand up.    The match was still going on.

More people were spilling onto the perimeter track and I still didn't

realise what the problem was.     More and more fans came spilling onto

the pitch.    It wasn't until maybe 6 or 7 minutes after the game had

started that I realised that fans had been injured.     By this time

there were policemen and fans up on the perimeter fence trying to pull

people out.    I couldn't see if the gates were open because there were

so many people milling about.

Me and David then walked around to by the North Stand and stood and

watched what was going on.     We couldn't believe what was unfolding.

One of the other apprentices then came and got us and we walked back

up to by the tunnel.

We stood there for a bit and then saw fans breaking up the advertising

hoardings.    It was now obvious to me that people had been injured.      I

saw fans walking past with broken arms and the like.

I then went and helped carry the hoardings.     I just helped out where

I could.     I didn't do first aid on anyone as everyone I saw was

receiving treatment.

I helped carry 1 youth who was injured on a board.     I carried him

with other fans towards the Kop, but got called away by one of the

ground staff to help give the water out.

From where I sat I never heard any shouts of distress from the crowd.

It all sounded highly charged and a good atmosphere.

I didn't have any dealings with the fans who died.



Description of maker:     White male, 5'11" (5' 11) , medium build, short

dark hair, wearing' blue' Unbro tracksuit.
        DICKINSON        MARK   ANDREW                           3




                                         MARK DICKINSON SIGNED
STATEMENT 1AKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:         DATE:   260190

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                     2322
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240190                                                           (SIGNED)




           On the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I together with the other YTS and

           apprentices were to be used as 'ball boys' for the F.A. Cup Semi

           Final. The normal practice is to use the 'Young Owls" which is a

           branch of the supporters club but for big games like this they use us.

           I reported to the ground at about half past one (1330).   I stayed

           abcut the dressing room area and we just had to make sure that the

           twc visiting teams were looked after as far as tea and stuff like

           that was concerned.

           I had been allocated to the area in front of the scoreboard on the

           South Stand.   This was on the comer of the South Stand by the Kop,

           probably as feu: away from Leppings Lane as I could have been.

           When the teams went out at about 2.55 pn (1455) we followed them out

           and went to our individual positions.   I was sitting on a small wooden

           bench.

           1'ir not sure if the game had kicked off or not, but I looked down

           towards the Leppings Lane end and saw that there were a number of the
fars climbing over the front fence and were then sitting down at the

back of the goal.     I thought that they were sitting down to be orderly

and waiting for the Police to re-direct them to the side pens.

The crowd behind the goal got bigger and people were now spilling onto

the pitch.     I then saw a Policeman run onto the pitch and speak to the

referee.     The ref then stopped the   game and took the two teams off the

pitch.     I still thought at this stage that whatever was happening was

a temporary thing and that the game would re-start.

At about this time I walked up and stood by the players tunnel.        The

rest of the ball boys also came along with the exception of two, I

knew David Lycett was one of them.

                one of the ground staff, asked us if we were all OK.      I

renrember that               went off to see if he could find the other

twc.     He came running back and said something like, "There are people

dying out there."     I realised then how serious it was.   I could see

that fans were ripping up the advertising hoardings and using them to

carry the injured on.         paid, "Come on we'll go and get some." We

wert down in front of the Kop and got the boards from there.

We carried the boards up to the Leppings Lane end and I could see that

the 18-yard box was almost full of people.      A lot of fans were

wardering about bewildered by what had happened.       I'd never seen a

deed body before but some of the fans who were laying dewn were blue

in the face.     Others were struggling to breathe. I could see that

fars were laying the casualties on the advertising hoardings and

carrying them off up the pitch. I joined in and helped where I could.

I think I carried 3 or 4 boards along with other fans.

We carried them up to the entry in the comer of the Kop and North

Stand.     I remember a man with a walkie/talkie.     I don'tknow ifhe was

a Foliceman or what, he told us that if the casualties were breathing
then we were to lay them down on the pitch in front of the Kop, if

they weren't then we were to carry them through to the gymnasium.        I

didn't carry anybody through to the gym.     I presume that all the ones

that I carried were ferried to ambulances.

The whole thing seemed to     go by in a flash.   I think everyonejust

acted on impulse and did what they thought was best to help.

I remember at seme stage that the catering staff came out and were

har.ding out jugs of water.   We all helped out by giving water to

whoever needed it.

All of us apprentices were dressed in dark blue 'Umbro' track suits.

It was quite obvious to people that we were employed by the club.        A

lot of them were saying that it was our fault because Liverpool had

been given the wrong end.      We just tried to calm them down.

The only other thing that     I should say is, that before the teams came

out I remember someone saying in the dressing room area that the game

was going to be delayed, and I remember someone else saying, "No, we

dor't want it delayed, let's get it started."      I am not sure who it

was who said this.

I have no recollection of what time I left the ground.

Description of maker:-      White male, 6'0, medium build, light

blende hair, short and neat.
                                                  4


                                         SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:         DATE:   240190

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                      2326
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 310190                                                                (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and live at the above address with my parents.




           (150489).    I was a YTS apprentice with the Club.   Part of my

           duties as an apprentice was to be a ball boy at every match at

           Hillsborough.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I played in an Intermediate

           League Match at our training ground in Middlewood Road during the

           morning.    After the match we got changed into the club tracksuits

           which we wear as ball boys and then we walked down to the ground, this

           would have been at around lpm (1300).

           Whilst walking down to the ground there were a large number of

           Liverpool supporters, a lot of whcm were asking us for tickets.        They

           appeared to be good humoured.

           Once we arrived at the ground we carried out various duties in and

           arcund the ground.

           We eventually went out onto the pitch just in front of the teams this

           would have been at about 2.50pm (1450).    My position as a ball boy
was outside the Spion Kop towards the South Stand.    I was stood with

PC Roy GREEN.   At that time I was not aware of any problems at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.

The match started and I watched it, I only became aware of something

happening at the other end coming out of the pens there onto the

pitch, more and more people came out and eventually the match was

stepped by a Police Officer & the players slowly left the pitch &

we made our way back to the players tunnel and there I met up with

most of the other ball boys.

                               asked if any of our lads were at that end

anc the lads from that end weren't with us, so                the head

lac went up there to have a look for them.    After a short time he

returned & told us there were dead people up there, at first we

thought he was joking.

Then an ambulance came into the ground & I saw people being carried

out on the few stretchers that were there, and then more on

advertising hoardings, & I realised that there was something more

serious.

As a group we decided to get the hoardings from the Spion Kop end and

help out,        shouted at us to stay where we were but we ignored him.

We got hoardings from the Kop end and then ran up to the other end.

When we got there, there were bodies everywhere together with

       I put the nearest body to us on our hoarding & ran with

hirr up to the comer of the North Stand & the Kop.     Gnce we got

there we put it down on the floor but there didn't appear to be

anyone there to help.

The man had stopped breathing & had vomit all round his mouth & it

was obvious he needed immediate attention.

So I started mouth to mouth resuscitation on him, and cardiac massage.
                                                                          3


I carried on doing this for a couple of minutes bat it was clear he

wasn't responding.   I checked but there was no pulse or any breathing.

Eventually I was joined by a man in a suit & he told me he'd take

over, & we went back to the Leppings Lane end.

The lad I treated was between 18-22 years, medium build, about 5'8"

(5'08)- 5'10" tall, clean shaven, he had brown hair, which was shorter

at the sides than on top it appeared to be slightly frizzy on top.

He was wearing blue jeans & a blue top possibly a sweatshirt, I

seem to recollect some writing being on the right sleeve.

Once back at the other end I picked up another body & carried it up

the pitch to the same place, I don't know who helped me with the

hoarding there were some supporters.   This lad was definately dead

very purple in the face.

This lad was in his late teens, slightly built, he had collar length

dark brown hair, clean shaven.   He had blue trousers on and he was

wearing a light blue T shirt, one of the sleeves was t o m on the seam

& was hanging off.

We left this body on the board with what appeared to be his friends.

I then went back to the otter end, but I couldn't find any hoardings

& there were still bodies to be carried away, so I picked up a lad

and looked for a board to put him on but there weren't any, so I

started to carry him up the pitch in my arms.

Just after I went through the line of Police Officers across the

pitch, I met a group of fans with a board & I put him on there.

They carried him away up towards the Kop.   This last lad was very

young he was probably in his early teens & he was very light.     He

was wearing a red top possibly a Liverpool T shirt.   I can't remember

the rest of his clothing.   He had short light brown hair with a

parting & slightly swept back.
                                                                               4


       All the bodies I picked up were inside the penalty area & to the

       South Stand of it.

       After handing over this last youngster I'd had enough & had to get

       away from it, & I went up the players tunnel & into a roam near to

       the office & had a couple of drinks.

       Later on I went back out with water and helped hand it out with the

       other apprentices.    I eventually left the field much later on at about

       5prr (1700) & later went home.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACEj

         TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE      PS




                                                                                   2330
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          TREVOR
A              HICKS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIKffl: 42

OCCUPATION:    MANAGING DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of rny knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150489                                                   T HICKS (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I reside at the above address.   On Saturday,

           15 April, 1989 (150489) I came to Sheffield in order to go to the Semi

           Final tie at Hillsborough.

           I came with rny wife Jennifer HICKS and 2 daughters Sarah Louise HICKS,

           19 yrs (10.4.1970)(10041970) and Victoria Jane HICKS 15 yrs

           (2C.7.1973) (20071973).   We came to the ground and my wife had a

           ticket for the North Stand.

           My daughters and myself had tickets for the standing area at the

           Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           At 2.00pm (1400) my daughters and myself entered the ground, on

           entering the ground my daughters went into the main entrance in the

           centre. I went to the right hand side pen and bought coffee, I stood

           on the side directly under the police box.

           Frcm my position I could clearly see that there was a dividing fence

           frcm my side of the standing area and the centre standing area.

           The game started and everything seemed alright.

           Where I was standing I could clearly see the central pen.

           The game was about 4/5 minutes old I could clearly see a problem in
HICKS                 TREVOR                                              2


the central pen I could see people pushing and shoving and obviously

trying to get out of the pen.

I could see people being pushed both downwards into the fencing and

sideways into the dividing fence.    I remember seeing an old man

with a grey suit on and his tongue was hanging out.    I turned towards

the police box and saw an officer with gold braid on his hat, I

shcuted to him "Can't you see what's going on"    That officer I think

rar onto the pitch and spoke to the referee I don't know if this was

actually the officer I saw initially.

I knew my daughters were in the section where the problem was I went

to the front and pushed onto the pitch where I looked for my daughters.

I saw Victoria being lifted over the top of the fence I saw both my

daughters lying both side by side.    I was told by someone that an off

duty officer was giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to Sarah, she was

also being revived by a man with a grey jacket.

There was an ambulance on the pitch and Victoria was placed in the

ambulance, I thought Sarah was also being placed in the ambulance but

soneone shouted,    "There's a body in" which made it inpossible for

Sarah to be placed in the same ambulance.

I remember a police officer being in the ambulance PC1926 MCGUINNESS

whe was in the ambulance.

Eventually we were taken to the Northern General Hospital.    I don't know

where Sarah went.

I was told at the hospital that Victoria was dead.

Later this day, I went back to the football ground when I formally

identified the body of Sarah Louise HICKS to PC86 MOUNSEY and I

further identified the body of Victoria Jane HICKS to PC3038

CUTTENDEN.
       HICKS             TREVOR                             3




                                           T HICKS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

         TIME:          DATE:     150489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                2333
                                                                          STATION


•
NAME:


ADDRESS:
               TREVOR
               HICKS




AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:    MANAGING DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of rny knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270489                                                    T HICKS (SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statement dated Saturday 15th April 1989

           (150489) I would like to add the following details, my daughter

           Victoria Jane HICKS bn. 20.7.73 (20071973) lived at the above address

           with my wife, Jennifer HICKS bn.                       She attended



           Hertfordshire.     Her doctor was

                Pinner.     Victoria was a healthy girl and was not receiving

           treatment for any illness.

           On Saturday 15th April (150489) after Victoria had been certified dead

           I was handed her clothing by a police officer.     'Hie only item that

           was missing was a navy blue 'v' neck cardigan.    My wife had only

           recently purchased it frcm a small shop in on the Albert Dock in

           Liverpool.     I think the shop was called the 'Wool Shop'. Victoria was

           wearing the cardigan when we entered the football ground but when I

           saw her lying on the football pitch she was not wearing the cardigan

           so I think it must have come off in the pen.

           Our daughter Sarah Louise HICKS bn. 10.4.1970 (10041970) lived at
       HICKS                TREVOR


                                               Sarah was reading Chemistry at

       Liverpool University and had been there since October 1988 (001088).

       She had the same family doctor as Victoria, DR                     Ln

       Pinner I dont know the name of her doctor in Liverpool.     Sarah was

       fit and healthy and wasn't receiving treatment for any illness.

       On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) after I had identified my

       daughter Sarah I was given her leather jacket and personal property

       frcm out of the pockets.   Sarah had been wearing this at the time she

       went into the football ground but she definitely wasn't wearing it

       when I saw her lying on the pitch.

       Sarah was also wearing a pair of brown doctor martins size 6, at the

       tirre she went to the football match.     They had brown laces in them.

       Todays date, 27th April 1989 (270489) I had the following property a

       pair of jeans, white t-shirt, belt, bra and pair of pants returned

       to me by PS APPLETON.   This property all belonged to Sarah and she

       was wearing it at the match on 15.4.89 (150489).

       The only two items missing are a pair of brown doctor martin shoes

       and a blue 'v' neck sweater.



                                                                 T HICKS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     JULIE APPLETON
Incident 102    190390 OP227          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER S317B

                                                                         Station

^tname              HICKS

Forenames           TREVOR

Age                 43                    Date of birth

Address


Occupation

Telephone

 IC                 Height                Build

Hair colour

Hair type

^^s                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

Glasses             Use                   Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated                                                                      Signed


          STATEMENT FRCM MR T. HICKS - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15.4.89 (150489).

          Myself, my wife and 2 daughters obtained our tickets from Anfield with

          the 2 girls getting standing tickets on vouchers from their Kop Season

          Ticket.    My wife was allocated a seat ticket, and I myself was given a

          standing ticket, - by the allocation based on the Main Stand Season

          Ticket Serial Number allocation.

          We travelled together in my car to Sheffield making only 1 stop at the

          Woodall Services just after Junction 30 on the Ml.     We then proceeded

          along the Ml and followed the Police signs at the first junction

          asking us to proceed to the next.    We encountered a long tailback (1-

          2 miles in nearside lane) but I continued in the centre lane towards

          the front of the queue, where I was able to leave the motorway down

          the Huai carriageway section of the slip road,      (time approximately

          12.10 pm) (1210).   We then followed the signed route to Hillsborough

                                                                                     2336
                                                                 PAGE     2
                                                                 S317B

and when we got to the ground I travelled along the A61 Penistone

Road towards the city until I was able to turn round and returned to

the car park which was being provided in the comer of the large park

between the A61 Penistone Road and the A616 Parkside Road.    We parked

the car at approximately 12.45 pm (1245) and we had the picnic lunch

which we had brought with us.

At about 1.40 pm (1340) we left the car, walked along Parkside Road

to the Lappings Lane end and arranged to rendezvous with my wife

outside the small tobacconists to the left of the approach area.     In

the bridge approach area I would estimate perhaps 6 - 1 0 Police

Officers were present (no Police horses) and it was all fairly calm

with only small numbers of fans milling around.

Between the car park and arrival at the turnstiles, we were asked by

about 3 people if we had any spare tickets - normal for such a big

game. Other than in the approach area, I only remember seeing Police

Officers (2 or 3) near a small Police kiosk on Parkside Road.      I do

not remember seeing any mounted police at all.

At about 1.55 pm (1355), my 2 daughters and I went through the

turnstiles, our tickets being taken, split and the "retain" section

returned. Upon entering the yard beyond, I remember small numbers of

people milling around, with 1 Policeman near our turnstile and perhaps

1-2 more in the yard area.    There were about 2-3 stewards in the

general area plus 2 selling programmes to the left of the tunnel.

The "standing"     sign above the tunnel was the only guidance visible/

given to us and there was no indication that it was not the only way

to the terraces.    My daughters proceeded down the tunnel, and I bought

2 programmes from the venders to the left of the tunnel.

I wanted a cup of coffee and observed a refreshment kiosk to the right

of the tunnel - I believe under the stairway into the seating area.       I

queued for a few minutes and purchased my cup of coffee.     It was this
                                                                   PAGE    3
                                                                   S317B

act that enabled me to see it was possible to go around the base of

the West Stand into the comer Terraces between the West and South

Stands.   This area was sparsely occupied with a wide choice of

positions, I took up a position about 2nd barrier from the rear in

front of the floodlight tower and to the left of the Police box.      (See

exhibit A). I stood in this position drinking my coffee, reading the

programme and listening for Team news etc on the small transistor

radio I had in my pocket.

A little before the kick off, (approximately 14.50 pm)(1450) I noticed

there were large numbers of people in the centre sections (I now

understand these to be known as Pen numbers 3 and 4).    From my

position on the terrace, I could quite clearly see the dividing fence

and could see several people crushed against this side fence, many

clearly in seme distress.    One in particular, an old man, I believe

wearing a light grey coat or possibly suit, had his eyes closed.

People were being pulled from the rear of the Pens up into the seating

area of the West Stand.     People were also being pulled/assisted over

the dividing fence and seme youths were scrambling over the pitchside

fence but were being repelled/arrested by Police Officers on the

pitch.

A senior Police officer was standing on the landing of the Police Box,

I would estimate some 10 feet (10') away frcm my position and I called

several times to him trying to attract his attention to the crushing.

 ( I believe he had gold braid on the peak of his cap and was wearing

a light coloured anorak). He ignored me completely and continued to

observe the scene for some minutes until he waited down the steps and

 round the segregation barrier underneath the South Stand.    (I believe

 he was the Officer who ran onto the pitch and told the Referee to stop

 the game some few minutes later).

 A television cameraman with a shoulder held video camera (I think the
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S317B

one shown in Exhibit 'A') took up a similar position but after many

shouts from the crowd (and possibly some coin throwing) he then left

the landing and went back under the South Stand.

Another Police Officer who I believe I can recognise facially (I

believe to have had black braid on the peak of his cap) took up a

similar position on the steps/landing.     I again implored him several

times that people were being crushed and couldn't he do something to

help.   He initially ignored me and then after say 3 or 4 calls to him,

looked down at me and said, "Oh shut your fucking rattle" and

then continued to look in the general direction of Pens 3 and 4.

Both myself and the man standing on my left were extremely concerned

as I knew this was roughly where my daughters were and this man said

he had a son in the same section.     Mbre and more people were

beginning to climb out of the section and I became increasingly

concerned for my daughters' safety.

The game had just kicked off and a Police cordon of 2 - 3 men deep

were put in an arc around the 2 central Pens behind the goal and it

was obvious that their purpose was to prevent anybody climbing over

the barrier.   It is my belief that several people were actually held

back and all the signs were that the Police officers had been given

instructions to contain the people within the pen area.     Officers

along the fence appeared to be pushing people back, where as their

colleagues standing in the arc were just standing watching, many with

their arms crossed.   I would estimate this took place for some 5 - 1 0

minutes, bringing the time to approximately 15.05 - 15.10. (1505-1510)

It was during this time that the Officer in the light coloured anorak

ran onto the pitch and spoke to the referee, whereupon the game was

stopped.   (I know this to be 15.00)(1500).

I also noticed a large number (100 - 150 approximately) Police

Officers emerged from the opposite comer and they took up lines
                                                                 PAGE     5
                                                                 S317B

across the pitch at the "centre" and along the North Stand.

I started to move down the terraces towards the side fence to try to

find my daughters and to render what assistance I could.    As I got

approximately half way down, I saw the linp form of my youngest

daughter Victoria being passed over the barrier.    I therefore changed

direction to the pitch access gate from my section (which was manned

by a policeman) and pushed my way onto the pitch.

I came upon my 2 daughters Victoria and Sarah, laid on the pitch

just at the touchline slightly to the right of the goal.    Sarah was

receiving assistance frcm 1 man and he, myself plus two others started

to render mouth to mouth resuscitation to both of them.    One of the

men attending to Sarah called for suction (I have since discovered

that this was Dr C K FT.ENT.EY) while we continued to resuscitate my

daughters I shouted my daughters names into their ears and called to

Police/Ifedics several times for suction but none was available.   We

then continued taking turns at mouth to mouth resuscitation.    One man

was called away to help a friend and it therefore left myself and 1

other giving mouth to mouth resuscitation on Victoria with Dr FLENLEY

and a man in a chequered shirt (who was apparently an off-duty

Policeman from the crowd) rendering assistance to Sarah.    There was no

medical equipment or assistance available to us throughout this time.

We continued to give mouth to mouth resuscitation, taking turns for

some 10 minutes or more, whereupon the first ambulance (the one

trapped behind the goal) tried to get past us catching my toes as I

knelt and the foot of someone else laid on the pitch.

This ambulance had taken up a ridiculous position with its

movement onto/off the ground grossly impaired.     Presumably this was to

avoid cutting up the playing surface.

We continued to attempt to resuscitate my daughters for a few more

minutes when a fireman came over carrying an oxygen bottle with a
                                                                  PAGE     6
                                                                  S317B

face mask attached (smoke-inhalation device?)    but this was no good as

we could not get the girls to breathe unaided and the pressure

in the bottle/regulator was insufficient to force oxygen into their

lungs.

A second ambulance came onto the pitch area and stopped adjacent

to us. We agreed to put Sarah and Victoria into this ambulance.

Two of us put Victoria into this second ambulance and were about to

turn around and lift Sarah into it, when a third group of people put

in a man who had to go onto the floor.    I was then faced with

the awful choice of leaving Sarah, who I was assured would be placed

in the next ambulance which was apparently coming.

The ambulance started to move away so I rejoined Victoria and along

with a PC1926 MZGUINNESS, continued to give mouth to mouth.

In the ambulance was the ambulance attendant, a woman, myself and PC

MXUINNESS. There was a young man in his 20's on the floor, who did

in fact have a throat tube in his mouth, but the ambulance man said

was dead within a minute or so of us driving off.    The ambulance

attendant and the woman attended a person on the other seat, but he

was also pronounced dead by the ambulance man.    The ambulance man and

myself continued artificial respiration with PC MCGUINNESS holding an

oxygen bottle and we continued throughout the time it took us to reach

the Northern General Hospital.   The ambulance man was of the opinion

he felt a faint pulse on a couple of occasions during this journey.

Victoria was then taken straight into the Casualty section and because

they thought there was possibly some life, received immediate medical

attention from a team of Doctors and Nurses aided by PC M2GUINNESS.        I

observed for some 2 or 3 minutes, whereupon I was asked to leave the

area and was taken into a side room.     Obviously conditions were

extremely hectic with people and bodies arriving very quickly.       The

Hospital was well equipped and I was given the impression that all
                                                                 PAGE     7
                                                                 S317B

possible care was being taken with people who were believed to have a

chance.

After about 10 minutes, I was informed by PC MZGUINNESS that my

daughter had been pronounced dead.    I thanked PC MZGUINNESS for his

asistanee and also apologised for the verbal abuse I had poured upon

hint as a representative of the Police throughout our time in the

ambulance and at the hospital.    Once I was told that Victoria was

dead, I then went around the Hospital trying to locate Sarah on the

grounds that I had been told she would be in an ambulance following

closely behind.

After some 30 minutes of futile searching, I was taken to the

Physiotherapy Department by a Psychiatric Nurse                  who

had come on duty to help with the problems.    I was kept in this area

for some half to three quarters of an hour and on a couple of

occasions                tried to establish whether Sarah was indeed at

this Hospital or not.    Eventually, I was taken round to the section of

the Hospital where the bodies of the deceased were being attended to.

I gave a description of Sarah to the Police Officers on duty and it

appeared that they had "a young unidentified female" who could

possibly have been Sarah.    A Police Officer went into the reran and

brought out a swatch watch which I felt at the time was the same as

that of my daughter Sarah.    After about 10 or 15 minutes, I was taken

across to the Hospital Mortuary to identify who I expected to be

Sarah.    It is now a matter of record that this was indeed Victoria who

somehow had become detached frcm her label when I at first identified

her on admission to the Hospital, despite the unnecessary distress

this caused to me personally I did not feel bitter towards the

hospital as I considered they were attempting to cope with the extreme

pressure that was put upon them.

Myself,_________        and a Reverend returned to the main Hospital
                                                                  PAGE    8
                                                                  S317B

building and I was retained for perhaps another half an hour or so.

Throughout this time, I was trying to establish the location of my

wife and Sarah.   I explained again that Sarah's condition was

obviously serious when we were on the pitch and that she was

supposedly "in the next ambulance"    I was then told that seme

casualties had been taken to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and that

Sarah could be there (as could my wife).

Communications were difficult and everybody both medical and

administrative, were at full stretch and all telephone lines were

jammed.   I was told that 11 people were dead at the Northern General

Hospital and that no other females were there.    Further discussions

took place and it was agreed that I should go to the Hallamshire

Hospital and if my wife arrived at the Northern General Hospital, I

would be contacted and she would not be told about Victoria's death

until I returned to meet her.

At about 6 o'clock (1800) I was taken by a young female Padre

          and Miss         to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     Upon

arrival I gave a full description to the staff and they then

circulated it to see whether Sarah had indeed been admitted.      I had

to wait in the general reception area for seme time, attended

initially by                 and nurses frcm the Hallamshire Hospital.

At one point, a man in a suit stood on a desk and called for

attention.   He read out a list of "patients" who had been taken to the

Northern General Hospital.    He called out Victoria's name and as I

knew she was dead, I broke down and began to cry.

A nurse took me into a side room and tried to console me and assured

me they were attempting to locate Sarah and that seme people had been

taken to Barnsley Hospital.     I said I suspected the worst because of

 Sarah's condition on the pitch.

A Police Officer also took full details of the location of my
                                                                 PAGE    9
                                                                 S317B

car and my wife and assured me he would try to locate and re-unite

me with my wife before she was advised of the death of Victoria.

At about 19.45 (1945). I received a message to say that my wife had

arrived at the Northern General Hospital and I was then taken back

there by a "Cruse Counsellor" (Mrs                     in her car.

At approximately 20.00 hours (2000), my wife and I were reunited in

the foyer of the Northern General Hospital, where I was appalled to

find she had been advised of the death of Victoria had been refused

permission to see her body and had been told I was with a female at

the Hallamshire Hospital whom she had assumed was Sarah.   She was

distraught when I was unable to confirm Sarah's whereabouts.

I made formal protests to both Hospital and Police Authorities and

demanded our rights to see our child.    After seme 5 or 10 minutes we

were advised by the Assistant Matron that our daughter's body was no

longer on the Hospital premises, and at police instructions, had been

taken back to the Hillsborough Ground.

I protested strongly at this callous and unnecessary act, especially

as I had already identified her twice, latterly at rest in the

hospital mortuary.   My protestations were met by off handedness by the

Police Officer (who claimed it was at the Coroners instruction) and

sympathetically by the Assistant Matron (who had tear filled eyes).

We were advised that there were "several unidentified people at the

ground" and we should return there.

Nobody advised us how many casualties/bodies we could expect to find,

no transport was offered and we were left to make our own way there.

In the accompaniment of a Mr
Mr               drove us back to Hillsborough in his car whereupon

we arrived at the entrance to the gymnasium/temporary mortuary at

approximately 2200 hours.   We were refused entrance by an extremely

callous, rude and unbelievably insensitive Police officer in charge on
                                                                  PAGE 10
                                                                  S317B

the gate.    He was a ranking officer (I believe Inspector) and

regretfully, I did not take his name.   He was totally callous to my

wife and I and this can be borne out by the 2 independent witnesses

aforesaid.    After considerable heated argument, with him I

compromised, agreed to go to the park and collect my car, whereupon

he would then allow us access upon our return.

The 4 of us plus a Police Constable walked back along Penistone

Road to the comer of the park where I discovered the gate was still

open and my Granada car was the only one remaining on the car park.

We then drove back to the ground gates and parked outside.

Further remonstrations with aforesaid Police officer took place and we

were again refused admission.    In addition he upset my wife further by

saying we had no rights in the matter, that the girls were the

property of the Coroner, and would have to undergo a Post Mortem.      His

attitude to us, and handling of us, was unbelievably callous.     I wish

to make a formal complaint about this officer when he can be

identified.    I gave my business card to a Norwegian Press Photographer

who took photographs during my remonstrations with the Police Officer.

Should I recieve contact from him, then I will make these

available,    the best that the Police officer could do was to offer for

us to sit in a Police van for 30 minutes.    This I refused to do and

said that I insisted that having been sent there by the Hospital,

knowing full well 1 daughter was dead and suspecting the fate of the

other, I demanded to be allowed access.     After a few minutes, two CID

officers (aged in their mid 30's with one in a brown leather jacket)

took charge of the situation and guided my wife, myself and our 2

Social Worker colleagues into an anteroom.     This officer is to be

commended for his handling of an extremely difficult situation.     He

did explain that the formalities were not quite completed and he did

so in a sensitive and caring manner.
                                                                PAGE 11
                                                                S317B

After same 10 or 15 minutes wait, we were shown into a room at the

side of the gymnasium and asked to view seme 81 Polaroid photographs

which were pinned to a board.    My wife said, "Oh my God, how can there

be so many dead!"   he replied, "I'm afraid that this isn't the end of

it, love."

We quickly identified the photograph of our youngest daughter Victoria

but initially were unable to see that of Sarah.    Naturally, we hoped

at this time she may have been a survivor and at one of the other

Hospitals.   We were asked to look again and whereupon we found what we

believed to be the photograph of our elder daughter (Reference No 64).

Again the CID officer in the brown jacket asked us would we please

wait for a few minutes and would we prefer our daughters bodies to be

brought out together or independently.    My wife and I requested that

they be brought out together.    This was carried out with a reasonable

degree of sensitivity and formal identification of our 2 daughters

took place. During the identification my wife cuddled both and

noticed that Sarah's body was still warm - calling out "She's still

warm - are you sure she's dead!"    I consoled her but also noticed

the distinct difference between Victoria's body and Sarah's.

After a few minutes to say our farewells to our 2 daughters we were

ushered to a series of tables set up at one end of the gymnasium,

whereupon we were interviewed by, I believe 2 male and 2 female Police

officers, and I was asked to swear out a statement.    We also took

receipt of the personal effects of Victoria which were in a white

plastic bag frcm the hospital.

At the same time, I gave a description of a brown leather jacket

 (American Flyer type) that Sarah had been wearing upon entry to the

ground but was not wearing when I last saw her on the pitch.

After some 10 - 15 minutes delay, (coinciding with the time I was

swearing out the statement) the jacket was retrieved and returned to
                                                                 PAGE 12
                                                                 S317B

us.   Upon examination of the pockets, all of Sarah's personal

effects, money, cheque book, wallet, cards bus passes and ID appeared

to be intact.   We therefore took possession of the jacket and signed

the necessary forms for the Police officers.    My wife and I were

given a cup of tea and the Social Workers escorted us frcm the

Ifortuary.

We were given offers of accomodation frcm various Clergy and the 2

Social Workers but expressed a desire to return home to Middlesex.      A

half hearted promise of a Police driver to drive us back was made but

I declined and preferred to drive myself.    My wife and I returned

hone, arriving home at seme 2.30 am (0230) Sunday morning.    Following

release at lunch time of the first casualty list which contained the

names of our 2 daughters among 14 others, we were inundated with

telephone calls and visits frcm the Press.     It is questionable whether

full address details should have been given in that first casualty

list.

I would summarise my assessment of what I experienced as follows

1.    Hie ground/approach areas policing/stewarding was low key - even

casual with little guidance and control being exerted.

2.    There are a limited number of turnstiles through which to go.

3.    Once through the turnstiles, the only sign visible was above the

tunnel, giving a natural inclination towards this route especially

if you were in a hurry.

4.    Police/Stewards failed to notice the build up in the central pens.

5.    They did not distribute the fans to the side areas.

6.    Senior Officer ignored (and many others) pleas to help those in

the central pens.

7.    It was obvious the Police totally misread events - believing a

pitch invasion/trouble was underway and mounted a restraining rather

than rescue operation.
                                                                         PAGE 13
                                                                         S317B

        8. The rescue commenced seme 10 minutes too late and was totally dis-

        organised - the death toll being much higher as a consequence

        9. Hie fences were such they prevented escape - even with assistance

        over the top.

        10.     The single gate was of little use other than to those in the near

        vicinity and it was opened too late.

        11.     Medical assistance and equipment was inadequate/non-existent.

        12.     Ambulance/Fire assistance was far too late arriving.




                                                                        SIGNED

^pATEMEMT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                                                    2348
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          TREVOR
A              HICKS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:    MANAGING DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030889                                                  T HICKS (SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statements, on Friday 7th July 1989 (070789), I

           was shown a number of photographs and video tapes by Inspector LAYTON

           and PC WATSON of the West Midlands Police.

           The photographs were shown to me in two folders bearing the reference

           nunber NA 64, in respect of my daughter Sarah Louise HICKS and the

           reference number NA 89, in respect of my daughter Victoria Jane HICKS.

           On Thursday 3rd August 1989 (030889), at my request, together with my

           wife, I again viewed the material referred to.

           I am satisfied that the two folders contain visual information which

           does relate to my two daughters.

           I have also been shown three photographic prints which have been

           marked TH1 (      ) TH2 (      ) TH3 (       ). These prints were

           shewn to me, as I had previously believed that I had recognised my

           daughters in the Daily Mirror edition dated Monday April 17th 1989

           (170489) and the Daily Star of the same date.

           I have indicated on the photographic prints where I believe Sarah and

           Victoria are shown.   In some instances these are positive sightings in

           my own mind, and in some instances they are possible, only.
        HICKS              TREVOR                            2




                                            T HICKS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     M LAYTON INSP9364




                                                                 2350
                                                                    1/89 STATION

NAME:          TREVOR
A              HICKS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:    MANAGING DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240889                                             TREVOE HICKS (SIGNED)



           This statement is made following the TAYLOR Judicial Review into the

           Hillsborough Disaster earlier this year.

           I em making the following complaints as an individual but I should

           also clarify that I am the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support

           Grcup.   Within this capacity I have taken a deep interest in the

           review and all aspects of the event.

           I vas a spectator with my wife and two daughters at the Liverpool v

           Nottingham Forest football match on the 15th April 1989 (150489) held

           at the Hillsborough Football Ground.   As a result of the disaster I

           lost both my daughters Sarah Louise and Victoria Jane HICKS.

           I gave evidence to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster enquiry before

           His Hon Lord Justice TAYLOR.   Subsequently I have taken a deep

           interest in the matters arising and I have collated evidence both as

           an individual and as Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

           My presence on the day and my consideration of the evidence leads me

           to conclude that several Police Officers neglected to discharge their

           duties relating to the staging of this football match.

           I em able to identify the following officers and I wish to make a




                                                                                     2351
HICKS                  TREVOR                                         2


formal complaint against them.

1. Mr Walter JACKSON

   Assistant Chief Constable

   South Yorkshire Police

My complaint against him is that he failed to take control of the

disaster.

2. Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD

3. Superintendent Roger MARSHALL

4. Superintendent Bernard MURRAY

5. Superintendent Roger GREENWOOD

It is my complaint that these Officers

(a) Failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside of

    the gates.

(b) Failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the

    opening of gate 'C'.

(c) Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to

    effect a rescue operation.

I have previously contacted South Yorkshire Police and they have

recorded two matters of complaint.

(a) Incivility towards me by a Police Inspector

(b) My treatment by a different Police Inspector at the temporary

    mortuary.




                                                                          2352
        HICKS              TREVOR                             3


                                        TREVOR HICKS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          1IME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     D JARRATT DSU




                                                                  2353
                                                                    1/89 STATION

NAME:          TREVOR
A              HICKS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:     MANAGING DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 221189                                                  T. HICKS (SI(2®D)



           States;

           Further to my letter dated 7 June 1989 (070689) to the Home Secretary,

           and my statement of Complaint to officers of the Northampton

           Constabulary dated 24 August 1989, (240889) I do wish to pursue a

           ccirplaint against C/Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD in respect of the

           false statement he made to his Assistant Chief Constable Walter

           JACKS®! on the 15 April 1989 (150489) in relation to Liverpool

           supporters forcing gate 'C' at the Leppings Lane end, of Sheffield

           Wednesdays Football Ground.   This is in addition to my other

           ccirplaints.   The basis of my complaint is that by making this false

           statement C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD misled his Assistant Chief

           Constable Mr JACKSON into believing gate 'C' had been forced open by

           supporters at 14.52 hours (1452), whereas the gate had been opened on

           his instructions.    This was then compounded in my opinion by him

           allowing'Assistant Chief Constable JACKSON, in his presence, to

           tell representatives of the Football Association and the various

           foctball Clubs present in the board room the false story.    The

           overall result being the maligning of Liverpool supporters in the
HICKS                 TREVOR                                            2


media and the attendant anguish and distress this caused to them.

The evidence to support this complaint is contained within the

transcripts of evidence given by C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to

the TAYLOR Inquiry and re inforced by C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD'S

sutsequent apology.

In making this complaint against C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD I

question whether Assistant Chief Constable JACKSON was unaware of the

real circumstances relating to the opening of the gate, as I can see

no reason why C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD would not have told him the

truth.   In other words I consider that there may have been collusion

between the two officers concerning this point and I would wish this

to be regarded an alternative complaint against both Assistant Chief

Constable JACKSON and C/Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    Although I

personally have no hard evidence at this time I wish this matter to be

investigated.

It is my belief that these matters and those contained in my statement

to Northampton Police represent all matters relating to Police

behaviour that I wish to pursue.

However, I do reserve the right to bring further matters forward

shculd any new evidence come to light.

T. Hicks                                              T. Hicks
        HICKS              TREVOR                              3


                                             T. HICKS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     R. I. TAYLOR DSU67




                                                                   2356
                                                                           STATION



•
NAME:          DAVID ANTHONY
               LACKEY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 20

OCCUPATION:    UNEMPLOYED COACH PAINTER.


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050689                                                  D LACKEY (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and I live at my parents house in Walton,

           Liverpool.   I am a Liverpool supporter and always have been.

           Although I didn't have a ticket for the F A Cup Semi Final match

           between Liverpool and Notts Forest, I did want to see the match.

           So on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), my mate,                   and

           myself set off for Sheffield by train.   We left Lime Street Station

           at about 1110 am (1110) and eventually arrived in Sheffield at about

           1.30 ptn (1330) or thereabouts.

           Although the train itself was a 'special' just set on for the

           foctball, we did seem to keep stopping for noapparentreason.       I

           think we were delayed by about half an horn:.

           When we arrived in Sheffield itself, we were escorted off the train

           station by Police Officers.   There were about four Officers on horses

           anc a few on foot who were stood on the road static as the horses

           guided towards Leppings Lane End.

           It was coming up to 2pm (1400) or just after by thetime wearrived at

           the Leppings Lane end.

           On my way to the ground I didn't see any supporters drinking alcohol
LACKEY                DAVID   ANTHONY                                   2


at all and I didn't see any fighting or drunkenness. We were all

having a laugh with the Police Officers on horseback and there was a

gocd atmosphere all around.

When we arrived at the entrance to the ground, it was already packed

with people.   I was surprised to have even got this far without a

ticket, because last year the Police were checking along the road on

the approach to the ground.

In front of the big blue railings there were quite a few Policemen

frcm the bridge to the shop, about 15 or so in all.    They weren't

blocking the way, they were just stood there.

They didn't seem to be checking tickets at all - one of them said to

me, "Either come in or fuck off."

He didn't ask to see my ticket.     I just walked past him along Leppings

Lare to see if anyone was selling any tickets.             ind myself

war.ted to buy one.

We couldn't get any tickets at all, so we walked back up to the

Leppings Lane entrance and sat on the bridge wall opposite the

turnstiles, by this time it was about 2.20 pm (1420) or thereabouts.

The crowds at the entrances to the turnstiles still

seemed packed. They weren't getting any better. It was chaos. There

was no organisation. Several Police horses were in amongst the crowd

but they didn't seem to be doing much good.

         left me on the wall and went back down Leppings Lane towards

the garage at the end by the station to try to get some tickets.

Whilst he was gone the crowd seemed to get bigger and it began to

spill out onto the road.

Abcut this time a Police Land Rover pulled up right by the shop.

There was just one Police Officer in it and he stood on the ledge of

the door with the door open and started to shout through a loud hailer
LACKEY                 DAVID   ANTHONY                                       3


to the Police on horses to 'Make a line across the gates.'

He kept shouting it over and over, but no one seemed to take any

notice, then he started to get angry.

I con't know whether they didn't hear him or what but they didn't do

anything.    It wasn't as if he was too far away frcm them.     I think the

Policeman shouting directions was a Senior one because he had braiding

or something on his cap.

I don't know what happened to him then because              came back to

where I was and had said that the gate had been opened.       So we both

thought we would go and get in.               still hadn't found us any

tickets.     We got down off the wall and went across the road past the

Policeman and joined the crowd.    We walked through the railings and

into the area in front of the terraces.       This area was busy but not as

much as it had been before.     There still weren't any queues at the

turnstiles. At this point            and myself split up and I headed for

a cate.     I followed the crowd basically.    The next thing I knew I was

at a large gate by the side which was open, so I went through the gate.

There were lots and lots of people all going through the gate with me

and none of us showed any tickets.       I didn't see any Policemen or

stewards on duty at the gate either outside or inside.       No one was

trying to close the gate. I was absolutely amazed the gate was open.

As soon as I was through the gate immediately in front of me I saw

the tunnel.     I noticed there was a couple of Policemen and two

stewards, I think, at the tunnel entrance. Everyone was walking past

them.     They weren't making any efforts to stop people going dewn the

tunnel. This must have been at about just before 3 pn (1500) when I

got to the tunnel.

I didn't really hang around in the yard area after going through the

gate.     I just went straight towards the tunnel but I didn't see any
LACKEY                 DAVID    ANTHONY                                        4


fighting or drunkenness and I didn't see anyone drinking alcohol.         It

still looked and felt like a normal Semi Final match.

As I got into the tunnel I felt it was more packed, but although it

was full the crowd was moving.      You had to go with the crowd though

and I was soon out into the terrace. At the end of the tunnel I went

into the right hand pen.       It felt packed, but I didn't realise it was

socn to get worse.     I went into the terrace and about three or four

steps down, I thought I would watch the match frcm there.      The goal

was slightly to my left and I would have got a good view. By this time

the players were out on the pitch warming up.

When I first got into the terrace I had enough space around me and was

fire.    Gradually I felt myself being pushed further forward by the

crowd behind me.     Then it must have been about kick off time, 3 pn

(1500), when there was a surge forward very fast and I found myself

richt forward, about six foot frcm the front fence onto the

pitch. I had also been pushed across a bit, as I was more or less in

between a gate in the front fence and the right hand goal post.       I

must have gone down the gap in between the crash barriers because

there was nothing in my path all the way to the front.

When we stepped it was absolutely packed, my right arm was pinned to

my side but my left arm was up.      All I could move was my head.

I expected the crowd to move backwards as it usually does if there's a

surge forward, but it didn't it just stayed as packed.       That's when I

wanted to get out.

At the back everyone was singing, and at the front people were

shouting for help and to stop the match.

Although I was only about six feet frcm the front there seemed loads

of people in front of me, between me and the fence.

I knew they were having problems because I was myself.       I could hardly
LACKEY                 DAVID    ANTHONY                                          5


breathe in, there wasn't enough room.

It seemed like ages before anything happened, then I saw a lad getting

through the gate at the front, but to my horror a policeman pushed him

back into the terraces.    People were shouting all around me.          There

was a lad next to me on my left.          I said, "We're going     to      diehere",

and he replied, "Yes, I know."

There was a middle aged man in front of me who was turned to the right

so I could see his face.       He was saying something about his son,

over and over.    I didn't know what to say.      I said, "Drag him up."

He said he couldn't.     I didn't know what to say, he was very upset.

I shouted through the railings to the police that people were dying in

there, but they took no notice.        Everyone was shouting       it      to them.

I didn't say anything else because it was just getting             harderto

breathe.

The man in front of me who I mentioned earlier, his face was going

yellow, then his head slumped forward and I knew he was dead.            I don't

knew how, just the way he was, his face.

I vould describe him as being about 30 to 40 years old.          He had dark

shortish hair with a moustache.       He was quite tall, about six foot I'd

say.     It's hard to judge because he was on a lower step than me.         He

was a well built chap.     I have since recognised a picture of him in

the Liverpool Echo on the Monday 17th April 1989 (170489), after the

incident.     I recognised it was him.

In amongst the crowd as I looked around I could see lots of people who

I thought were dead.     Their heads were slumped forward and the colour

of their faces was a yellow and blue colour.         I don't know what

happened to that man I didn't see him again until when I opened the

paper the few days afterwards. I think he was there by me, but I

thcught I was going to die myself so my attention was elsewhere.
LACKEY                DAVID   ANTHONY                                      6


I just didn't look.   From the newspaper I found out the mans name was

Themas HOWARD frcm Runcorn.

The crowd was still just as tightly packed and there were about four

Police Officers shouting for everyone to move back.    They were

standing on the concrete bit of the fence.    Obviously there was

nothing we could do, the people at the back didn't realise what was

happening.

A few Police climbed on top of the fence when they realised what was

happening and began pulling people out, but because it was so packed

it was hard.

Eventually after what seemed like ages, I saw the gate to my right

open, there were police by it trying to pull people out and everyone

was just climbing out.   The crowd was so tightly packed that people

frcm behind were walking over the crowd to the front to get out the

gate.

One lad had his knee or arm on my shoulder trying to get up and

towards the fence.    I had to push him off me because I was going dewn.

I knew if I fell I wouldn't be able to get up again.

Later I saw           in the next pen to my left. He was climbing over

the fence onto the pitch.     I shouted to him for help but it was no

gocd.

Gradually we started to get more room and the crowd swayed to the left

anc lots of people fell over, I turned around and there was a lad

behind me who had fallen too.     Seme lads grabbed him and as he got up

he grabbed me to help me to my feet and pulled me backwards out of it.

There was loads of room behind me and I moved back, that's when I saw

so many people just dead on the floor all around me, that's why we

kept falling over, we were falling over them.

I just switched my mind off at that point and kept telling myself not
       LACKEY                 DAVID       ANTHONY                                       7


       to look around but to keep going.            I headed back towards the tunnel

       anc went back through the way I had coroe. My head was banging as

       if it were about to explode and I was shaking as though I was going to

       collapse.     I walked round for a bit then sat down.        Then I went into a

       nearby shop and the man there gave me a drink and a tablet.            I then

       wer.t to look for             ind eventually I found him.

       At the match I was wearing blue jeans and trainers and a green

       sweatshirt thing.     I have got black hair and am about 5'11 tall.

       Throughout it all I got slightly injured, I had bruising to my ribs

       anc chest plus under my arms and the back of my legs was bruised too.



       One thing I would like to add is that it could have been prevented if

       there had been proper controls and organisation outside the ground

       before the match.    The FA could have put more thought into the end we

       were given.    We have got far more supporters than Notts Forest.

                                      D Lackey



                                                                      D LACKEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

9        TIME:               DATE:    050689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC
                                                                       STATION

NAME            DAVID ANTHONY
                LACKEY

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 20

OCCUPATION:     UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070889                                              D A LACKEY (SIGNED)



          Further to my statement dated the 5th of June 1989 (050689), today at

          Stanley Road Police Station, I was shown photographs by PC WATSON and

          WPC         of the West Midlands Police Force.

          I can recognise the man I stated in my first statement Thomas HOWARD

          he is on photograph ref no PR1, 12A he is to the right of Gate No 3 in

          Pen No 3, he is wearing a blue jacket, which has Red flashes on the

          shculder.   On the next photograph PRl, 13A, I am standing directly

          behind him, my head is turned to the right I also recognise Mr HOWARD

          on the following photographs PRl, 14A, PRl, 15A, PRl 16A, PRl 17A,

          PRl 18A, PRl 19A, PRl 20A, PRl 2LA.

          I then viewed a photo album marked PR2, on photograph No 8, I can be

          seen at the front of Pen 3 to the right of the gate, Mr HOWARD is no

          longer in the shot, I also appear in photographs 9, 12, 22, Mr HOWARD

          does not appear in any of these photographs.

          I vcas aware that Mr HOWARD'S son was with him and must have been close

          by to him in that pen, but I did not see him at any point.

          I have also viewed video footage but I have been unable to recognise

          myself or Mr HOWARD on the film.
        LACKEY            DAVID   ANTHONY                       2


        D IACKEY



                                            D A LACKEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                                    2365
                                                                   9/89 STATION

NAME:            DAVID ANTHONY
£                LACKEY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 20

OCCUPATION:      UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 201089                                                 D. LACKEY (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Semi Final at

           Hillsborough Football Ground Sheffield.   When we first got there, we

           sat on the bridge by the Leppings Lane Entrance.

           My mate                was with me.

           We eventually got into the ground, when I think it was Gate 'C' was

           opened.   We went through the tunnel and then got separated, but I got

           into Pen 3 and stood near the back because of the people crushing in

           behind me.   I quickly got pushed to about six feet frcm the front at

           the perimeter fence.

           The crush around me was so great I just could not move anything other

           than my head and eyes.   This was just before the match started.

           Everyone around me and myself started to shout and scream at the

           Policeman who was standing on the pitch side of Gate 3 facing towards

           us.

           We screamed for him to open the gate, but he just took no notice of

           us, when it was obvious people were already dead, and he could see

           this. Eventually the gate opened and a lad went to go through but the

           Policeman pushed him back into the crowd.
       LACKEY               DAVID   ANTHONY                                      2


       I thought that was our last chance and thought I was going to die

       because I could not get my breath.

       I said to the lad next to me "We are going to die here" and he replied

        "I know we are", I could see a number of people in front of me already

       dead.

       A number of Policemen then arrived and started shouting and waving for

       us to get back, but we just could not move.

       I wish to complain about the Police Officer on Gate 3. He should have

       opened the gate when we asked him because it would have definately

       saved the life of some supporters if he had have done so.   It seemed

       ages before he opened it and then he pushed the one lad back into the

       crowd.

        I received injuries to ray ribs arms and legs and was bruised all over

       ray body.

                                         D. Laskey

                                                            D. LASKEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    S. BEECHEY D/SUPT 360

®FICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                     2367
                                                                            STATION

NAME:           LESLIE
                JONES

ADDRESS:
                                        1ERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 51

OCCUPATION:     SECURITY OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160489                                                      L JONES (SIGNED)



           My son Richard was b o m on 5th October 1963 (05101963).     I last saw

           Richard on Saturday 8th April 1989 (080489).      For the last four years

           Richard lived in Sheffield, his last address there being

        _____ Sheffield.

           Richard's girlfriend was Tracey COX of

                                    She has been Richard's girlfriend for about 7

           years, during which time I have seen her on a regular basis.         Because

           of Richard living in Sheffield I do not know the name and address of

           his doctor.    Similarly with Tracey.     Richard has not recently

           received any kind of medical attention.       I do not know about Tracey.

           At 2.45 am (0245) Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) I attended the

           Gyirnasium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough,

           Sheffield, and there identified the body of my son Richard to PC2220

           BRCMLY.     I similarly identified the body of Tracey COX to PC579

           ZIEWNSKE.
        JOKES             LESLIE                               2


                                            L   JONES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:      160489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                   2369
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          LESLIE
£              JONES

ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

A ® / DATE OF BIRTH: 51

OCCUPATION:    SECURITY OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150889                                                   L JONES (SIGNED)



           I have today been shown a number of photographs by Inspector LAYTON

           and PC COWIE of the West Midlands Police.

           In photograph reference number MWL10/34A I recognise ray son, Richard,

                                   and Richard's girlfriend Tracey COX.

           I have been shown three photographs reference numbers DEI/6, DEl/33

           and DEl/34. I am satisfied that they show ray son Richard.

           I have been shown a photograph reference number SMIR1/117. The person

           being looked at by a police officer looks very much like Richard, but

           I cannot be absolutely sure in this case.

           I have also seen two photographs reference numbers SMR1/128 and SMR1/

           151 where someone who I believe to be Richard is seen holding the

           fence looking down.    Again I cannot be absolutely sure.
        JONES              LESLIE                             2


                                             L JONES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:      150889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     M LAYTON INSP 9364




                                                                  2371
                                                                            STATION

NAME:          LESLIE
A              JONES

ADDRESS:       I
                          LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 52

OCCUPATION:     SECURITY OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 301C89                                                      L JONES (SIGNED)



           I have today been shown Video Footage taken at the Hillsborough

           Disaster shown to me by Police Sergeant Killoch and Police Constable

           Cofcie of the West Midlands Police.

           On Video Tape (Ref MAPI) (Exh          ) at time reference 14.56.32.16 I

           car identify Tracy COX in the bottom left comer of the screen, she is

           alive and well in the Pen.

           L Jones




                                                                     L Jones SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:     PS6818 J. KILLOCH

             TIME:            DATE:      301089

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:       J. KILLOCH PS6818

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                      2372
                                                                     12/89 STATION

NAME:            LESLIE
                 JONES

ADDRESS:
                             LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

ACT / DATE OF BIRTH: 52

OCCUPATION:      SECURITY OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 021189                                                     L JONES (SIGNED)



           I irake this statement on the understanding I may have a copy today.

           On 19 October 1989(191089) I wrote to Mr K.S. ANDERSON, South

           Yorkshire Police and informed him I wished to make complaints against

           soire of his officers.

           My specific complaints are as follows;

           1) Against Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD, that he;

           (a)   Failed to acquaint himself with the planning and problems

           related to the control of the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest

           Serri Final on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).

           By this I mean he failed to pre-plan correctly and that he did not

           give himself the knowledge necessary to control a football match of

           this nature.

           (b) He failed to monitor the crowd numbers packing into Pens 3 and 4.

           By this I mean he should personally have ensured the number of people

           in those pens only reached a safe level.

           (c) He failed to act when it became obvious that Pens 3 and 4 were

           overfull as he had an excellent viewpoint frcm the Police Box above

           the Pens.      By this I refer to the fact he could actually see himself



                                                                                      2373
JONES                  LESLIE                                            2


the pens and that in addition he had the use of television monitors.

My feeling is that by 2.45 pm (1445) and certainly at the latest

2.50 pm (1450) he should have recognised Pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded.

(d) He failed to make provision for fans coning through gate 'C'

after he had given the order for the gate to be opened.    By this I

mesn he should have controlled the disposition of those fans by using

the Police Officers under his control.

(e)   Failed to act when it was obvious that people were in distress.

It is my contention he did not use his other Senior Officers to good

effect in order to co ordinate the disaster.    Also he failed to

act himself in a way he in his position should have.

(f) He attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable at the

Grcund and others, that is, representatives of the Club, the F.A and

the Fans themselves regarding the origin of the order for gate 'C' to

be opened.

I irean here that Mr DUCKENFIELD led those referred to to believe the

Supporters had forced the gate when he had in fact given the order to

open the gate.

2) Against Superintendent Roger MARSHALL, that he;

(a)     failed to control and filter fans away frcm the immediate

vicinity of the turnstiles even after 1417 hours when it was obvious

he had lost control of the turnstile area.     I base this on the fact

that Superintendent MARSHALL I believe knew he had a problem at 1417

hours. Therefore he should have acted at this time and certainly not

later than 1430 hours to restrict the flow of fans in Leppings Lane on

the approach to the turnstile area.

(b) This leads to my second complaint against him that he gave no

actual order to restrict the approach of those fans, or after 1430 to

actually stop the fans entering Leppings Lane.
JOKES                  LESLIE                                              3


3) Against Superintendent Roger GREENWOOD, that he;

(a)     failed to carry out his assigned duty by placing himself in a

position by the players tunnel.     He had a radio and by using his eyes

he should have been aware of the dangerous situation and controlled
his officers accordingly.

(b)     failed to give instruction to his officers to monitor the Pens.

By this I mean that prior to the match he should by briefing have

informed his officers to monitor all of the pens for overcrowding in

relation to crowd safety.

(c) Was totally ineffective       in mounting a     rescue.By thisI mean he

was at ground level and made      no attempt to    organise the Police

Officers in a manner which would have helped bring about a successful

rescue operation.

(d)     failed to send officers   to the rear of Pens 3 and 4 to relieve

pressure.     It is my view he was in control      of thisarea andhe should

have sent officers to the back of Pens 3 and 4 to monitor the

situation once he knew that Gate C was being opened and supporters

would be allowed in.     I believe he would have been fully aware of this

frcm the transmission of his personal radio.

Finally it is my contention that my complaints against all three

officers and the failings I have highlighted were responsible for the

death of seme if not all of those that died in the Hillsborough

disaster.

L JONES
        JONES               LESLIE                            4


                                             L JONES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     M J POSTER DCS6930




                                                                  2376
                                                                         STATION

NAME              LESLIE
                  JONES

ADDRESSs
                           LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 52

OCCUPATION:       SECURITY OFFICER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 231189                                                   L JONES (SIGNED)



           Further to the previous statements that I have made to the West

           Midlands Police, on the 23rd November 1989 (231189), I was shown by

           Inspector LAYTON and PC WATSON a section of video referenced MAPI.

           At a reference number 14.56.31.04 I can confirm that my son Richard

           JONES is shown on the picture.   He is to the left and near to Tracey

           COX.    His position is as indicated by the number 63 on a photocopy of

           the video print at that reference, shown to me.   L JONES.

                                                                  L JONES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
p         PLACE

             TIME:              DATE:   231189

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE            M LAYTON INS9364




                                                                                     2377
                                                                      3/89 STATION

NAME:             EDWARD
                  SPEARRITT

ADDRESS:
                         RUNCORN

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:       TAXI DRIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                 E SPEARRITT (SIGNED)



           I am Edward SPEARRITT of                           Runcorn.      I have lived

           at this address for about the past eighteen years and am employed as

           a taxi driver.     My immediate family consists of my wife Janet

                                   Adam of late.

           Adam was b o m on June 13 1974 (13071974).     In Liverpool.    He attended

                                                                          School.   Adam

           has always been a fit and healthy lad

                                                          Adam's doctor was our

           family doctor, his name is                     - the surgery address is

                                               Runcorn.

           I have been following Liverpool Football Club virtually all of my

           life and have taken Adam along with me since he was about five years

           old.    On Wednesday 12 April 1989 (120489) I collected one ticket from

           Anfield which was a standing ticket, I was able to obtain this because

           Adam was given a voucher by a friend at school.      I was able to get a

           second ticket off Tony CURRAN.     I planned to attend the Cup Semi-Final

           at Hillsborough with my friends

                   Liverpool, Anthony CURRAN of                     ^Liverpool, and my
SPEARRITT              EDWARD                                                   2


son Adam.    We planned to get to the match in           car.

On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) Adam and myself left heme to meet

           nd Anthony at about 11.55am (1155).    We walked a short

distance to the                                                 Runcorn,

arriving about five minutes later.    We met            and Anthony outside

the pub and then went inside.            and Anthony had a pint of lager

I had a half pint of lager and Adam had a glass of cote.        After ten

minutes we left the pub and made our way by car towards Sheffield.

The route comprised of joining the M56 at Junction 11. We headed for

Stockport and travelled along the Snake Pass and made our way into

Sheffield.    We arrived in Sheffield City at around 2 pm (1400).          We

left the car about half a mile away from the ground and decided to

walk because we were unable to find anywhere else to park.         There was

a lot of traffic about but I wouldn't say it was excessive in the

circumstances.    We walked towards the ground it was obvious which way

to go as there were supporters all walking in the same direction in my

opinion the amount of supporters was just normal considering the type

of game.     Whilst we walked to the ground everything was normal, I

couldn't see anyone fighting pushing or being a nuisance nor did I see

anyone drinking beer from cans or similar.       We arrived at the Leppings

Lane end at about 2.30 pm (1430),              and Anthony went to a cornier

shop and I stayed with Adam.     There were no problems with the crcwds

at that time seme supporters were queuing at the turnstiles others

were milling about, there was one policeman on horseback at the

turnstiles, I met a friend passing by and talked for a while.         At

this time there was no need to be anxious about getting into the

ground my son and I had tickets and there seemed to be no problem.

           and Anthony had nade their way to the seated part of the

stadium because of the tickets they had bought.       After I had said
SPEARRITT             EDWARD                                             3


goodbye to         the friend that I had met, Adam and I decided to go

into the ground.   We walked through a blue gate fully expecting to go

through sane turnstiles and to be met by stewards and police, but

there were neither.   I couldn't see any officials at all.   I made my

way with Adam towards the front of the West Stand.    As we made our way

down the terrace there were very few people inside.    We were able to

make our way unhindered to the front of the terrace.   We stood

directly behind the goal right up to the blue fencing, at this time

I could see one policeman on the pitch but there could have been

more.   I couldn't see anyone on the terrace drinking or misbehaving.

Soon afterwards the Liverpool team came out and started kicking

about, I think it was about 2.50 pm (1450) by this time.     I said to

Adam, 'The boss man is playing'. I was referring to Alan HANSON.

Adam acknowledged me and then I became aware of the immense amount of

pressure building up behind me, I instinctively knew that something

was wrong.   The pressure suddenly became so great that I was unable

to turn around to see what was happening.   Adam was in front of me

and was getting crushed.   I knew that the situation was serious and

so I began to being on the fencing in front of us in an attempt to

attract the attentions of the policeman who I mentioned earlier.

There was a gate about an arms lenghth away to my right, I screamed

to the officer to open it but he just looked at me and seemed to take

no notice.

I tried to lift Adam up above my head so that I could get him over

the fence, but the pressure behind me was so great that I was unable

to get a grip of him.   After that I lost consciousness, when I came to

I was in a Hospital bed.    I remained in the Northern General Hospital,

Sheffield, until Tuesday 18 April (180489), where I had been placed on

a ventilator.
       SPEARRITT              EDWARD


       When Adam left home with me on 15.4.89 (150489) he was wearing a blue

       and white tracksuit top, green corduroy jeans and white 'NIKE'

       training shoes, to my knowledge he wasn't wearing a watch or any

       jewellery.     I believe that                received all of Adam's

       clothing.

       When I was discharged from the hospital, I was missing items of my own

       clothing which consists of a ski jacket with white sleeves blue trim,

       the rest being basically green, it has a zip up front and a 'Crew

       neck' type collar, a pair of size 6 Oxblood shoes, a gents quartz

       watch with an analogue face and steel bracelet, and two semi-final

       tickets for the Liverpool Nottingham Forest game with the stubs still

       attached.

                                                         E SPEARRITT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                    PC!




                                                                                2381
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          EDWARD
               SPEARRITT

ADDRESS
                        RUNCORN, CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 41

OCCUPATION:    SELF EMPLOYED TAXI DRIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100789                                              E SPEARRITT (SIGNED)



          I sm a married man and I reside at the above address with my wife and

          fairily, I am the father of Adam Edward SPEARRITT, who was b o m on 13.

          6.74 (13061974) in Liverpool.

          On 15th April, 1989 (150489), Adam and I went to the FA cup Semi-Final

          at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, where Liverpool were to play

          Nottingham Forest.   We got into the terrace behind the goal at the

          Leppings Lane end of the ground at about 2.40 pm (1440).      I think

          I was in the area referred to as Pen 4 with Adam.   We were

          immediately in front of the perimeter fence at this location.

          I vcas wearing a pair of black trousers, a cotton zip up jacket, green

          coloured, the sleeves are white, only from the wrist to just above the

          eltow.    The jacket is bottle green on the bottom section and almost a

          blue or green blue on the top section.   There is a white band about a

          1/4" (quarter inch) wide, just a little over the top half of the

          jacket, this also continues on both sleeves and on the back of the

          jacket.    On one sleeve, the left one, is a circular cotton badge,

          green coloured with a white background and the words 'ICE BREAKERS' a

          green, dark open crew neck sweater, I wore under this jacket.      I wore
SPEARRITT            EDWARD                                               2


lace-up size 6 ox blood shoes.

My son Adam was dressed in a white jacket with blue collar, a blue

kargaroo on left breast area, and a series of narrow blue lines

rurning across the back of the jacket, in the middle area.    There are

narrow blue vertical lines running down the front of the jacket from

the area of the shoulder. In addition there is a 2" blue line running

the length of each sleeve and at the back of each one.   Adam also wore

a pair of green corded trousers, a rust coloured sweater and a pair of

'Nike' white trainers, with the name and logo in red.

As a result of the disaster at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989

(150489) my son Adam died.

On Monday 10th July, 1989 (100789), at my home address I handed to

PC's BEI.iL and HORRELL, of the West Midlands Police, one colour

photograph of my son, passport type, taken this year.    This photograph

is a good likeness of my son Adam SPEARRITT.   I gave a second

photograph, taken of myself in Paris.   In both pictures, Adam and I

are wearing the jackets that we wore to the match that day.

I understand that these pictures will be used to assist with the

visual identification of Adam and I in the football crowd.

I further understand that these two photographs will be returned to

me, once such identification, or otherwise, has been carried out.
        SPEARRITT         EDWARD                                    3


                                              E SPEARRITT SIOffiD
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:        100789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                                        2384
                                                                        STATION

NAME          EDWARD
              SPEARRITT

ADDRESS
                       RUNCORN, CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 42

OCCUPATION:   TAXI DRIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020889                                             E SPEARRITT (SIQffiD)



          Further to my previous statement dated 28th April 1989 (280489), I

          have today been shown a number of video tapes and photographs by

          Inspector LAYTON and PC WATSON of the West Midlands Police.

          I have been unable to positively identify myself or my son Adam on any

          of the material shown.

          I can say that having viewed the material, I am reasonably satisfied

          that we were in Pen 4.

          I have indicated on a map where I believe we were, but I cannot be

          absolutely certain.

          I have indicated on two photographs PR2/H/30 and PR2/H/21 a person who

          I fcelieve might be me, but again I cannot be certain.
        SPEARRITT           EDWARD                                 2


                                              E SPEARRITT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:      020889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     M LAYTON INSP9364




                                                                       2386
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          EDWARD
A              SPEARRITT

ADDRESS:
                         RUNCORN,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 42

OCCUPATION:    TAXI DRIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 290989                                                E SPEARRITT (SIQffiD)



           I am the father of Adam Edward SPEARRITT aged 14 years who died when

           we both attended the semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest held at the Hillsborough Football Ground Sheffield on the 15th

           April 1989 (150489).

           I have made previous statements to the West Midlands Police regarding

           the loss of my son and the injuries I received.

           I wish to make a specific complaint as follows:

           1. That a Police Officer who I believe to be PC ILLINCMDRTH of the

               track side serial neglected to discharge his duty in that he

               failed to open gate 4 in the perimeter fence despite my loud

               appeals directly to him and his close proximity to our position.

           I consider PC ILLINGWORTH'S failure to act had a direct bearing on the

           loss of my son and the injuries I received.

           E SPEARRITT

           S EEECHEY DSU360
        SPEARRITT           EDWARD                              2


                                           E SPEARRITT SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                                    2388
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           STEPHEN   PAUL
A               HENDRY

ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL.

Affi / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION: SHOP FLOOR ASSISTANT


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                  S HENDRY (SIGNED)



           I reside at the above address together with my parents.

           I have been a Liverpool supporter for all of my life.     I am not a

           seeson ticket holder but attend all of the heme games and as I work

           every other Saturday only attend away Cup games.

           For the Liverpool - Forest game at Hillsborough I obtained my ticket

           a 6 pound standing ticket for the Leppings Lane entrance from a friend

           who had a spare voucher.    I don't know his name but he is a friend of

                      who I went to the match with.

           I travelled to Hillsborough in a private car together with

           of                          Liverpool and                   I don't know

           there surnames or address's but        Irove. We left between 11.30

           (1130) and quarter to 12 (1145) and followed a Police route from one

           of the programnes along the M62, through Huddersfield and onto

           Sheffield. We didnt stop at all en route, but we were stopped by a

           Police Officer directing traffic in Sheffield for about 5 minutes

           before we got to the ground.

           We parked the car in Browning Rd at about 2.30pm (1430) and walked to

           the ground.    We walked down Halifax Rd and I saw about six Police



                                                                                      2389
hekdry                STEPHEN   PAUL                                        2


Officer in pairs at various places down the road just standing about

and not apparantly doing anything.     I saw numerous fans with the odd

bottle of alcohol but none of them were drunk.     When we got to

Leppings Lane, there was just a mass of people and in the mass I

could see four mounted Police officers because of the amount of

pecple it was difficult to see their horses.                    |iac

tickets for the West Stand and North Stand respectively, and went off

to there respective seats leaving me and         to find our way into

the standing area.   We intending to go to turnstiles 'B' but couldn't

get near it and found outselves outside the turnstiles for the West

Stand seating area, we managed to force our way out of this area and

through one of the open main gates and into the Leppings Lane

standing area turnstiles at Gate B this was about 20 to 3 (1440).       I

saw a lad being helped up onto the dividing wall between the standing

and seating turnstiles and into the ground by a Policeman.     The

mounted officers were moving about slowly in the crowd then swinging

them round causing people to panic about being trampled on.     There

were 2 outside the main gates and 2 in the fans waiting at the

turnstiles for the terraces.    We eventually after a lot of crushing

and pushing manage to get through the turnstile and into the ground

the ticket man took my ticket from me at the turnstile and gave me

back the stub which I still have.      Upon entering the ground I saw no

Police or stewards directing us or anything like that, we weren't

even searched.

Inside      went to the toilet and I waited outside there were plenty

of people about but not crushed or anything as I was able to bend

dofcn and do my shoe lace up, with no trouble at all.          :ame out

of the toilet and we walked down the tunnel together.      We were able

to walk through quite easily and found ourselves in Pen 3 near the
HEKDRY                STEPHEN   PAUL                                      3


back, it was quite packed then at about 5 to 3ish (1455) so we

thought we'd try to move down a bit out of the back, and before we

could move we were caught in a huge surge from behind us and I just

saw the Forest team coming out onto the pitch.    As I was being pushed

down to the front of the Pen, the crowd was so strong it turned me

round so I was facing away from the pitch.   I couldn't see anything

except a mass of people and I manage somehow to grab hold of my mate

     and we both turned back to face the pitch.    I had my wallet in

my inside chest pocket and as I went to make sure I hadn't lost it

another surge pushed me onto a chap in front and I was crushed from

all sides, I was totally unable to move in any direction except for

being carried with the crowd, in these waves and surges that were and

hac occurred.   The man in front of me had long hair and a cigarette

on, and I remember trying to keep out of the way of his cigarette by

moving my head so he didn't b u m it, he dropped the cigarette and

then I was pushed closer into his hair and was unable to breathe, my

mates elbow was stuck in my ribs and I was totally unable to get my

arrrs out to do anything.   I began to scream and panic and I thought I

was going to die.   I know that the teams were out and playing and had

kicked off because although I personally couldn't move I was being

jostled by the mass and every now and then I caught a glimpse of the

pitch and the players. All of a sudden I heard a roar go up as if

Liverpool had scored then it died down as if we'd missed, I later

found out it was a shot deflected off the bar, as this roar went up I

was pushed further towards the front by another surge and still being

crushed against same different people.        was still with me I

could see him, and the sweat was pouring off him, I'd see him take a

breath then this head would flop down and then he'd lift it loosely

for another breath.   I could just touch him but was unable to reach
HEKDRY               STEPHEN   PAUL                                      4


because my arms were stuck against me.   I started screaming and

shcuting "I can't breathe" and my attention focused on the gate at

the front of the terrace, the air was really thick around me and if I

could have got air it would have been like nothing to help me at all

it was awful.

I just couldn't breathe and it was so hot I just broke out in a

terrible panic and the more I panicked the less I could breathe, I

was still being pushed towards the front and I could see same lads

getting over the front fence onto the pitch.   One lad straddled the

ferce on one rail and leant in to help people out of Pen 3, he

mar.aged to get a few out by grabbing their hands but a lot couldn't

lift their arms up for him to reach them so he began shouting then

screaming 'Push back Push back'.   We shouted screaming at the

Policeman at the front of the fence 'open the gate' 'let us out'.

The Policeman did nothing except shout at the crowd 'push back' I

thought he could have opened it to let us out but he didn't, he did

nothing.   I saw a few more fans get over the fence and also saw that

play on the pitch was still going on and that it was now at Leppings

Lar.e end of the pitch.   We were still screaming at the Bobby to open

the gate and he still screamed push back, I saw one lad get over the

ferce and the Policeman grabbed hold of him by his collar and his

belt and threw him back into Pen 3.    The crushing then was still

getting worse and then my hearing began to fade.    I could still hear

but not very well.   I still saw people getting over the fence but was

unable to move myself.    I got pushed towards a barrier which was

abcut two thirds of the way down Pen 3 and close to Pen 2 I could see

lying on the floor three or four lads with their eyes wide open and

bulging, their faces were purple and very dark under the eyes, there

bodies were contorted and there heads pointing up towards the
HEKDRY                STEPHEN   PAUL                                       5


crcwds. I didn't see any of them move.    I don't know if they were

dead or not.   One of them I'm sure must have been, because he was

lying on the steps and his face was looking down onto the steps.       I

sav several people walking on him not on purpose but because we were

still being crushed and pushed, this man wasn't screaming or crying

out at all.    The gap that had opened around these lads on the floor

just as suddenly as it had opened closed again, but during this short

tiire I was able to breathe again, I had lost my friend         and

again was crushed by the crowd I didn't see the lads on the floor

again.   I wanted to help those lads but I couldn't move my arms to

them at all.    I don't know if the players were still playing now but

I was still being crushed and pushed sideways towards Pen 2.     I was

still near to the barrier where I saw the dead lads.    I looked

towards the gate again and it still wasn't open the Policeman was

still standing there and across the pitch I could see more officers

coning towards us, I don't know if they were rushing I could only

make out the uniform.    I saw the other end of the barrier ccming

towards me and I managed to get my left leg onto the top of the

barrier, I was helped by soneone I don't know who to get up onto the

barrier and onto the dividing fence of Pens 2 and 3.      I remember my

left shoe was half off my foot and my lace got trapped around a fence

spike, the people in Pen 2 shouted 'Jump, we'll catch you' and I sort

of stumbled and fell into Pen 2, and I was in a total daze.

I saw a gate open in Pen 2 with a load of Police around it.     They

were dragging people out.    So I made my way towards it, I got to it

and saw two lines of fans passing what appeared to be dead or

unconeious bodies out of Pen 3 near to the front of Pen 2 and out

onto the pitch.

I remember seeing an old man of about 60, he had grey hair, receding
HEfcDRY                STEPHEN    PAUL


at the front and swept back, he was about 5'4 tall plumpish wearing a

brcwn coat dark trousers I believe they were black, I couldn't see

what he had on under his coat.       I can't remember anything else except

waking up lying on the pitch, so I must have passed out.      The St.

Johns Ambulance woman was standing over me with her hands on my chest

anc I woke up with a jolt.       I said to her 'What are you doing' and

the Policeman who was standing nearby said 'Stay there, you've been

through a lot, just lie down.' So I stayed there and lay on my side

to get seme air into my lungs.      As I turned over I saw a young lad

lying on the grass, he was about 8 or 9 years old, a Policeman was

checking his pulse and pumping his chest, but I could see the kids

eyes were shut and his face was a pale bluish colour and then they

stepped and I had to turn away.       I can't describe him at all, I only

save his face and know he was really young.     The St. Johns lady gave

me a drink of water and told me to stay where I was and she'd come

back later.     I stood up in a total daze and went dizzy, I saw a mass

of red and white and made towards it.       I found myself in the Forest

fans in the 1st block of the south stand.      They gave me a drink and I

stayed with them.     I didn't look back to the Pens at all while I was

in the seats.     I was far too upset and still trying to breathe

properly.     I eventually moved and made my way back across the pitch

towards the Liverpool fans, I was also worried about what had

happened to          I looked for his green shirt amongst all the

injured and couldn't find him.       I saw someone with an oxygen

cylinder, I think it was either a policeman or fireman.       I saw them

put the mask on the man on the ground and turn the cylinder on then

they kind of panicked threw the cylinder away and carried on doing

mouth to mouth.     I looked away and walked towards Pens 6 and 7 where

I saw         in the West Stand, he saw me and I managed to get up to
HEKDRY                 STEPHEN   PAUL                                       7


hirr eventually.   We stayed there for a bit and looked onto the Pitch I

saw a solid line of Policemen across the centre of the pitch.     This

lire opened up everytime someone was taken through.     We left

then and went to try to find            Leaving the ground we made our

way back to the car.

I would like to go back now to the people who were lying under the

barrier.   I would describe (1) as being medium build wearing a red

and white Rugby type top, I couldn't see what else he was wearing.

He had light brown slightly curly hair, collar length, he had blue

coloured eyes and was cleanshaven.      I think he was about 19 to 20 yrs

ole. (2) on the right of the barrier he had a red and white rugby

top on it was red at the top and white at the bottom he was lying

partly on his side so I couldn't see his face very well, but he had

dark brown hair like mine.    Prior to the game I had seen a friend of

mire Steve ROBINSON                                     Liverpool, he was

wearing a top identical to the one this youth was wearing and he had

shcrt dark hair like mine and I thought it might have been him but I

car't be sure.     Steve died during the incident at Hillsborough.

As for describing the other two who were under the barrier I'm afraid

I can't remember them.

I would like to say that if the Police man had opened the gate at the

becining of the crush, I don't think that there would have been so

mary deaths also if there had been any stewards directing people to

the different areas.     For a game that big and for the amount of

supporters that Liverpool have there were hardly any police to handle

the situation and I think this is totally wrong.
        HEKDRY           STEPHEN   PAUL                     8


                                          S HENDRY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                2396
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           STEPHEN   PAUL
A               HENDRY

ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 20

OCCUPATION:     SHOP FLOOR ASSISTANT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be falseor do not believe to be true.


DATED: 101C89                                                  S. HENDRY (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Semi Final between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest held at Hillsborough Football Ground.

           I have previously made a statement to the West Midlands Police on

        what occurred at the match.

           I wish to complain about the Police as follows.

           1.   I was standing in Pen 3 when a huge crush came from behind, the

           teams had not come onto the pitch at this time.     I started to panic

           because I was getting crushed and could not breath properly.    Together

           with others I started screaming at the Policeman who was standing

           facing us at Gate 3 to "Open the gate let us out"

           He just treated us with total complacency by waving his arms and

           shcuting Push back push back.    We could not move and continued to

           scream at him to open the gate, but he would not do so.

           2.   Seme supporters then started to climb over the perimeter fence

           and I saw one had reach the top and got half over.

           This Policeman from Gate 3 then went towards him, grabbed the lad by

           his collar and belt and pushed him back over the fence into Pen 3.

           I could not see if the lad had been injured in any way.     The crowd got
       HENDRY                 STEPHEN   PAUL                                     2


       really angry at this and I thought he should have helped the lad

       instead of pushing him back.

       After that I passed out and cannot remember much more what happened.

        I vvould describe the Policeman at Gate 3, as a fairly young officer

       clean shaven and possibly fair hair.    He was the only officer I had

        seen prior to these incidents in the area of Gate 3.

                  S. HENDRY



                                                               S HENDRY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE       S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                                                     2398
                                                                              STATION

NAME:          ANTHONY DENNIS
               LEIGH

ADDRESS:
               HUYTON, LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 24

OCCUPATION:    TYRE FITTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250489                                                    TONY LEI® (SIGNED)



           I am a single man living at the above address with my common law

           wife,                                         I am employed as a tyre

           fitter.    I am a Liverpool supporter and have been nearly all my

           life.     I am not a member of the Liverpool supporters club.      I have

           attended only Four games this season, the game at Hillsborough would

           have been my fifth.     On Friday 14th April 1989 (140489) my father,

                                                  gave me a ticket for the North

           Stand.    The ticket was for seat 100, row 'T'. The ticket was a sort

           of present for my birthday.      The cost of the ticket was #14.     On

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I left home about twenty five to

           seven (0635) in the morning.      I went to                        on the

                              Huyton with                     I'm afraid I don't know

           his address.     We waited about five minutes for              brother,

                                                         to turn up but he did not.     We

           then walked to his house and knocked him up.        We he came out we

           walked back to the                    and waited for a bus.    We caught the

           No 10 bus into Lyme Street.      We then made our way into the station and

           caught the 0816 to Manchester.      The ticket cost #11 return.     On the
LEIGH                  ANTHONY    DENNIS                                      2


train there was quite a few other supporters.       On the train it was

packed and it was a bit rowdy.      On the train there was a few cans of

beer but I did not have any myself.        At Manchester we got off the

train onto platform.    The platform was either 4 or 8. As we mingled

arcund on the platform with all the other supporters me mate,

brought a ticket for the game.      The ticket was for 'B' turnstile at

the Leppings Lane end of the ground.              paid for #14 for the

ticket off another fan.     On this platform I met two other kids I've

never seen before.     One was called            The other was           We

hac a cup of coffee whilst waiting for the train to come in on the

other side of the platform.      After about 10 minutes the train to

Sheffield came in. Before the train came in there was an announcement

saying the Sheffield train was delayed.        When it came in all five of

us got on the train.     The train was supposed to stop at various

stations to Sheffield but just after we moved off there was an

announcement on the train saying it would stop at the next station and

then it would go straight through to Sheffield.        The train stopped and

nuirerous people got off.    The train carried on but there was no

excessive noise or shouting.      There were still several people around

with a few cans of beer but no drunkeness, it was a bit early.        At

Sheffield we got off the train and went into the walkway, there was

abcut 40 or 50 of us that got off the train.        At the ticket barrier we

were stopped by some Policeman who wouldn't let us through.

Eventually a couple of coppers came and shepparded us from the ticket

office to another exit.     We were made to wait for about 20 minutes.

There was lots of coppers about and then a double decker bus came and

the Policeman made us get on it.        There was no other way we were going

to leave the station.     We p>aid a pound for a return ticket.    The bus

tock us to Leppings Lane and we were allowed to get out.         The time was
LEIGH                  ANTHONY   DENNIS                                         3


abcut eleven (1100) or just after. The five of us joined up again and

we tried to get         a ticket.   We went up to the ticket office at

the ground but it was shut.      The coppers made us go back.   We then

turned around and got seme bacon butties from a shop.       We then walked

up a hill to a little pub, the Horse and Jockey.       The pub was packed

inside and out with about five hundred outside.       We only had three

bottles of Pills, that's all we could get.       The fans were just singing.

The time we got to the pub was about twelve to quarter past twelve

(1200 to 1215).    I had to queue for 1.1/2 hrs to get served,

got his ticket for the Leppings Lane End.       I swopped my ticket with a

TA mate called            I left the pub with my mates about ten p>ast

twc (1410). Nearly all the fans at the pub left at the same time.          We

walked down to the ground getting there about two-fifty.        (1450)   When

we reached the Leppings Lane end it was just one mass of people, there

were several hundred there.      I saw no policeman about or any stewards.

The only policeman who turned up was a mounted one whan I know cames

frcm Liverpool.    He has got silver hair and moustache.     I've seen him

on the television since it happened, he's usually at the cop end.

The ticket I now had was the same of my mates.       We all made our way to

'B' turnstile.    We got though the crowd with some jostling.      I went

through the turnstile first, followed by my mates.       I wasn't searched

but my mates were.     I did not see anyone outside the ground drinking

anything.    Frcm where we got in you could see the ground through the

tunnel.     I did not see any Policeman or stewards.    All five of us

went through the tunnel and we went into Pen 4.        In the tunnel it was

very busy but there were no hold up®.       At the end of the tunnel there

was no stewards to be seen.      We all went to the left hand side

between a crash barrier and the side fence.        I stood there singing

and chanting like any normal game.        At this time we were all packed
LEIGH                  ANTHONY   DENNIS                                      4


but it was not uncomfortable.     I heard them announce the teams and

then it started, everything was getting tighter, more packed.       All of

us got split up by an almighty sway forward.      I then realised it

wasn't normal, you couldn't move, you couldn't even get your arms

out.     I saw a little lad facing the tunnel with his head over it and

his backed pressed against it, he was going under.      I nudged him and

talked to him.     I then saw next to him another man get pressed

against the barrier, he was screaming in pain.      The young lad was 14

to 15 years, wearing a denim shirt.       Hehad black collar length

hair.    The man I can't remember.   There was also a man and a girl

there.    The girl was red in the face.    There was then a lot of people

screaming at a copper on the pitch in front of the man.      They wanted

the gate open.    He just looked at us and walked away.    The pushing

got worse and I hit the barrier.     I remember pushing and the next

thing I remember was flying through       theair and cooing to right in

the left hand comer of the pen.      Ithink I climbed up the side

railings.     I remember lying on the floor with an injured right ankle

still in the comer of the pen.       I remember scmeone saying 'Get up or

you'll be trampled.' The next I remember was being carried onto the

pitch by two lads.     I lay on the pitch and two coppers came over,

picked me up and threw me into the hoardings.      The coppers said, "Get

hiir off the fucking pitch."



                                              I cannot identify the

Policeman who threw me off the pitch.
        LEIGH            ANTHONY     DENNIS                       5


                                              TONY LEIGH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                                      2403
Incident    102   190390 OP227         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                        STATEMENT NUMBER   S21A

                                                                           Station

fl^name            LEIGH

Forenames          ANTHONY DENIS

Age                24                      Date of birth

Address
                   HUYTON, LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

Occupation         TYRE FITTER

Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hair type

      es                                   Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                     Accent

 Number of Pages

 Dated             080689                                                    Signed


           I make this statement to my Solicitor, Mr Keith LEVIN of Keith I^vin &

           Co, and in relation to the treatment that I suffered at the hands of

           the South Yorkshire Police, and also the behaviour of the Police that

           I witnessed, on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).

           I travelled to the match with my two friends,

                   who are brothers, and who both live at

           Huyton, Liverpool, L36.    We caught the normal train from Liverpool to

           Sheffield.    It was our intention to have a pleasant day out, and to

           spend seme tine in Sheffield City Centre before going to the match.

           The train arrived in Sheffield at 10.30 am, (1030), and after we got

           off the train, problems started immediately.     We found that along with

           other Liverpool supporters , we were physically herded like what I can

           only describe as cattle.    We were prevented by the Police from leaving

           the railway station, although we wanted to do so.

                                                                                       2404
                                                                  pact:    2
                                                                  S21A

Along with other supporters at the railway station, we were forced

aboard double decker buses which had been laid on to ferry fans from

the railway station to the ground itself.   I felt that we had no

choice whatsoever other than to board those buses.     I would go as

far as to saying that had we not agreed to board those buses, then

we would simply have had to caught the next train back to

Liverpool.   In effect, there was no choice at all.    Accordingly, we

got on these special buses and were taken to Hillsborough.     The return

fare was #1, and again we were given no choice, we had to pay the

fare or go home.

We arrived at the Hillsborough ground at about 1100 am (1100). We

wandered around the Leppings Lane area, simply to kill time.     We went

into a little shop and bought something to eat.       I did not see any

trouble whatsoever. At about 2.20 pm (1420), the three of us returned

to the Hillsborough ground to go in.   We queued up to get through the

turnstiles for about 10 minutes.   Although it was crowded outside the

turnstiles there was no real problems.    The queueing was not orderly,

but the crowd was not hostile or badly behaved in any way. There was a

bit of jostling, as everybody wanted to get into the ground.     A Police

horse arrived and went straight into the middle of the crowd, and

after the Police horse arrived, then the queue became more orderly.

As I have said above, we got through the turnstiles with no problems.

I was not wearing a jacket and there was a Police Officer on the

inside of the turnstile.   He did not search me, but both of my friends

who were wearing jackets were searched.

We went through the tunnel which was straight ahead and when we came

out of the tunnel at the other side, we went to the left and stood at

the back of the pen.

Things began to get really bad when the teams got on the pitch.

Turning now to my specific complaints against the Police:


                                                                               2405
                                                                 pact:   3
                                                                 S21A

Firstly, when the crush was really bad, I saw young children being

crushed against the crash barriers about fifteen feet back from the

main perimeter fence.    I saw youngsters being trampled on and girls

screaming.    There was one Police Officer in uniform who was walking up

and down the running track on the other side of the perimeter

fence.   I was screaming to him at the top of my voice to open up the

gates.   Lots of other people around were also screaming at him, but he

appeared to be ignoring what was being said.    Eventually he turned and

he mouthed seme words, which appeared to me to be offensive and

dismissive.    I believe that what he was mouthing was 'shut up you

dickheads' or something along those lines.     Certainly, the Officer

did not apear to want to help in any way and did not seem to be

interested in what was going on inside the pen.

Secondly, after I myself had been thrown over the perimeter fence and I

landed on the other side in a heap, I was then carried onto the

pitch by two or three lads who were supporters who had come out of

the ground. A couple of Police Officers came over to me and they

picked me up, in what I can only describe as a rough manner. They

threw me into some advertising hoardings at the side of the pitch, and

at the same time they were saying words to the effect 'get off the

fucking pitch' or 'get him off the fucking pitch', and am not

absolutely certain which of these two versions were used.     However,

the impression that I got was one of aggression towards me by those

two Police Officers, and certainly they were not treating me gently

or kindly, bearing in mind the state that I was in.

After I had been thrown into the advertising board by the above two

Police Officers, I could hear people in the crowd shouting to the

Police Officers not to be so rough and that there were problems.

After that, I had little involvement with the Police at Sheffield.

I would add that I have no complaints whatsoever with regard to the


                                                                             2406
                                                                      PAGE
                                                                      S21A

       West Midlands Constabulary or the Police Officers who investigated ray

       case, and in fact they treated me very kindly and with the upnost

       courtesy.




                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   060889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

m  OF REPORT




                                                                                2407
                                                                  2/89 STATION

NAME:          ANTHONY DENNIS
£              LEIGH

ADDRESS:
               HUYTON, LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION: TYRE FITTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 101089                                              TONY LEIGH (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to Hillsborough Football

           Ground Sheffield to watch the Semi Final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.

           As a result of what occurred at the match I have previously made

           statements to my Solicitor Keith Levin and Co., and also to the West

           Midlands Police.

           My specific complaints are as follows.

           1.When I arrived at Sheffield Railway Station with other Liverpool

           Supporters, we were herded towards the exit and penned by the Police

^          and treated like animals.

           We were kept like this for at least half an hour whilst they got seme

           Nottingham Forest supporters off their train on the other platform.

           The Police seemed very oppresive and just would not let us move away

           at all.

           There were officers on horses, seme with dogs and large numbers of

           them, but I could not individually describe them.

           We were told if we wanted to go to the match we had got to get on a

           double decker bus & pay #1 cash for the return fare, otherwise we
LEIGH                  ANTHONY   DENNIS                                        2


were not being allowed out of the Railway Station.       We had arrived at

the Railway Station at about 10.30 am (1030) and by the         time we gotto

the ground    it was after 11 o clock (1100).

2. When I     was in the ground I was halfway in the terrace in       Pen 4.

Before the    teams came out it was gettiang very crushed,      and a lot of

people started to panic.    Together with a lot of other supporters I

started to shout to a Policeman who was walking along the perimeter

of the pitch, to open the gate.     He ignored us so I started to scream

and swear at him to open the perimeter gate and get us out.       He then

turned his head towards us and seemed to mouth "Shut up you

dickheads".   I could not hear him because of the tremendous noise.        I

would describe this officer as middle aged, well built with a grey

full moustache and greying hair which I could see at the back of his

helmet.   I feel that this officer should have helped us but just

didn't want to know.

3.   Because of the crush I must have blacked out and the next thing I

remember was being helped and climbing over the fence into the alleway

dividing Pens 4 and 5.     I fell from the top and lay on the floor and a

number of people stumbled over me.        I was told to get up but I could

not because I had hurt my right ankle.       Three lads then carried me

onto the pitch by the left side of the goalposts.        I looked up and

could see Bruce Grobbelar, the goalkeeper.

Two Policemen in uniform then came up to me, grabbed me by my jeans

and shirt, and the one on my left hand side said "Get him off the

fucking pitch". I was lifted up by both of them one on either side

and thrown into the hoardings. I was more bundled than thrown, but I

must have then got up and stumbled back onto the pitch.



                                      I have been shown a video by
         LEIGH                    ANTHONY   DENNIS                                   3


         Knowsley Social Services which shows me stumbling on the pitch & the

         time on this video was 1505.       I cannot describe the two officers

         because at the time I was very hazy and in pain frcm ray ankle.

         These officers were very aggressive and should have helped me instead

         of throwing me into the hoardings.




         My injuries were caused by falling of the fence.       I do not think I

         received any further injuries by the two officers bundling me off the

         pitch.




                  Tony LEIGH




                                                                 TONY LEIGH SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

            TIME:               DATE:

® T N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:           S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                                                         2410
                                                                  2/89 STATION

NAME          ANTHONY DENNIS
              LEIGH

ADDRESS
              HUYTON, LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:   TYRE FITTER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080390                                              TONY LEIGH (SIGNED)



          Further to my previous statement of 10th October 1989 (101089) in

          which I mentioned I had been shown a video by Knowsley Social

          Services, I have today been shown a Video Ex No MRE2 in which I have

          identified myself behind the goal towards the right goal post.   I am

          wearing a white shirt.   This must have been after the incident when

          the policemen had bundled me off the pitch.

          The time shown on the video is 15.03.14.

          I cannot identify the two policemen on the video.   Tony Leigh



                                                              TONY LEIGH SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE

            TIME:            DATE:      080389

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:       S BEECHEY

OFFICERS SIGNATURE          S BEECHEY D/SUPT 360




                                                                                  2411
                                                                    13/59 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
               RUNCORN, CHESHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 52

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 271C89                                                             (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989(150489) together with

                            jiverpool who is my brother and

                  «je went to Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield to watch the

           Seni Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

        We arrived at the ground at about 2.20 pn( 1420) and made our way to

           the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           There was no orderly queues and a crush developed in front of the

           perimeter gates.    We were getting pushed against the angle of the iron

           railings by the side of the river.     I have marked my position on

           the Plan of the ground Ex. No.

           I saw a mounted police officer and his horse being pushed around by

           the crowd.   I was a short distance frcm him and moved out of the way

           because I did not want the horse to tread on me.

           I then saw a man in a red cardigan shouting something at the mounted

           Policeman.   The Policeman then leaned over and cuffed him across the

           face and head.

           I have seen this Policeman before at Anfield, he is a regular at the

           Liverpool matches and I have never seen him put a finger on anyone
                                                                                    2


        before.    I have been shown a Video Recording of the incident Ex. No.

              and I have pointed out the man in the red cardigan and the

        Policanan cuffing him.    The number on the video time was 1147.    I

        eventually got into the ground by Gate 'C'.

        The mounted Policeman was out of order he should not have lost control

        and cuffed the lad in the red cardigan.

        The other thing I wish to say is about two uniform Policemen with

        helmets who when the first few supporters started to go onto the pitch

        one big bloke staggered on the pitch by the goalpost.    These two

        Policemen then got hold of him by his arms and part threw and bundle

        hirr off the pitch onto the track beside the grass.

        The Police had just misread the situation and should not have handled

        hiir in this way.    They obviously thought it was a pitch invasion and

        not through the people being crushed.



                                                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:       S. BEECHEY DSU

fc’FICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                     13/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                RUNCORN, CHESHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 53

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 210290                                                              SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statement of 27 October 1989 (271089) in

           respect of the supporter who staggered onto the pitch.     I would

           describe him as a heavy set youth around 24/25 years of age, and he

           locked rather bedraggled but this may have been due to him being

        crushed in the crowd.        I cannot describe the Policemen any further.



                                                                            SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

             TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         S BEECHEY D/SUPT




                                                                                     2414
                                                                   15/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:




Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 271C89                                                            (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 together with

                            Liverpool,

                                  Liverpool, we went to Hillsborough Football

           Grcund Sheffield to watch the Semi Final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.

           I parked my car and we made our way towards the Leppings Lane

           entrance to the ground arriving at around 2.40 pm. (1440)   We had got

           tickets for the North Stand so we made our way over to the left side

           of the perimeter gates over by the tobacconist Shop.   Because of

           the crush of supporters, we got separated with my

                            going between two mounted Police Officers on their

           horses, one of these being a female officer.

           I did not follow them but held onto a young lad about eleven years

           old who I thought was in danger of being trampled on by the horses.

           Just then a young man about fifteen years old try to go between the

           twc horses, so the male mounted officer tried to give the youth a clip

           arcund his head with the flat of his hand, but just then the

           crcwd surged forward me included, and I received the full hand slap



                                                                                    2415
                                                                                2


       across my face on the left hand side, knocking a cob I was

       eating out of mouth.   The crowd carried on surging and although I was

       trying to complain to the officer I got pushed forward and ended up

       against the corrugated gate.




       My complaint against the officer is that he had lost control and

        shculd not have struck out.   These actions inflamed the situation

        instead of controlling the crowd.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE

         TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    S. BEECHEY D/SUPT

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
                                                                    14/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                            LANCASHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 271C89                                                             (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) together with                   ray

           employee,                     we went to the Semi Final between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at the Hillsborough Football Ground

           Sheffield. We arrived in Leppings Lane at around two twenty and walked

           towards the ground.   As we approached the ground we split up because

                                         lad tickets for another part of the ground,

           mire being for the West Stand.    I turned the comer from Leppings Lane

           into the entrance of the ground which was a solid mass of supporters.

           I joined the queue and made my way along the wall by the river and

           within a minute or so the crowd had packed in behind me.

           For the next few minutes the whole crowd just swayed back and forth

           without any definate movement in any direction.    I was on the right

           hand side of the perimeter gates (As I have marked on the Plan of the

           Ground Ex. No.        when I saw two mounted Police Officers just

           outside the perimeter gates. Because of the tremendous pressure frcm

           the supporters the two mounted officers appeared to lose control.

           There was a lot of noise and shouting going on when I saw one of the

           mounted officers stand in his stirrups lean over and started clipping
          people around the head, I saw him do this at least twice, and also

          rerrember him pointing at scmeone before he clipped them as if he had

          warned them.

          The gates were then opened and I went through in the surge of

          supporters.

          I have today Friday 27 October 1989 (271089) been shown a video

          recording marked       indicating number 1137 on the top of the screen

          which shows the mounted officer striking someone and again at 1147

          when he again strikes out at somebody.




          My specific complaint is that the mounted officer had lost control and

          by his actions in clipping people around the head, enflamed the

          situation rather than controlling it.



                                                                          3I(3®D

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

            TIME:              DATE:

® T N E S S TO SIGNATURE:    S. BEECHEY D/SUPT

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                   2418
                                                                    16/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                            LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 171189                                                            (SIGNED)



           On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) I took                  to the

           Sari Final at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield.

        We arrived at around 2.20 pm (1420) and eventually got to our seats in

           the North Stand about eight seats from the dividing fence and Leppings

           Lare terraces at about 2.30 pm (1430).

           Just prior to the kick off when the players were kicking in, I saw

           four lads getting over the dividing fence from the terraces into the

           stand. All the crowd around me started to shout to the lads that the

           Police were coming.

           I saw one Policeman come from ray left and make his way towards the

           lacs on the fence.

           Three of the lads got over and made off into the crowd, but one

           appeared to be stuck on top of the fence.   He had almost got his whole

           body over but appeared to be caught by his clothing.

           The Policeman went up to the lad and started pulling at his trouser

           lec, but he could not get him down.   The Policeman then stood on the

           back of one of the seats reach over grabbed hold of the lad at the

           back of his shirt up by his neck and yanked him off the fence.



                                                                                     2419
The lad fell and hit his head and back on the back of the chair he

fell almost vertical and then fell to the concrete steps.   The lad lay

still on the floor and the crowd by this time were getting very angry

by what they had seen and started shouting at the Police.

The Policeman then got hold of the lad who was lying in our row of

seats, the Policeman being in the row in front.   He tried to get the

lac up by tugging at his shirt and when this failed, he put his head

in like a head lock and then got hold of the lads upper body to try

and drag him out.   The Policeman was being very aggressive in trying

to get the lad out and was determined to get him any how.

I told the Policeman to leave the lad where he was because he could be

injured and damaged his back. Other supporters were also shouting at

the Policeman to stop manhandling the lad.    The Policeman made no

corrment and just ignored us.   Another two or three Policemen then came

to him and spoke to the Policeman and tried to pull the lad up in not

such an aggressive manner.

One heard a message on his walkie talkie and all four officers just

left the lad lying on the floor and went towards the pitch.

Other fans then helped the lad by giving him a drink of Coke and

seeing he was alright. The lad just sat there and did not appear to be

badly injured.

My attention was then drawn to what was happening elsewhere.




He did not appear to be drunk but I don't know whether he had had a

drink or not.

The Policeman who pulled the lad off the fence was                 I

could see the number clearly on his uniform.


                                                                           2420
                                                                               3




        I wish to make an official complaint against this officer for the

        uneccessary force used against the lad and his failure to assist the

        lac who could have been injured.

        I do not wish to make any complaint against the other three officers

        whc came to assist.




                                                                      SIGNED

^J^IEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE

          TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE       S BEECHEY DSU




                                                                                   2421
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                             LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 42

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 190190                                                          (SIGNED)



           Further to my statement of 17th November 1989 (171189), although my

                                                                    was with me

           at Hillsborough and saw the incident that I described with the

           Policeman pulling the lad off the dividing fence from the terraces

           into the North Stand, I do not want him interviewed or any statement

           taken from him.

           My reason for this is that I do not want the disaster brought back to

           his memory.   I have marked with an 'X' on the picture (Ex No       , the

           position my seat was in in the North Stand.   Where the Policeman

           pulled the lad off the fence was in the row of seats in front of me,

           up against the dividing fence between the terraces and the North

           Stend which again I have marked with an 'X' on the picture (Ex No

                 When the lad was pulled off the fence he fell onto the seats and

           the back wooden part was broken.




                                                                                       2422
                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                    2423
                                                                   17/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                        MIDDLESEX,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 211189                                                             (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) together with

                           ________________ London, we went to Hillsborough

           Foctball Ground, Sheffield to watch the semi final.

        We arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at about 2.30 pm

           (1430) with seat tickets for the West Stand.   We went through to the

           turnstiles without too many problems and entered the ground.    We made

           our way up to the stand and eventually went to the toilet block at the

           back of the stand.   The time would be around 2.50 pm (1450) and I

           locked out of the window at the turnstiles and the gate which I now

           knew to be Gate C.

           I saw supporters climbing over the turnstiles and saw Policemen

           helping them down off a small flat roof.

           They then opened Gate C about three or four foot (3' or 4') to eject

           these supporters.    A surge of supporters then forced the gate further

           open and came through the gate.    I then saw a uniform policeman

           wearing a helmet force his way into this surge of supporters and punch

           one of the supporters on the side of the face with his right hand.

           The supporter who was quite a young man wavered for a short period



                                                                                     2424
        anc carried on into the ground.

        I then lost sight of what happened and went back to ray seat.




       When the Policeman hit the supporter we shouted for him to leave him

        alcne but it made no effect.

        I co not know whether the supporter had provoked the Policeman but if

        evidence came to light that the Policeman had not been provoked I

       would wish to complain about the assault he committed against the

        supporter.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                                                 2425
                                                                   7/89 STATION



•             1
NAME:

              -------------------
ADDRESS:       ______


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 131C89                                                            (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Semi Final between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest held at Hillsborough Football Ground,

           Sheffield.

           I rrade my approach to the ground from the Nottingham direction leaving

           the Ml motorway at approximately one o'clock (1300).   It took me about

           an hour and a quarter to reach a parking area near the ground.

           I arrived amidst thousands of Nottingham Forest supporters and there

           was no problems for them getting into the ground.

           I was then directed by a Policeman to Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           When we that is my myself,                     approached the

           turnstile and at about 2.25 pm (1425) the whole area was massed with

           supporters.

           As we got to the outer gates the Police were trying to split them in

           what I thought was to ease the crush in front of the turnstiles.

           Whi1st there a mounted Policeman tried to come between the gates and

           the supporters to stop the flow of supporters coming into that area.

           The Police horse went between me            and divided us.     I asked

           the officer if he could let             past him to rejoin us, but he



                                                                                     2426
refused to do so.   I then asked if              and I could rejoin

but again he refused.

I complained to him that it was essential I rejoined          but he

then started swearing at me and using abusive language.

I could understand his frustration in that situation but was still

surprised by his attitude.

The sheer weight of supporters then forced the horse backwards out of

the crowd and       rejoined us.

Fox something like the next twenty minutes we were pushed back and

forth towards the turnstiles then the outer gates in a tremendous

crush.

At that time the mounted Policeman had again cone into the crowd and

due to the crush he appeared to loose control of his horse and the

whcle of the time he was shouting abusively at the supporters and

leaning down from his horse and throwing blows at the supporters.      I

saw this at least five or six times.     This was presumably to get

pecple to move away from his horse, but in my opinion he appeared to

have lost control of himself.

I vcould have difficulty in identifying the mounted officer but he was

the only one in that area at the time.

Later when I saw television coverage of the disaster I saw the mounted

officer I am speaking about.

After we had left the ground I did see this officer with other mounted

officers on a traffic island by the main road at the junction

dividing the ground and a pjark.   I went over to him and made a mental

note of his number which I gave to West Midlands Police in a

questionnaire seme months ago.

My specific complaint against the officer was:

1. He had lost control of himself he was abusive and throwing punches
        at people.    In my opinion the incident with the mounted Police Officer

        is of a minor nature and it is far more important to take account of

       my written communication covering the whole afternoons events to

        allocate blame.

        I have written to Lord Justice TAYLOR and sent a copy to your Chief

       Constable in which I have expressed my views, and I would sincerely

        hope the full account is taken to attempt to ensure that a repeat of

        this type of incident could never happen again.

        I do not want a witchunt on individual officers but dreadful mistakes

       were made and they cannot be repeated.

                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        S BEECHEY D/SUPT 360




                                                                                   2428
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 301C89                                                          (SIGNED)



           Further to the written statement I made on the 13th October 1989,

           (121089) I have today Monday 30th October 1989, been shown a video

           recording Ex. N o . b y   Inspector 9364 LAYTON.

           During the recording I identified the mounted Police Officer who I

           have complained about at counter reference Numbers shown on the top

           right hand of the screen 10.18.22 to 10.29.17 then 10.35.04 then 11.

           35.22 to 11.38.03 and finally 11.41.01 to 11.49.20.

           It was not the incident that I mentioned in my previous statement but

           I am certain in my own mind that this was the officer I had the

           altication with.

           As far as the abusive language used by this officer was concerned,

           when I pulled        Dut of the way of the horse, I said to the

           mounted officer, "You want to get a grip of yourself."   He then put

           his finger towards my face about four inches away and said "Don't

           fucking tell me to get a grip of myself, or I will get a fucking grip

           of you."   I then said "That's charming behaviour from a Police Officer"

           He replied something like "Fuck off or I will fucking well have you."
                                                 2



•                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     S BEECHEY DSU




                                                     2430
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


AEDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 230190                                                R MCMAHON (SIGNED)



           Further to my statements of 13/10/89 (131089) and 30/10/89 (301089) in

           relation to the incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground,

           Sheffield on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489),



                                     concerning the abusive language used by the

           Mounted Police Officer.




                                                                                     2431
                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          1IME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     S BEECHEY DSU360




                                                    2432
                                                                             STATION

               JOAN
               MCBRIEN

AEDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 49

OCCUPATION:    TEACHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250489                                                  J McBRIEN (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address.     I am a married woman



                                                  I married my husband on 19th

           October 1963 (191063).   We had three children to the marriage.

           They were all boys and John McBRIEN was the youngest. John was b o m

           15th February 1971 (15021971).    He attendee]^

           where he was studying for 'A' levels.    He had never had any illnesses

           apart from normal child illnesses. The family Doctor_________

                                          had never seen him to treat him.

           John was a member of Liverpool Supporters Club and he obtained a

           ticket for the semi final football match between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest on Saturday 15th April 1989 (15041989).     On that

           day John went out of this house near to 10.45am (1045) to catch the

           bus from the Victoria Hotel in Holywell.     When John left the house he

           was wearing a blue shirt, blue jeans, white vest and underpants, red

           scarf and grey socks and a pair of black shoes.     John went to the

           football match on his own.

           The next tine I saw John was when I identified John to the Police at



                                                                                       2432 A
       MDERIEN              JOAN


       4.30pm (1630) Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) at the Sheffield

       Medical Centre.

       On Tuesday 25th April 1989 (250489) at about 2.30pm (1430) I

       identified the clothing to DC              as that of my son John.       I

       also identified to DC             one black shoe (Item No.           )

        (Exhibit No.           ) as that shoe as being worn by ray son when he

       left ray house to go to the football match.

        I authorise the Police to keep the shoe until this enquiry is

       completed but I must stress I would like that shoe returned later.



       J KcBRIEN




                                                              J McBRIEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     250489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                    2432 B
                                                                     STATION

               JOAN
               MCBRIEN NEE HUGHES

ADDRESS:
                         r N. WALES

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H:

OCCUPATION:    TEACHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070689                                            J MCBRIEN (SIGNED)



           States




                                                            J MCBRIEN SIGNED

             TAKEN
             PLACE

             TIME              DATE:    070689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE          G PARKES




                                                                               2432 C
                                                                   18/89 STATION

               JOAN
               MCBRIEN

AEDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 50

OCCUPATION:    TEACHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 061289                                               J MCBRIEN (SIGNED)



           States:

           Further to my letter dated 7th November 1989 (071189) to the Chief

           Constable of the West Midlands Police, I do wish to make a formal

           canplaint against officers of the South Yorkshire Police arising frcm

           the Hillsborough disaster in which I lost my son, John MCBRIEN.

           My first complaint is against Superintendent MARSHALL who was in

           charge of the Policing arrangements in Leppings Lane.   It is

           That he failed to prevent a build up of Liverpool supporters at the

           turnstiles in Leppings Lane by inadequate policing arrangements.

           The basis of my complaint is that I feel that he should not have

           closed the road off to traffic that barriers should have been placed

           in Leppings Lane either side of the ground, to filter out non ticket

           holders and persons who had consumed too much alcoholic drink, before

           the situation became too bad.

           My second complaint is against both Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

           and Superintendent MARSHALL and is closely related to my first

           complaint. It is:

           That the police should not have opened the gates under any
       MCERIEN                JOAN                                             2


       circumstances giving unlimited and uncontrolled access into the

       football ground by supporters.

       The basis of this complaint is that I don't think Superintendent

       MARSHALL should have asked Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD for

       authority to open the gates, nor should Chief Superintendent

       DUCKENFIELD have authorised there opening as this is against the club

       rules and completely contrary to the police operation that day.

       These are my only complaints and I believe that the facts clearly

       indicate complete recklessness, on behalf of the officers that I have

       named on the day.    J McBrien


                                                           J MCBRIEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE         APPLETON PS 7844




                                                                                   2432 E
Incident   102   280390 QP8064         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                         STATEMENT NUMBER   S404C

                                                                  18/89     Station

 Surname          MCBRIEN

 Forenames        JOAN

 Age              50                       Date of birth

 Address
                            , CLWYD,

 Occupation       TEACHER

 Telephone

 IC               Height                   Build

 Hair colour

^^tir type

 Eyes                                      Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses          Use                      Accent

 Number of Pages 14

 Dated             240190                                                     Signed


           FOP THE ATTENTION OF

           MR J. MERVYN JONES M.SC.

                              EVENTS RELATING TO JOHN.

           John, our son, left home on the 15th April 1989, (150489) just in time

           to catch the Deeside Liverpool Supporters Club Coach fran outside the

           Victoria Hotel at Holywell, Clwyd.
           He travelled to the match with a ticket and consumed no alcohol on

           that day.
           The coach arrived at Sheffield at approximately 2 p.m (1400) and John

           and a number of other young supporters made their way to the ground.

           I was told that the organisation this year was totally different to

           that of last year when there were a number of control points to check

           for tickets before the fans arrived at the main gate and turnstiles.

           In fact, on a number of occasions in the past, ticketless fans were
                                                                  PAGE    2
                                                                  S404C

taken to a specified area where they listened to the match on a

transistor radio and so did not pose a problem.

This year there appeared to be no plan whatsoever operating at the

Leppings Lane end and widespread chaos developed when the road was

closed, following Mr Marshall's request, at 2.30 p.m. (1430)    It was a

very foolish move as fans were then able to spread out in all

directions and checks on them became impossible.

Fans with tickets were being pestered all the time by fans without

tickets asking if they had any spare tickets.     It appeared that the

police did not understand what 'spares' meant as they completely

ignored the situation and made no attempt to filter out the fans

without tickets.
By the time John and his friends managed to get through the main gate,

there was utter confusion with fans being helped over the turnstiles

and walls by policemen and one policeman on the roof of the

turnstiles.   Also ticketless fans were attempting to bribe the

turnstile operators and so were hindering the flow through the

turnstiles.   These people should never have been allowed through the

main gate!
Added to this existing confusion, was the fact that the tickets

themselves were incorrectly numbered or lettered.

John and his friends were being pushed and crushed at the turnstile

area at about 2.45 p.m. (1445) because no-one bothered to insist on

queues being formed; instead the crowds were allowed to develop into

masses.As one of John's friends suffers with asthma and started to

have an attack, they quickly moved out of the crush at the turnstiles

and went as far away as possible to stand outside the exit gate C

where there were not too many people at the tune.     They went there

because they felt safer and at that point they were not even bothered

 abcut seeing the beginning of the match.   They were concerned only
                                                                PAGE        3
                                                                S404C

with their own safety.

To their amazement, Gate C suddenly opened to eject a fan and police

officers there at the time mistakenly thought that the gate had been

opened in response to Mr Marshall's request and so they told John and

his friends, along with other fans, totalling about 200, to go in.

John and his friends looked back and saw the gate closing behind them

and felt safe, though surprised that they had been let in that way.

They went to the lavatories and then quickly made their way down the

tunnel, after reading the large sign 'standing' above it, and took up

their positions in Pen 3.

No sooner had John and his friends got into their places in Pen 3,

than thousands of people came pouring down the tunnel after Gate C was

opened again and left open.
The facts clearly indicate complete wrecklessness on the part of those

put in responsible positions on that day.   John should never have died

at 18 - this was completely and easily avoidable!   We can never

recover from the mistakes made by incompetent people who were in a

position of responsibility on the 15th April 1989 (150489) at

Hillsborough.   The price all the bereaved families have had to face

is a colossal one!   This is something that no-one can put right but

we do hope that justice will be done!

If only Police Constable Buxton's request to have the Kick-off post­

poned had not been rejected by Mr Duckenfield, I'm sure there would

not have been that terrible tragedy.

Instead, Mr Marshall, in more authority than P.C. Buxton,

requested that the exit gates should be opened to get rid of the

crowd surging around him, which he had allowed to develop.   That

was not just a serious mistake but a fatal one where John was

concerned!   I'm sure John would not expect that gate where he was

standing to suddenly open and allow him in - in to his death!      I will
                                                                  PAGE    4
                                                                  S404C

always think of that gate as the 'Gate of Death'!

Mr Jack Stone, a gatenvan at Gate A, pleaded with the police not to

open the exit gates as it was against Club Rules and said, "All hell

will break loose if you open them!" and it surely did!

He refused to open his gate and stood firmly by it but was eventually

compelled by the police to do so.   Here was a man who knew his job -

he knew that exit gates were not to be opened until after the match;

he knew what the right decision was - if only the power had been in

his hands instead of Mr Marshall's and Mr Duckenfield's.

He obviously cared for the fans and knew the dangers.    It was such a

short time after he pleaded with the police not to open the exit

gates, that people died inside the stadium and that wonderful and

intelligent son of ours was changed from a healthy, happy and lively

person into a dead body labelled No 68.

Although John was carrying his identity in the form of a Provisional

Driving Licence, I went through the trauma of not knowing anything

until about 4.30 a.m (0430) on Sunday 16th April, (160489) when I

tried to identify him.




1'ir sure neither Mr Marshall nor Mr Duckenfield deliberately caused

John's death, but by their irresponsible actions they certainly caused

it!   It was clear to John and his friends that it was absolute

psandononium at the turnstiles with fans constantly being allowed to

get over the wall and this is why John and his friends moved away to

relative safety as they thought, but instead were actually invited

into that cage by the police.

Then John was allowed to be crushed by a terrific force with no

police-officer in the ground doing a thing about it!
                                                                   PAGE    5
                                                                   S404C

OBSERVATIONS MADE FROM THE EVENTS

I feel the Police were too complacent and just hoped that everything

would go alright in 1989 (000089) as it had done so in 1988 (000088).

But there were differences in 1988 (000088).    There were controls well

before the turnstile area when Chief Superintendent Mole was in

overrall command and Mr Greenwood was in control of the Leppings Lane

end.   In 1988, ticketless fans were taken to a certain area and a

transister radio was produced and they were able to listen to the

match there.But in 1989, Mr Duckenfield thought that measures like

that were unnecessary.    He did not see the necessity to filter out

ticketless fans, hence the excessive build-up at Leppings Lane.

Fans with or without tickets were all together and then when they

reached the perimeter gate i.e. the main entrance gate, they were

allowed in there, too.     It was the duty of the police to keep

ticketless fans out of that area.    Only ticket-holders should have

been allowed through those gates and only a manageable number at a

given time.    That was the point where very strict control was

necessary but it was completely absent on that day and people moved

into the concourse before the turnstiles, not in queues but in masses

and a chaotic situation was allowed to develop.    Who was to blame for

all this?     The police for not operating a sensible system.

Even the closing of the road at 2.30 p.m (1430) by Mr Marshall was a

corrplete mistake in my opinion.    It has never been done before as it

is a main route between north and south Sheffield.     The police should

have put moveable barriers along the pavements and that would have

kept fans only about four or five deep.     Once the road was closed, the

fans were able to take over the area completely especially as there

were no check-points.

The situation should never have been allowed to develop to such an

extent that fans could actually gain access to the stadium by climbing
                                                                 PAGE          6
                                                                 S404C

walls.   This happened because there were no orderly queues at the

turnstiles.   The situation was so chaotic at 2.45 p.m (1445) with

police control breaking down completely, that certain officers

actually helped fans climb over the walls because of the pressure.         I

believe at about this time, 200 police officers were allowed to go

for a lunch-break at a time when reinforcements were needed so badly

at Leppings Lane.   Soon after this time, Mr Marshall requested that

the exit gates be opened to allow anyone in.    I can only take that

to mean that 'Crime really does pay'.

My interpretation of that is if you turn up at a match without a

ticket, having had a lot to drink, you don't need to worry as you will

get in if you use a bit of pressure.    That is how I saw the situation

and I feel it was completely wrong.    Mr Marshall should have asked for

reinforcements and postponement of the game as these people were only

pushing to get in by the crucial time of 3 p.m. (1500)

Mr Marshall at no stage requested Mr Duckenfield or suggested to him

the possibility of delaying the Kick-off.    It never entered his mind

to make such a request.   He just believed that the game had to start

at 3 p.m (1500) come what may.   That seemed to be his main concern.

The fans outside the turnstiles would have quietened down if they knew

the game was starting later - that would be obvious to anyone!     I

think he just wanted to see the back of those people and felt once

they were out of his sight, they wDuld also be out of his mind.       He

never considered for one minute the consequences of his requests. It

was a cowardly act!

In spite of the F.A spending #50,000 on the policing of the match at

Hillsborough, the police operation proved completely ineffective and

their actions on that day can never be forgiven.

I feel Mr Marshall made two rather unusual requests.     On both of

these occasions, Mr Duckenfield wondered why he was making such
                                                                  PAGE      7
                                                                  S404C

requests but after pausing on both occasions agreed to them.      I feel

the best policy is always, 'when in doubt, don't do it'! Mr

Duckenfield showed lack of real leadership because he gave in to

sorreone in a lower position to himself and had doubts about the action.

Then, knowing the action he had taken was wrong, he tried to blame

scrreone else vie:   the fans themselves, for the blunder.    I think the

twc main qualities of a good leader are honesty and integrity and by

telling lies Mr Duckenfield proved to be the worst type of person to

be an effective leader.    But it is Mr Marshall, who led that extremely

poor and weak leader astray by making such requests and he is equally

to blame for that terrible tragedy.    I believe Mr Duckenfield didn't

want to go against Mr Marshall's wishes as I feel he respected and

liked the man and had probably known him a very long time.      But if Mr

Duckenfield had been a really good leader, he would have refused those

requests.   Instead, they decided to open Gate C and allow thousands in

all at once just minutes before Kick-off without either of them

considering the consequences of their actions.

Attempted bribery of turnstile operators was very much in evidence and

contributed very much to reducing the movements of legitimate ticket-

holders through the turnstiles.    Why on earth hadn't these people been

dealt with much earlier i.e. along Lappings Lane?

Although there was a monitoring system, a computerised system, no-one

frcm the inside asked Mr Marshall, nor did Mr Marshall ask those

inside, as to the numbers of people and the flow and the like frcm

2.15 p.m (1415) to 3 p.m. (1500).
But to make the fatal mistake of opening Gate C,    where   John was

standing was completely unnecessary.     It was the gate furthest away

 frcm the turnstiles and there was no crushing outside of it as is

 thought by many people.   People believe it was opened to relieve the

 crush at that point; the crushing was talcing place near the turnstiles
                                                                PAGE       8
                                                                S404C

and gates A and B in actual fact as that was the usual place to get

into the ground.

The situation was very chaotic at 2.45 p.m (1445), when John moved

away from the turnstile area, with one of the ground control

Inspectors, Inspector Bennett, up on the roof of the turnstiles.      He

was not sending people back but was effectively helping them over or

allowing them over.    He was doing this because people were being

crushed near the turnstiles.    But this could look a bit odd to people

further back and they would feel no-one was in charge as indeed no-one

was! There are also allegations of police-officers even asking for

cash from the fans to allow them in!

So, in my view, the policing at Hillsborough in April 1989 (000489)

was pathetic in every way; but to open the exit gates and let anyone

in is unforgivable as it is the main action that caused the deaths of

95 people and injuries to many others.    It is a colossal tragedy!

Mr Marshall surely knew that to open those gates would have gone

against everything that the police had set out to achieve in that

drunks would have got into the ground, the hooligan element would have

got in, the non-ticket holders would have got in and that would have

conrpletely put an end to all the good work that they had done to

prevent those things happening.

So why did Mr Marshall request that it be done and why did Mr

Duckenfield agree to the request? Why didn't they have the match

delayed or even abandoned if they couldn't keep control through lack

of a sensible sytem?

Whatever the outccme of all this, they will always be guilty in my

eyes!

Mr Marshall did not consider at all what would happen when the gate

was opened and neither did Mr Duckenfield.    In fact, no-one bothered

to do anything and thousands of fans were allowed in just before Kick-
                                                                 PAGE     9
                                                                 S404C

off.   It's not surprising that Mr Duckenfield did not tell anyone, the

stewards for instance, as the police action was contrary to the Club

Control System.   In other words, it was wrong and to do it proved to

be a very wreckless act as very soon after the opening of Gate C, all

officers were called to the inside as fans were bringing out dead or

injured comrades in alarming numbers.
It was the sheer volume of people, allowed in all at once, just before

Kick-off, that caused the disaster.     By letting in everyone, was a

very dangerous thing to do and it undoubtedly led to overcrowding and

crushing and death.

If a sensible system would have been in operation on that day, then

our son, John, who like many other fans had acquired a ticket for the

match and had no alcohol in his blood, would have been safe to watch a

gaire of football on that fine Spring day.    Instead , innocent people

died or were seriously injured.



HOW THE TRAGEDY HAS AFFECTED ME.
             PAGE 10
             S404C




SUMMING UP




                       2432 O
                                                                 PAGE 11
                                                                 S404C

Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield in the presence of Mr Walter

Jackson, Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, told Football

Association and Club Officials in the boardroom after the disaster,

that the fatal crush on the terraces had been caused by the opening of

a gate, allowing thousands of fans into the stadium just before Kick-

off.   He did not, however, tell the people present in the boardroom

that he had given permission for the gate to be opened.   In fact, he

lied because he knew he had taken the wrong action and said the gate

had been forced in by the fans.   Of course, there would have been a

disaster if the fans had really done that;   but there was still a

disaster when the police opened the gate!

Mr Marshall made an excuse as people always do when they have done

something wrong.   I'm not prepared to listen to his excuse!   He said

that he had to ask for the gates to be opened to stop the pushing

outside.   He should have dealt with the pushing where it was occurring

by delaying the Kick-off, not giving in to pressure as he did,

disregarding security.   The Police, through lack of organisation had

allowed that situation to develop and it wasn't surprising that fans

became inpatient when it was nearly 3 o'clock (1500) and they were

still not in the stadium.

Proper security should still have been maintained. The fans should not

have been allowed in without checks being made.

I think Mr Marshall feared only for his own safety and wanted to get

rid of those crowds as quickly as possible and gave no consideration

to the consquences of his actions.

As a result of the action taken, John, like many other victims, lost

his precious life with all that potential.

I feel no officer is 'above the law' and a Club Rule is a Club Rule!



                                  J McBrien (Mrs)
                                                     PAGE 12
                                                     S404C

                                (24.1.90) (240190)




                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                                               2432 Q
                                                                         STATION

NAME:           JOAN
                MCBRIEN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 50

OCCUPATION:     HOUSEWIFE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250390                                               J MCBRIEN (SIGNED)



        Today at my home I have been shown photographs by Inspector LAYTON and

        Police Constable          of the West Midlands Police sane of which I

           have viewed on a previous occasion.

           On photograph reference number         oday I can positively identify

        my son John McBRIEN on that photograph.    J McBRIEN.

                                                                J MCBRIEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

             TIME:            DATE:

^pTNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                   2432 R
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          ALEXANDER ROBERT      WALKER
£              FORREST

ADDRESS:       ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
               SHEFFIELD S102JF

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:     CONSULTANT CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 200489                                                 A FORREST (SIGNED)



           I em a registered medical practitioner and a chartered chemist.     My

           qualifications include the degrees of bachelor of Science, bachelor of

        medicine and bachelor of surgery, and the Mastership in Clinical

           Biochemistry.   I am a fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry and a

           mesrber of the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of

           Pathlogists.    I hold the posts of Consultant in Chemical Pathology at

           Royal Hallamshire Hospital and Honorary Lecturer in Forensic

           Toxicology to Sheffield University.

_          On the morning of 18 April 1989 (180489) I was handed a box by an

           officer who identified himself to me as Sgt              of South

           Yorkshire Police. The box contained 94 samples of blood each in a

           container with an appropriate preservative and each container being

           enclosed in a plastic bag labelled with a decedents's name and

           identifying numbers. The blood containers themselves were also

           lakelled appropriately.




                                                                                     2433
POFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                           2


(2C0489) these samples were analysed under my direct supervision for

ethanol with the results given below.       Ethanol is the alcohol present

in alcoholic beverages.

                                                      BLOOD ETHANOL




1.        HOWARD Thomas Anthony             ACJ8       20 mg/lOOml

2.        SHAHSIDES Inga                     DC7      None detected

3.        HARRISON Gary                      DC12     None detected

4.        RIMMER David                       DC4      Less than 10 mg/lOOml

5.        ASHCROFT Colin Mark                PHR15    None detected

6.        WHELAN Ian                         PHR13    None detected

7.        HENNESSY James R                   PHR11     35 mg/100ml

8.        HAWLEY David                       PHR6      None detected

9.        ASPINALL James Gary                PHR16     None detected

10.       BROWN David S                      ACJ5      15 mg/lOOml

11.       HARRISON Peter Andrew              TIB5      21 mg/100ml

12.       HAMILTON Roy                       TIB16     118 mg/100ml

13.       WAFER Colin                        DC8       None detected

14.       CHURCH Gary                        DM33      None detected

15.       RIMMER Carl William                ACJ3      144 mg/100ml

16.       MURRAY Paul                        TIB4      None detected

17.       DEVONSIDE Christopher Berry        PHR3      32 mg/100ml

18.       SMITH Paula Ann                    AFW1      None detected

19.       COX Tracy                          TIB10     None detected

20.       McCABE Marion                      DM32      None detected

21.       FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael        TIB14     None detected

22.       MATHEWS Brian                      TIB17     None detected

23.       BURKETT Peter                      DC5       99 mg/100ml
FOFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER


24.       ROGERS H C                        DM315    None detected

25.       CLARK Joseph                      TIB3     177 mg/100ml

26.       McALISTER Francis                 TIB6     None detected

27.       MCCARTHY Daniel Joseph            DMG6     18 mg/100ml

28.       ROBINSON S J                      TIB12    141 mg/lOOml

29.       HANKIN Eric                       DM39     132 mg/lOOml

30.       JOHNSTONE Alan                    DC6      34 mg/lOOml

31.       BURKE Henry Thomas                PHR10    16 mg/lOOml

32.       McGRATH Keith                     PHR17    None detected

33.       DELANEY J P                       ACJ9     38 mg/100ml

34.       OWENS Jonathon                    PHRl2    None detected

35.       JONES Christine Anne              PHR2     None detected

36.       TYRELL Kevin                      TIB2     None detected

37.       GLOVER Ian                        DC3      None detected

38.       EDWARDS C                         ACJ2     None detected

39.       TOOTLE Peter                      DM35     None detected

40.       MCDONNELL P                       DM312    172 mg/100ml

41.       HUGHES Eric                       REWl     32 mg/100ml

42.       HEWITSON Paul Anthony             PHRl     88 mg/lOOml

43.       WRIGHT Graham Shawn               TIB19    Less than lQmg/lOOml

44.       HEWITT Darren Carl                AFW2     Less than lOmg/lOOml

45.       JOYNES Nicholas                   DM31     72 mg/100ml

46.       BROWN Carl                        AFW4     83 mg/100ml

47.       BIRTLE David William              DM34     42 mg/100ml

48.       COLLINS Gary                      DM318    29 mg/100ml

49.       THOMPSON Patrick John             DM319    93 mg/100ml

50.       BROOKES Andrew                    PHR5     89 mg/100ml

51.       WILLIAMS Kevin Daniel             DM38     56 mg/100ml

52.       RFTT.T. Christopher Michael       DCl      Less than 10mg/100ml


                                                                            2435
FOFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER


53.       THOMPSON S                        TIB8     78 mg/100ml
54.       KELLY Anthony Peter               PHR14    None detected

55.       HEWITT Nicholas M                 DM316    None detected

56.       MATHER D W                        ACJ4     None detected

57.       TRAYNCR Martin Kevin              DM314    60 mg/100ml

58.       CLARK Paul                        TIB7     67 mg/100ml

59.       HORN G                            PHR4     55 mg/100ml

60.       TRAYNOR C J                       DM313    54 mg/100ml

61.       SEFTON Colin Andrew               MWL2     None detected

62.       GLOVER Barry                      AFW3     138 mg/100ml

63.       JONES R                           DM320    Less than lQmg/lOOml

64.       HICKS Sarah Louise                DM37     None detected

65.       PEMBERTON W Roy                   TIB9     None detected

66.       FOX Thomas Steven                 DC10     82 mg/100ml

67.       CHAPMAN Raymond                   DM310    91 mg/100ml

68.       McBRIEN John                      PHR7     None detected

69.       BARON Gerard                      ACJ1     None detected

70.       McGLONE Alan                      DC9      75 mg/100ml

71.       COPOL Stephen Paul                RDW4     49 mg/100ml

72.       KELLY Michael David               TIB20    None detected

73.       CARLISLE Paul                     PHRl9    61 mg/100ml

74.       BALL Kester Roger Marcus          ACJ7     None detected

75.       GODWIN D G                        DCll     None detected

76.       ANDERSON John Alfred              ACJ6     76 mg/100ml

77.       WILD Martin Kenneth               PHR8     None detected

78.       THOMPSON Peter Reuben             TIBI     None detected

79.       ROBERTS G J                       TIBll    79 mg/100ml
00




          BENSON David John                 MWLl     Less than lOmg/lOOml
o    *




81.       HOWARD Thomas                     TIB21    34 mg/lOOml


                                                                            2436
FOFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT    WALKER                          5


82.       STEELE Philip John                 MWL3      None detected

83.       GILLHOOLEY John Paul              TIB13      None detected

84.       BRADY Paul                         PHR21     13 mg/100ml

85.       LEWIS Carl James                   PHR20     None detected

86.       JONES Gary Philip                  RDW2      None detected

87.       O'NEILL Stephen Francis            PHRl8     None detected

88.       BENNETT Barry                      DC2       78 mg/100ml

89.       HICKS Victoria Jane                TIB15     None detected

90.       THOMAS David Leonard               TIB18     48 mg/100ml

91.       HARRISON Steven                    DMG17     30 mg/100ml

92.       HORROCKS Arthur                    RDW3      92 mg/100ml

93.       HAMMOND Philip                     DM311     Less than 10mg/100ml

94.       SPEARRITT Adam                     PHR9      None detected

(Ncte: mg/lOQml means milligrams            Jianol) per 100 millilitres of

blcod)




It is very difficult to more than make broad generalisations about the

likely alcohol consumption that would produce a particular blood

alcohol concentration in any one individual, or to predict whether or


                                                                                 2437
FOFREST              ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                        6


not that blood alcohol level would be associated with intoxication.

As a broad guide, an average man who consumed two pints of average

beer over 2 hours might well have a blood ethanol concentration, at

that time, of about 50 milligrams per 100 millilitres.    The state

corrmonly recognised as being drunk is associated with large variations

in the blood alcohol concentration.   For example whilst it is unlawful

to drive a motor vehicle when the blood alcohol concentration

exceeds 80 milligrams per 100 millilitres, I have examined individuals

with few objective signs of intoxication although their

blcod alcohol concentrations were in excess of

20C milligrams per 100 millilitres.   Such individuals usually have

problems related to the habitually excessive consumption

of alcoholic beverages.   On the other hand, I have seen many

individuals who were obviously impaired when their blood alcohol

concentration was below 100 milligrams per 100 millilitres.     It should

be noted that the degree of intoxication associated with a particular

blcod concentration of alcohol in a particular individual is usually

greater when the concentration is rising rather than when it is

falling. (Signed)   A FORREST

A R W FORREST, BSc, MRCP, MRCPath, CChem, FRSC.
        FOFREST          ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                      7


                                                       A FORREST SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:          DATE:   200489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                              2439
                                                                        STATION

NAME:         ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER
              FORREST

ADDRESS       DEPARTMENT OF CLINICAL CHEMISTRY,
              ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL, SHEFFIELD. S102JF

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION: CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090589                                                 A FORREST (SIGNED)



          I em a registered medical practitioner and a chartered chemist.    My

          qualifications include the degrees of Bachelor of Science (with

          honours in pharmacology), Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery

          awarded by Edinburgh University, and the Mastership in Clinical

          Biochemistry.   I hold the Diploma in Obstetrics of the Royal College

          of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists together with a Joint Conxnittee

          Certificate in contraception and family planning.    I am a fellow of

          the Royal Society of Chemistry and a member of the Royal College of

          Physicians and the Royal College of Pathologists.    I hold the posts of

          Consultant in Chemical Pathology to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,

          Clinical Lecturer in Human Metabolism and Clinical Biochemistry and

          and Honorary Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology to the University of

          Sheffield.

          This statement is intended to supplement my statements of 20 April

          1989 (200489) and 2 May 1989 (020589) and should be read in

          conjunction with them. In the process of analysing samples of blood

          ethanol, other volatile compounds may be serendipitously detected.

          The commonest of these is acetone, although others may also be seen.



                                                                                     2440
POFREST               ALEXANDER   ROBERT    WALKER                           2


It was apparent, in the course of analysing the blood samples obtained

at autopsy from the 94 individuals who died at or near the

Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April (150489), that many of than contained

significant concentrations of acetone and some contained significant

concentrations of aceltadehyde.

Acetaldshyde is a difficult compound to measure accurately in blood

sairples.   It may be generated spontaneously from ethanol after a

sairple has been taken, and it is quite volatile so even if the sample

has been taken with appropriate precautions it may be lost from the

container in which the blood sample has been placed.      There are

also problems with the standardisation of the assay.      These aspects of

the matter are discussed more fully below.

After the ethanol concentration had been measured in the 94 blood

sanpies, an attempt was made to quantitate the acetaldehyde and

acetone concentrations.     The results obtained are presented in tabular

anc graphical form below.    Note that all the concentrations are

presented in milligrams per litre and that where the concentration of

ethanol is low, either less than 10 milligrams per 100 millilitres

or "not detected" in my original statement, the results may be

expressed differently here.    Where the concentration of ethanol is

less than 100 milligrams per litre but more than a trace is present, I

have here expressed it arbitrarily, for purposes of statistical

analysis as 50 milligrams per litre.       Where only a trace is present I

have expressed the concentration as 1 milligram per litre.      For all

purposes, other than the purely scientific, the results given in my

statement of 20 April 1989 (200489) should be used.      Measurements of

1o k concentrations of ethanol in blood, below 10 milligrams per 100

millilitres, are quite imprecise.

Acetaldehyde is virtually only found in human blood samples after the
FOFREST               ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                          3


consumption of ethanol. Ethanol is metabolised by the body first to

acetaldehyde and thence to acetate.    Tables 1 and 2 and figure 7 show

the close correlation of the blood acetaldehyde and ethanol

concentrations.

It will be seen that the concentrations of acetaldehyde found are

quite high.    It is quite unusual to see substantial amounts of

acetaldehyde in blood samples sufcmitted for ethanol analysis either

in living or dead patients.    Peak blood acetaldehyde concentrations

in normal subjects drinking ethanol might be as much as 2 milligrams

per litre.    After drugs such as carbimide, which inhibit the

metalbolism of acetaldehyde to acetate, the concentration might rise

to 10 milligrams per litre.    Some subjects here have acetaldehyde

concentrations that are significantly higher than that (Figure 5).The

question obviously arises; "could the presence of such large amounts

of acetaldehyde in certain samples be an artifact?"      The main

mechanism by which acetaldehyde is generated in a blood sample

containing alcohol is as follows:     A proportion of the oxyhaemoglobin

in a sample is converted to methaemoglobin with the generation of a

superoxide radical.     This can in turn oxidise ethanol to acetaldehyde.

The stochiometry of the reaction is:

HbC2 >> MatHb + 02.

0 2 + 2 CH3CH20H -> 2 CH3CH0 + 2 H20

One haemoglobin molecule, fully oxegenated, contains 4 Hb02 subunits.

Blcod contains about 2 mmol/1 of haemoglobin.       1 mole of

oxyhaemoglobin could theoretically generate 8 moles of

acetaldehyde.    Thus theoretically, the complete conversion of all the

oxyhaemoglobin in a blood sample containing an excess of ethanol would

generate acetaldehyde at a concentration of 16 mmol/1.      That is 704

milligrams per litre.    In this instance, there is likely to have been
FOFREST              ALEXANDER    ROBERT   WALKER                           4


little oxyhaemoglobin present after death.    However, even so, it is

quite possible that a substantial proportion if not all, of the

acetaldehyde present in the samples could have generated post mortem

by not metabolic oxidation of alcohol, particularly as

the samples were placed in plastic vials with a large dead space,

containing air, above the blood sample.     It is still surprising that

one does not usually see such large concentrations of acetaldehyde in

the course of normal case work.     The reason may be that post mortem

sanpies are usually submitted in 20 millilitre universal containers,

filled to the brim and containing little dead space, whilst clinical

sairples are sufcmitted in "vacutainers" with a significant dead space

alteit with a low oxygen content.     In both cases there may be less

oxygen available to promote acetaldehyde formation.The acetone

concentrations found are probably not artifacts.       Acetone can arise as

a product of metabolism at times when glucose is not readily available

to cells or when stress hormones mobilise fat stores which are then

metabolised.   Normally, the presence of ethanol tends to inhibit the

production of acetone from the metabolism of fat, its presence

favouring the production of beta hydroxy-butyrate instead.       However

there are theoretical reasons for believing that, under circumstances

of extreme hypoxia, this mechanism would not operate and acetone would

be produced even in the presence of ethanol.        It is noteworthy that

there is little correlation between the concentration of ethanol and

the concentration of acetone in the blood samples examined here.

Acetone can be produced in large amounts during fasting.        It is

unlikely that this was a significant mechanism in this case.

Conclusions:

1) Whilst there are theoretical reasons for believing that significant

concentrations of acetaldehyde might accumulate in the blood as a
POFREST               ALEXANDER    ROBERT   WALKER                      5


result of the metabolism of ethanol during severe hypoxia, it is not

possible to state that the unusually high concentrations of

acetaldehyde found in some of the samples examined here are not an

artifact of sample collection.

2) The relatively high concentrations of acetone found here are likely

to be an indication of significant metabolic stress during the agonal

period.



Case No   age Years   ethanol   acetaldehyde acetc

 1         14           200            0        20

 2         39             0            0        10

 3         25             0            0        10

 4         39            50            8        48

 5         19             0            0        46

 6         19             0            0        30

 7         29           350       41            45

 8         39             0            0        84

 9         18             0            0        74
                                  -f
10         25           150            6        40

11         15           210            6        40

12         34          1180            8        23

13         19             0            0        25

14         19             0            0        20

15         39          1440            9        39

16         14             0            0        43

17         18           320            8        69

18         26             0            0        49

19         21             0            0        76

20         21             0            0        99


                                                                            2444
          ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER   6


21   34      0        0             7
22   38     10         3           22

23   24    990        10            8

24   17      0        0            30

25   29   1770        13           29

26   27      0        0            23

27   21    180        15           30

28   17    141        25           61

29   33   1320        25           75

30   28    340        14           89

31   46    160        2            20

32   17      0         0           21

33   19    380        18           40

34   22      0         0            0

35   26      0         0           44

36   15      0         0           53

37   27      0         0           59

38   25     10        17           31
39   21      0         0           34

40   21   1720        24           89

41   43    320         1           20

42   26    880        16            8

43   17     50         3           32

44   17     50         4           15

     26    720        69           13

     18    830        52           31

     22    420        19           96

     22    290        17           26

     35    930        30           73


                                            2445
          ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER   7


50   26    890        23           34

51   16    560        4            36

52   17     50         1           28

53   17    780         9           60

54   29      0         0           73

55   16      0         0           48

56   19      0         0           56

57   16    600        39           94

58   18    670        24           76

59   20    550        20           63

60   26    540         9           97

61   23      0         0           11

62   27   1380         6           13

63   24     50         3            7

64   19      0         0           16

65   23      0         0           30

66   22    820        12           48

67   45    910        21           30

68   18      0         0           43

69   67      0         0           93

70   28    750        10           27

71   20    490         5           18

72   39      0         0            8

73   20    610        34           56

74   16      0         0           25

     24      0         0           24

     62    760        34           11

     29      0         0           41

     30      0         0           42


                                            2446
FOFREST             ALEXANDER    ROBERT   WALKER                        8


79          24       790        16            65

80          22        50         7            85

81          14       340         5            14

82          15            0      0             0

83          10            0      0            18

84          21        130       20            29

85          18            0      0            33

86          18            0      0            35

87          17            0      0            39

88          26        780       27            13

89          15            0      0            22

90          23        480       33            25

91          31        300        0            32

92          42        920       10            28

93          13         50        0            33

94          14            0      0            15



Note: all results, including ethanol, expressed as milligrams per

litre.

Where ethanol is less than 100 milligrams per litre it is recorded as

either 50 milligrams per litre, if there is a trace present, or 10

miligrams per litre if it is barely detectable or zero if none is

detected.



TAELE 2



Correlations between measured parameters



                    AGE         ETHANOL   ACETONE   ACETALDEHYDE
FOFREST              ALEXANDER       ROBERT   WALKER              9


AGE                  1         0.1750         -0.110   0.1317

                                 (.0021)      (NS)     (.0264)

ETHANOL             0.1750       1            0.0508   0.7014

                     (.0021)                  (NS)     (.00001)

ACETONE             -.0110     0.0508         1        0.1117

                     (NS)        (NS)                  (NS)

ACETALDEHYDE        0.1317     0.7014         0.1117   1

                     (.0264)     (.00001)     (NS)



(Significance level) NS = not significant.



None parametric method used (Kendall Rank Correlation).



NB.   Partial correlation analysis suggests that the apparent

association of acetaldehyde with age can be explained by the

association of age with blood alcohol concentration.




                                                                      2448
        FOFREST          ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                      10


                                                       A FORREST SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   090589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                               2449
Incident     102   190390 OP227       DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                       STATEMENT NUMBER    S910C

                                                                          Station

^ im am e          FORREST

Forenames          ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER

Age                21 100                 Date of birth

Address            DEPT OF CLINICAL CHEMISTRY, ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL
                   SHEFFIELD S102JF

Occupation         CONSULTANT CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST

Telephone

 IC                Height                 Build

Hair colour

 Hair type

^yes                                      Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses           Use                    Accent

 Number of Pages 2

 Dated              020589                                                   Signed


            This statement consisting of 2 pages each signed by me is true to the

            best of my knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that if it is

            tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have

            wilfully stated in it anything that I know to be false or do not

            believe to be true.

            Dated the 2nd day of May 1989 (020589).

                                                                Signed..........

            I am a registered medical practitioner and a chartered chemist.    My

            qualifications include the degrees of Bachelor of Science (with

            honours in pharmacology), Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery

            awarded by Edinburgh University and the Mastership in Clinical

            Biochemistry. I hold the Diploma in Obstetrics of the Royal College of

            Obstetricians and Gynaecologists together with a Joint Committee

            Certificate in Contraception and Family Planning.    I am a Fellow of
                                                                PAGE     2
                                                                S910C

the Royal Society of Chemistry and a Member of the Royal College of

Physicians and the Royal College of Pathologists.   I hold the posts of

Consultant in Chemical Pathology to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,

Clinical Lecturer in Human Metabolism and Clinical Biochemistry and

Honorary Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology to the University of

Sheffield.

This statement should be read in conjunction with my statement of 20

April 1989 (200489) concerning the blood alcohol concentrations found

in the blood samples handed to me by Sgt              Dn 18 April 1989

(180489).




                                                                             2451
                                PAGE     3
                                S910C




                                SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT




                                             2452
                                                                             STATION

 NAME:         ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER
£              FORREST

ADDRESS:       DEPARTMENT OF CLINICAL CHEMISTRY, ROYAL
                HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL, SHEFFIELD S102JF

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:    CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED:                                                                   (SIGNED)



           Further to the three previous statements I have made concerning this

           matter which I understand have been submitted to Lord Justice Taylor's

           Inquiry through H.M. Coroners Office I should like to state the

           following.

           I had no direct contact with the events of Saturday 15th April 1989

           (150489) but through my role as Medical Officer to a Voluntary

           Organisation I attended at the Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street,

           Sheffield on the 16th April (160489).    Incidental to my visit there I

           hac converstions with Professor USHER, Dr John CLARK and Professor

           Laurence HENRY who were carrying autopsies on the deceased.       I also

           spcke to the Coroner and his Officer who both indicated to me that

           there vvould be a number of blood samples sent to me for analysis

           within the following couple of days.

           On the morning of 18th April (180489) Sergeant___________ of the

           South Yorkshire Police brought a box of 94 blood samples



                        All the containers were appropriately labelled and

           identified and I have no reason whatsoever to believe that any mis-



                                                                                       2453
FOFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                       2


identification has taken place at any stage.

However, I did notice immediately that the blood samples were

contained in plastic 5 millilitre containers usually used for blood

sarrples taken for blood glucose analysis.     This poses of itself a

nunber of problems:

(a)       It has been shown a number of occasions that a volatile

          substance such as ethanol (the alcohol in alcoholic

          beverages) can diffuse relatively rapidly from such

          containers.    This might be over a period as short as a few

          days.   This is because the container is plastic as opposed

          to glass and is I think caused by permeation through the

          plastic.    In other words over a period of time there could

be           a drop in the measurable alcohol content of the sample

          without the container being opened.

          Over the period of two or three days from these sarrples

          being taken to being analysed in my department I would not

          think that such a drop could be very great.      I would be very

          surprised if in any individual case it had exceeded 10

(b)       The particular container used is marked and designed to

          leave a considerable dead space above the blood sample -

          that is to say that the tube is filled to only about 50 of

           its capacity.   This leaves in comparative terms a

          considerable amount of air in the gap between the sample and

           the top of the container.    Ethanol could evaporate into that

           air and would thus be lost every time the container was

           opened.    Further the oxygen in the air by virtue of a

           complex reaction with the haemoglobin in the blood and

           the ethanol present can lead to a significant reduction in

           the ethanol concentration by a process of oxidation.      I
FOFREST               ALEXANDER   ROBERT    WALKER                          3


            regret to say that there is evidence that such oxidation

            took place because the blood samples were found to contain

            an unusually high proportion of acetaldehyde.   This is an

            oxidation product of ethanol.    However, it seems to me

            unlikely that this oxidation could account for a loss or

            more than 5 of the ethanol concentration during the period

            between the samples apparently being taken and being

            analysed in my department.

(c)         The particular type of container used tends to leak once it

            has been opened and closed more than a few times.   This is

            generally undesirable from both the analytical and safety

            point of view.   Obviously if blood can leak out, air can

            leak in which would further increase the process of

            oxidation and thus alcohol loss.

It is of interest to comment that when I was at the Medico Legal

Centre I did not see any of the tubes that I have referred to in

evidence in the post-mortem room.     I can only speculate that blood

sarrples were taken by the Pathologist and held in glass universal

containers (this would be the normal course) and then transferred in

part into the type of container that I have referred to by either

Mortuary attendants of Scenes of Crimes Officer from the Police.        I

die see a Pathologist taking one sample into a universal container

which leads me to believe that my supposition is in fact probably

accurate.

Despite my reservations about the type of container used for blood

sarrples I would like to stress that in my opinion the results achieved

by my analysis are sufficiently accurate for general conclusions to be

drawn about the alcohol contents of individual blood sarrples at the

tiire of death.   In other words although I would not wish to claim that
        EOFREST                ALEXANDER   ROBERT   WALKER                        4


        the results of the analysis obtained must be absolutely accurate they

        are certainly not going to be very far wrong.

        I crew the attention of H.M. Coroner to the question of the blood

        sairple containers at an early stage.

        I should also like to say that in relation to my first statement it

        will be noticed upon a careful scrutiny that the numbers accorded to

        the deceased on three occasions are in fact exactly the same numbers

        as the blood alcohol content in milligrams per one hundred

       millilitres.     This was notice immediately in my department and has

        been carefully checked.    It is pure coincidence however bazaar that

       may seem.     I have also drawn this matter to H.M. Coroner's attention.



                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

         TIME

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




m
                                                                                      2456
