                       Sheffield Archives R ef.’l'o-                                                            M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                    HfltP a n d t i m p raispH              3     I                             Number



T i t l e _______
                          lilt     *.                                                     ■C /,U ^pozi                       rti
(Include source and a ny docum ent number )r relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes /N d ^                  C -'y              jK 'f / •
                                                                                                                                                Receiver

                                                                                                                                                  .v,VC
                                           -> £ (<zijL.AML^          4        J l*   O ^ /^ c V          JlU S jU .C c,      /g
                                                                                                                                                Indexer
D o c u m e n t registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                           s?~                                                                                              Statement Reader
S ta te m e n t reader's in stru ction s
                                                                                                                                            5 V tl-
                                                                                                                                                indexer
Indexed as indicated         *-

No(s) o f actions raised

E xam ined - f u r t h e r actio n to be taken




                                                                                                                                                Indexer
Further action No(s|


When satisfied all actions raised O ffic e Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                            HILL330R0UGIi ,5th APRIL 1939.




           Our coach Jones Hot or Services, Flint, C l ' y d . , arri r e i at SdeffieJd
at 2.40pm we were delayed '.soor.v.jc of road words at dt'.>cd :?ort. inden I wot off
the coach, xrith :.<y two friends we went straight to the Lo:>pings La\?o end of
the ground whore :/e had tickets for the Central dorrace dntrance »B».
 x.j.qx'Q -USu .0.8,ve oeon 3/ 4-jGu1 Xrivsrpco.L fans stxll outsit .9 tns wuouud and we
felt x^e ixould miss the start of the mat oh, 3 0 we dialled arcxwid the ground
 ■*oo .d.'./y j.or entrance * “^       cox.'ilci. no~& sso rwc ..o we a.s.cou a oolriGGinaii were
the entrs-n.ee was located hut he just replied that this was tdio Liverpool
area,, ns then ashed another policeman and. he was not sure h it he pointed
to the right hand side of the ground.                  Wetheix worded our way through the
crowd to the right hand side and entrance ’B ’ oaae into view.                      dt no time
dicUwe feel uneasy or fright end in the middle of all those people, ire did
not. see anybody drunk or in a had nood. As -re attemped to join the queue
for our turnstile a policewoman grabbed me and told me that the exit gate
xras open, this emit gate is not the gate the police admit to opening which
is to the left of the turnstiles out the one set hach on the right of the
turnstiles. ilobody took our tichets.                 As we walked into the ground at the
'back of-the l^rjypes suddenly there was a sxirgo of fans from r a j left and from
"behind me, i#®was unbelievable, I x*as carried down the tunnel onto the terraces
this was were I w%p seperated from my two friends.

       I was forced to within septan or eight yards of the perimeter fencing and
the crush was unbearable, I screamed for the police to open the gate lyat they
didn't want to knovr. Some lads scaled the perimeter fencing to 'escape the
crush I could see them pleading with the police to open the gate. Suddenly
the crush became worse I was trapped on a harrier I couldn't breathe my legs
were numb .1 couldn’t move, people all around me were crying out for help and
with pain.I couldn’t do anything for them, they were passing out, falling,
it was like a nightmare but suddenly it was for real, grown men were crying -
with the pain some were coughing up blood, it took all my strengh just to
keep my head up in the crowd and slowly I became weak, a bojr of about eighteen
was asking me to push him back he was screaming for help I couldn’t do
anything to help him because I v?as. myself trapped unable to move, he passed out
turned blue and collapsed over the crash barrier, it was awful, nobody deserves
to die just becau.se of a footba.ll match. The crush was getting worse*" and I was'
feeling faint I had accepted that I -was going to die through lack        cf oxygen.
Suddenly I was slapped s,cross the face and a lad pulled me up and        out of the v
crush to the back of the Leppings Lane terrace.     I owe my life to      him hut I
will never be able to thank him because I don’t know who he was but I will
always be grateful to him. At the back of the terrace there -was mayhem, there
must have been about ten to twenty dead bodies and the injured were being carried
to ambulances by police and fans alike. Some people were checking the bodies I         .
had' .seen but no way was it to rob them, they were frantic trying to find their
family and friends, they were crying not stealing. After resting I made my way
outside of the ground to try to find a phone to ring my parents. I saw some fans
shouting at the police saying they didn’t know what they were doing and that they,
the police, had no idea of how to police a soccer match. It was shock and anger
not hooliganism which made them do this, I saw another fan.who was ciying kick a
police car he then ran away, two policemen walked after him but turned back after
a few steps. I knocked on a door a few streets away from the ground and the lady
let me use her phone, after this I made my way back to my coach, thankfully my
two friends were waiting f o r m e .
