                                                                                                MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised v3 Q ( £ > [ & 5 ^ — ^       H .Q p   Number


         fibpevfe           t-C      G/cx/gng          f i g y / W              (Vvg>h
T itle
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's
                                                      £qq^T o                          tecnCflgg tv\ ~Tc>aX,’
Keceivei » instructions
                      - - —
                          urgent    action - Yes/No
                            =»---------------                t------------- ^ ------        j       ,                    Receiver
 tC .          Ux>\f£-            -to      ~nnCLs-uJj)                  V CU~40C|r

■t o C \ / o ^ n            & y -*fn s W         ^
                                                                                                                         Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reactor
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                          Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                          Indexer
 Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                               # 7 5 2431                     TVP READING C R
      0#/#6   89   12:19

m X
.^V'W
 v>Wi,-




                                            C l /    -       ? r ?       -




                                           Police
                                                 E " Division
                                            Headquarters

          From                        C O N T R O L ROOM
                                                    r e a d in g

 For The
ATTENTION (
   Of

               To                      C         7.             )
          Follow
                                                 ' H a i a e S IJsdl-ey police -
                                             E   - 3ytvvttvsi Hea^cpass-fcers



               K   M   fx a te .       ( fh t- r ^ e K          v    *       ’*   /E   T

                           ■           >     w      )           -r                         -   "   S

                                  ■    y C J & T         M     r X           I
        06/06 '89   12:19        © 75     2431                     TVP READING C R                                       2002

                                                 THAMES VALLEY POLICE                                                      le w

 ■H '
Jrvisrdn/StatJon;   »e » Division, Heading- £East)
          From:     Superintendent WjaEDIS                                           To:     Chief Superintendent WKH3
             Ref:                                                                  Date;     12th. January; -1933
         Su&ject:
                                                            Towi —y— Cardiff City
                                                     Challenge Cap - 20.11.82.

                    With reference to the above, and to the attached letters from The Football
                    Association and the- Some Office, I enclose herewith m j report on ‘the
                    preparations sad planning- for the match together vith the ^>lice ''
                    operational order, plus a report by Chief Inspector ESOViJjj with photographs,
                    dealing- with incidents -chat srose before, during and after the match-


                    to ACC(O).



  ¥
                                                           tl.   w is u i^ a ;
                                                           Sttperiatszident


                                                                 (2)
                    ACC 0EE3A3I01SB              (Tour Ss£: EQ    1 2 2 /6 /1      GW3/43)

                    1.      Papers submitted in. accordance -with your siesiorandum. of the
                            29 November 1982.

                    2.      Sprout sy point of -siev I did. raise some objections originally to the
                            holding of the match at Vokiaghss. and recoasiended it should he held
                            at Beading on Sunday, 21st.       T h s 1*A were at one tise in agreement
                            ■with that hut X understand there was some objection ’ey Cardiff ‘because
                            it -was a Staida^ and thereafter the FA agreed that it should go ahead
                            subject to the increased stgsd accomodation at Wokingjassu

                    3.  Of course the worst aspect of this match -was the serious injury
                        sustained hy IvTC l£5 I5SCHF0H) who was detained in hospital for some
                        time*. _                3   L
                                 ^ "c
                    It- jts msaationed'on the teleprinter message I vas kept informed of the
                        events throughout gnd in fact visited W C LE2GE2FCHD issnedistely at the
                        Ecffal Berkshire Hospital snd it is of interest to note that the Directors
                        of Cardiff' SC did in fact have a florists shop opened in Wokingham
                        sent flowers ssying1how sor^y they vere for the injuries received by
                        her.




                    12«. J a n u a r y 1 9 3 3                                   Chief Siroerintendent
          06/06 '89            12:20         075     2431                               TVP READING C R                           @003

                                                                                                                          i*Bv?
                                                           THAMES VALLEY POLICE

 JivIsiortT'Staxion:             "3*' D i v i s i o n . , S e a n i n g   (S a .s x )

             From:              S u p e r i n t e n d e n t S . S '. W lB B L S                       Chief Superintendent W5SB
                  Ref:                                                                         Date: xith January, 1983
           Subject:
                                                                  ff. A* Challenge Cap
                                                          ¥okinghani Tova —v— Cardiff City.


                         1-     Xu the draw for “tbs 1st round of "the jr. A. Challenge Cup, VokicghaBi
                                Town ?C were drawn to play Cardiff PC at home. The tie was to fee.
                                played on Saturday, 20rh Soveiaber. 1932.

                         2 . As you are aware* Wokingham Town ere a non—league side, playing in
                             ■the Isthmian League. Cardiff City axe at the present time in the 3^d.
                             Division of the Football Leagoe. Although a number of teams in the
                             football League have played friendly catches at WokingfrgTn*s Finchaastead
                             Soad ground, this ■was the first occasion, on which a c&apetitive match
                             involving1a league te®& had. “been played thera.

                         3* Following the draw, immediate contact was made with the Qfficals of the
                            Club, including- S?r* Gale, Cbairoan, and I^r. Soy Meriyveather, General
                            Manager. An initial inspection of the ground revealed that, as expected,
                            the facilities for spectators ware nowhere near the standard found on
                            Football League grounds. Some terracing existed on the north and east
                            sides of the ground and a sffirall stand was located on the south side.
                            Part of the north terrace was covered. No crowd control barriers vers
                            situated on the terracing, but as the terracing was only 8 or 9 rows
                            deep, this was not considered to be of crucial importance. The
                            perimeter of the pitch was surrounded on all sides by tubular steel
                            poles supported by reinforced concrete posts. The perimeter of the
                            ground was reasonably secure, being surrounded by either 6 ft M gh
                            wooden fencing or a similar height chain link fencing, topped by barbed
                            wire*

                                The Club requested assistance in deciding upon the aaidlmrai attendance for
                                the match, which was to be 1all ticket1. It was stated that on
                                previous occasions for major friendly snatches, between 3*00C — it,000
                                spectators had attended. I doubted this and advised that provided certain
                                structural alterations were *nade, the attendance should be restricted to
                                approximately 2,^00 persona. ‘Phi? Cttnh then indicated that it wae
                                intended to construct a low banked temporary seating area for the aatch,
                                similar to those used at sporting events such as Golf Tournaments,
                                Eorse Ehows etc. This would seat approkiaately 1,900 persons on the
                                east side of the ground and in view of this, I advised that the capacity
                                of the ground be set at ^,200. This was agreed.

                                I requested that in order to facilitate the effective policing of the
                                match a number of Elinor structural alterations should be made. These
                                were as follows:—

                                         (*) Two sets or double gates at the east end of the ground
                                                   should be altered to open outwards rather than inwards,
                                                   to facilitate the exit of spectators from the ground at
                                                   the end of the satch and in the event of emergency.



                                                                                                                                                "M
                                                                                          coni/...



                                                                                                                                         ■ -■
t,»G£N 45(7/31)
                      1fe;„:   >v-S&mrnftfe.                                                                                                    * Jk
    08/08 '89   12:21      © 7 5 2431                   TVP READING C R                                   0004
     *
                                                        -   2   -




C’                           (d)   In area of tbs north terrace designated for Cardiff
                                   Supporter be seperated from adjoining area, by seans
                                   of substantial barriers at least 2 metres high and
                                   at both ends of this area, a. THo m an* land* be
                                   designated to ensure the proper segregation of
                                   supporters,

                             (c)   Additional turnstiles be placed at the south-east
                                   corner and south side of the ground.             ;

                             C4)   Sajrhcd w i s e b e gH.c.pec. a^enind tic fn.oodJLigiL't ‘io-u-eJDis
                                   sOHte 3 ~ b metres frost the ground, to prevent
                                   spectators climbing thee.

                             (.e) A gate was constructed at the south west comer
                                  of the ground to allow access by police Officers
                                  around behind the fencing at the rear of the
                                  enclosure on the west side of the ground.
&                            (f)   A temporary toilet be constructed in the Cardiff
                                   enclosure on the north terrace,

                             (g)   Defects in the terracing be niade good*

                             (h)   Stanchions supporting the goal nets be repositioned
                                   to enable access by Police Officers around the
                                   peri-aeter of the pitch, behind the goal areas.

                6*      H I these matters were attended to and in addition, facilities were
                        aade available at the ground for the parking of Police vehicles and
                        the Club roos was set aside for the purposes of briefing and
                        refreshments, before and during the match. Iso alcohol would be sold
                        at the ground until after the match.

                7-      Prior to the day of the statch, consultation, did take place with the
                        F.A., Lancaster Gate. Their view was that the match should go ahead
                        at Wokin^zam unless we, the Police, said it could not be effectively
                        policed. Although I had reservations about the catch, I was
                        satis .fled that with careful planning, the tie could go ahead as
                        planned*

                S.      I believe that consideration was siso giv-sn by the Club to playing
                        the Hatch at Cardiff or at   rn Park, 2eading> oa Sunday, 2lst
                        November, but in the event, the Club decided to go ahead with the
                        match at "Wokinghaa,
                a
                y *     ‘
                        The attached Divisional Operation Order No* S'13/52, gives details of
                        the Police operation. Considerable thought was given to the parking
                        of vehicles and plans were made to try to prevent persons travelling
                        from Cardiff gaining access to the sain shopping area in Wokingham
                        and to Town Centre Public Houses. Insonnation was received to the
                        effect that most supporters would travel by coach or car and for
                        this reason at our request, the S..A.C. directed traffic fros the Mi*
                        via the A 32?(m) away froa the town centre.


                                                            coat/,„
    06/06   89    12:21       © 7 5 2431                   TVP READING C R                                   g]005




C
                 10.      Xn the sven.tt many Cardiff spectators travelled by rail on normal
                          service trains, and some did Set into Public Houses in the town.
                          The incidents giving- rise to arrests and injuries are detailed in
                          tVip* r-r^wmT-t rvjr P.T 'KROTW5f, attach®*!- Iti par'.irn~lar T w.-mlrt flTsirf yrmT-
                          attention to paragraphs 3» b , 6, 11, lo, 17 and 20 of that report,
                          firing the incident described in paragraph 16, the natch -was stopped,
                          fair a short period. During-the incident described in paragraph 17,
                          the aatch. was stopped for some 10 aiinutes and the referee and
                          players left the field. The incident in paragraph 20 has been
                          investigated hy Zuspectoir SliTPZBLD, but to date the persons
                          responsible have not been traced-

                 11.      A total of 37 persons w r e arrested and 10 persons, including 9
                          Police Officers, reported injuries* X &m convinced that had the
                          re—ijjforced concrete posts not collapsed, the match would have been
                          concluded without major crowd disturbances* I aa equally convinced
                          that a nuaber of suppos'ters, probably no aore than 50 out of a total
                          attendance of around k»I00, attended solely to cause disruption and
c                         that alcohol was a aajor contributing factor to the disturbances.

                 12.      A total of 95 Police Officers (including' 13 Special Constabulary
                          Officers) were deployed, on duties in. connection with the match.




                                                        5. WASDltEi
                                                        Superintendent
         06/06      '89   12:22           075    2431                          TVP READING C R                                          @006.

           ;                                            THAMES VALLEY POLICE
                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                                  /             .-t
Division/Station: 'Z' xeadinc
  (   '                     “
            From: C m e f u is a s c to r 3 RC.."r'                                           To:   Superintendent
                 Ref:                                                                       Date:   *6 Decs:.iber 193-2
           Subject:

                          F I-S T     5 0 ~ ; D ? A C £ ? 7 Q C 3 A I Z , I-IATC:! -   i-'OKir^GH’-A-I TOWN *V«   C AR D IE? C l n



                                    Sa-vurday 20th iioveaber 1582} I yas Second — ia — co"~and of the
                                Polz.ce Operatic” at V:ofcin£h;sr. in connection with a 1st rosed FA Cup
                                *2G^3Sii          -■'5-"-——s;—          r wiirdifi Ci zy.
                                                               TC’-'IL ‘■
                                                                        '


                                ? -3-d.mr-; civ y.~Qjcxa^c,
                                                          -j,i i'Oi.ice station. jl la^er brxejEsd other Officers
                                reporting for duty at Uokiaghas. football Club at 1100 hours, 'i200 hours
                                33d IJOO hours,

                                   about *_x?0 itours, X was       (by radio sessa^es received) that the
  •4^/                          licensees of two licensed premises in l*’oki!ishant the Molly Millar- Public
 C                              House and I'he Soeouck na'el., hed requested Poli.cs assistance bsc&use
                                they visaed to close their public bars. She reason given for this was
                                the behaviour cf football fan.* and the anticipation of likely trouble,
                                i wss also avrsre that youths -rsre being arrested ir, '••okinghsH. Toys. Centre
                                for threatening behaviour*

                          1
                          ”*‘       ac^ut       nourst i Txsxted the Dukes Hss-d Public House in vemssrk
                                Surest, -'"okxn^hsn* i found the bars of this public house occupied
                                •sntiirely by v-okirLgnan Tovn Supporters. *nhe front entrance to the
                                puolxc house tst=s locked sad only selected, persons were allowed s.d2.ittance-
                                iasaas the bar a lar^e amount of beer- vss bains; consumed and.all customers
                                 :ere eithar singing or shouting in loud voices      i-vsrz ires -cnxs, the
                                premises ■•:ere orderly.

                                From TtOO hours, I *35 at the sain entrance to the Uokinghsn: ^ovm Foot-
                                ■ball Club. At this entrance supporters of the two ceaas were segregated
                                ann care cues. to separate entrances* Host supporters were examined for
  , w                           si^as of offensive weapons. At this tine it v/ss very obvious that most
                                      9 C^rdiif City supporters had been drinking heavily,

                                Prior to the corsssacssent of the aatch, I examined waste ground at the
                                "35-    ^ o:      rjrcuna. On ~;y return4 I yas is the -iouth—;»'ast comer
                                of the ground when I noticed si^ss of crowd disorder ia the "orth-Sest
                                corner of the ground* I sav several youths whoss I later ascertained
                                   r purported, to be Chelsea fans, running across the pitch a^ay from
                                tns covered terrace occupied by the Cardiff supporters. I vent to this
                                are=. o. L-ne ground ssn ascertained .tha~ several stones had been thrown
                                by cotil groups of supporters. I saw one Police Officer, ?C|               |
                                yno had a.cut on h i s forehead just a.bo~e one eye, I vas told that this
                                injury had 3sen caused by a stone*

                                rtt                 the fC!2.s.iS£’£ •S,
                                                                       ui>'^crti$rsT lus-i r**t'Uz,iisd to
                                              01 vlis Ci'QivCL, biiu tnS’        t t Si-iscor'bsrs v^2^s                  y obviously
                                ai^ressec. «?tid v;er& r^ry vaZubie in. their di^contsnt*




               ..
06/06 .’89   12:23     @ 7 5 2431                          TVP READING C 1




                Ths enclosure occupied lay the Cardiff supporters,’extended along
                tbf* ’Ibr-tft w r p i"i tnp groica frsc th o siaxit zn.tirGa.Qa- is tlis
                Sast corner to a point about i a lo n g the pitch. At the Sastsrn
                ena a f ^ h e Cardiff Supporter's, thsra were solid weadsa barriers
                enclosing an area of «ao isaas land* about seven yards vide. ' S ®
                rstsaj.mng'
                *       .     scssXl
                              . a4s4* arsa of the L'ortn. tarra.cs
                                                                ' was oscnoi&d~     faw
                                                                                      ir ‘Wokis.it-
                                                                                                 O
                •B.GSS                                '

                Frora ■the coamenceiaent of t h » aatch, Police Officers'were deployed
                hetvsen the to u c h line an d the barriers.ia front. oSths- Cardiff
                S'Gpp’
                     O rtsrs• A nusioer ox ox-.3,5.r' officers 'wsrss t£s"2Xcysd on. "the ■
                terrace at ths rear •6£ toe CartLif? supporters. X took gp position
                xa front; oE t h e area of *ao asss landr. Faros m y position T cotiM
                hear chanting froa Cardiff s-upporters directed directly at .Woking­
                ham suppoz-ters. Many Cardiff supporters at the front of the crowd
                were looking atihe Vokingpaszi sapportsrs to their right ftjsA coa$e—
                qtteatly were paying' little or so attention to the football gaae*

                After a short while the Wokingasni sroport&rs to ths’West of the
                8no sans land' fences, begsa to re&c£ to this provoketion »n.d. I
                could. Itsst" threats h exag casa.t6fi lay tae WokxnghSEj supporters* As
                 a result o£ tiist 2 placed two officers ia the *no eass land' area
                ■and I directed three or foar officers to go to the.rsar of tie
                Woklngihsm supporters in this area.      ;



                                                                                                       fj.0
                                  illlllll                                                        W^SW4^0m&.


                                                                                                  S' ai‘t i^ite
                         ih ~   ‘
                                sESrisr at tuxc-               u? LJ4.tr                     fB          __ ol
                      WMWMWB                 as. *.



                                                                                           ^ifw0M§MM
                                                      ■l "O jwrip forward onto fee pitch

                                                                                                  WMM0Mm




         12.    1 afterwards exsaiaed the concrete post which had collapsed aed I aat^ecl
                that it was r e Mforced with steel strands.

                '^t  oifflf5 Ajafctxla5.ee p s r so im e l were q u ic k ly on th e seethe 4 but a s far*
                as I co'uld a sc e r ^ a in , no—one wa,s in j Tired.      £ev‘ei*sil of th e you th s
                appeared to be s3 ■f-,~•*-"»—        -

         1%.   A metal ex^d-control hairier was hron-ht to the scene by stewards
               ana. taxs was placed at rtLght angles to the eadsiin g terrier tiros
               effectively widening tha area of *no nans land* *

               ihroogkouv tne^ match, there was xaovenent on the terraces aad by half—
               tiae ii, was no-cxefcle t a s v  section of Cardiff supporters* nearest
               say posxtxon, ^na^ tncreased substantially, la tJis second half t h i s
               section or the crowd appeared to surge forward on seTsral occasions
               anfi xa tisw of what had happened earlier, 1 forsied the oninion t h & t
               they wars testing the strength o f the barrier.           ~         *^
1.2:24                       !7 $        2431:         : TYF READING




          f ia the second half a seoor.d concrete past .coll&paad, caiisxug
    y/'r-S     % Sr
    uairctla stnraarrs          la U : forwards. ■■ On, tills occesioa tits supporters:
    appeared to hairs braced theiEsel“e5 in anticipation, of the 'oarri;
          ajisxng eo.ii agaia no—oae was s.nj'urfs                 on.ce no re produced'
          ot-.’d control barrier scad on this ocg
                                                oc es x ok ths barrier       :S Ij JL&G&Q.
        xr'OJiv 01 t a s suvvort& rs.
                                                                                                                                                     :
*          about t w e s t j .f i r s salantes o f th e gisae r e n a in ia g 'aad. C an giff City..
    aw-i.Il lo s in g oas a il* tb#ra was smraors' froa the C ard iff ■ s u p p o r t ' -
    about: a ‘ p itc h is -a s io n f * The .csaastsaiti surging :±a the C a r d iff crowd :
    was s t i l l - e ^ i d e s t j sud t h i s time a th ird b arrier collapse               'Ca&USJs?
                        £.e reixarcea cotm
                      *2 -    <=*4 T 1
                              w -i.                                            sav.r
                       si                           rl "
                                                       fi u i . w-?t              -s.wio :aaa
    forw ard c r s r ta s b a r r ie r - ' Itis /a a n o t u a t i l ■seas tim e la t e r X r e a lis M
    th a t \H?G 155 Sarah. LjEECEFOjE) geec bs.att' trapped wader the fallen barrier
                                                                                gr l
                                                                                   f>
                                                                    “j waroizf oTipparters i&c&ded
                                                               stop ths gsae end call the
       <sCV!
           £rX*S o t b . ^ T>-T“ srtS>t  if    S0S1S 85.2            /re s3-eas, b u t - i n g eaar® !, .* .>
           c s 'o ffic e r s s tte o p te d to sb@pb.ard. the supporters back to th e t@sra.ae*i

    Tiie Msn'ag^r of ?iokisg^an Tbt-sr* FootbsXX Lab, &r 3oy KH22B/SA2H3R..
                                                  - *                       *
    to the centra .of the pitch with, a radlo-niicrpphoa&'sad' appealed5 for-
                                                                           Tf   ,
    order* Mr                    then want to the area. of pitch in, frost of the
     Jardlfx support*** and appealed directly to tfeea. Hr I-iSPv^iB-nTiEd?»-
                                          •*.    Jta              .   - «—v   -   -   -B-   -   ——- - - ■» - » ----(W - » ■* ■> . =-„ .„ »*-*»   W

    ss'asals
           Ls were
              were respscta-d by tr.e sajorIty ox - t~-* crowd
                                                   the-        — jthere
                                                             j sud     * Is
                                                                         r_ -.
                                                                             .
                                                                             as -
            th a t his
       &fc that    h is effort
                        efforts greatlj assisted the Police in restoring order*.

    I latsr ascertained tiat ¥FG ISa'CnS'Om was taken, to tke Horal Berkshire
    Kospitsl,-!
                                               iier p^xgirt recssi-red na1
             iti her photosra.pIx taken Is tUs aospltal bed sppesrsd ra sasfc aatlonc




                          _._ srters resaln&d ir» tlieir pla<     .... ...... .
    escorted the Cardiff sxmpoi*ters to their coaches, to ths csjt park ar_
    to the local radios,? station. f       JSie departiizg supporters coaches vsre
    escorted froa the ground by Police sotorcydists. .411 t h i s s$:
    S ° well, but i, was later iafors&a that et a point about a ssile .. _ J        -'W-
                                                                                   __
    football ground, a stoss had be-m th ro v a at one of the v i s i t i n - cc^cass
    bj 3 2 . uairaoi-m. persoa, causing a. ••coach wiado* to ssasii. "
    of t h is , oae of feh® oecapests of th e coach t^-s feskea to              u n erxai
    froa a cut doss to his e^e.                     ■ '

                                                                 aad 9 Police officers vsrls iajsred
     dent     102        020689 O P 10007           MESSAGE TYPED          NOT REGISTERED

                                                                                Message Number            M1404


Message     Date               300389                          Time     1450

Message     Type               Phone in
                                                                                                      ■ . ■ ■■         ■ ■■
Officer     receiving          ACC <H1)                                                                -:v.


Surname                   FOSTER

Forenames                 DET.CHIEF-SUPT.

Address                   NECHELLS                                                                                 |
                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                              f
Telephone                                                                                                                     t


C   ached    is   a    daily   telegraph   report   of   so   may   1989 i n a c r o w d b a r r i e r c r u s h              I
                                                                                                                              I
AT WOKINGHAM TOWN FOOTBALL CL U B ,            THE HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE ARE QUITE                                      \

INTERESTED IN THIS BARRIER COLLAPSE AND WOULD APPRECIATE                            SOME INFORMATION

ON IT*      PLEASE CAN YOU PURSUE AS SOON AS POSSIBLE,

ACTION YES:           RAISE ACTION FOR INSP WILLIS TO FOLLOW UP.                   TO SPEAK WITH DCS

FOSTER FIRST,
                                                                                                             MIR.8
                                                                                                                            SBIilliHi
                                                                                                                               SSSIg

                                                                                                                                   g 8 |V |M |



                                                                                                                            mmfmm
                                                                                                                               mB.
                                                                                                                           WMM
                                                                                                                             mmm

                                                                                                                            ^M0$90M0i
                                                                                                                              P&&M&


                                                                                  1450 hours




                                                                                      ank, rmmtt & mmfcmr)
Titephoriei h:.##»#




     .ttac.eC ±Z5
     Attacneu
              is       a D a i l y Telegraph
                       a i;au.V'-iy ^ b * w r ‘
                                                  report
                                                    ^
                                                           of 20.._May 1989
                                                       .v.■•.
                                                                                i n t o a crowd barrier-
                                                                                  ..... .... ........ ...




    :                 i n t ^ t e d in this' barrierjgoi ^ ^
     information on it.           P le a s e can you pursue as soon .as POs a ib l^ _ ;               ____




                                                                                                              Action

 ActionYe$/J
     i'd




                                                                                                                                      f"
                                                                                                                                    iWk

                                                                                                                                       mm
                                                                                                              wammmmmmmmm
                                                                                                  'mm tm m s m m
                                                                        Mi&Si
                                                                                    ifiii                     WMmM
                                                                                                                     Ig illflltf
Other References:                                                                                mmmm
                                                               lU B M M liM M ItiMiil
                                                                         flNHMttMttfe
                                                          ""
                                                               WsMiflBniii


                                                         mm                                        WSSiM^
                                                                      ■ll                                    MMHNi
      fo r Hml (x{kuM <vv                 d


      U I U U U U U 1C


ir-
m      £3,560 damages
et
       for crushed WPc
 1
> -
<e     A p o licew o m an who w as
*s     crushed by a crowd barrier dur­
of     ing an FA Cup match at Wo­
:y     kingham Town Football Club
 ’t    was awarded £3,560 damages
       yesterday.
id       WPc Sarah Letchford, 28, of
       Thatcham, Berks, was flattened
       during the match against Car­
       diff when a barrier collapsed on
       her and fans trampled over her.
       Mr Justice Kenny, sitting at
       Beading County Court, found
       the club had been negligent by
       not providing safe barriers.

                         2.0/*/ e?
                                                              Case No.84 04764
IN THE RFADING OOQMTY COURT



BETWEEN :



                               SARAH JANE LETCHPORD                             Plaintiff


                                      -and-


                           WDKINGHAM TOWN FOOTBALL CLUB                     Defendants




                           PAGINATED BUNDLE OF DOCUMENTS




                      Consulting Engineer's report dated 3rd January 1985 fran
 I-   to
                      Mr J.D. Bayes BSC C Eng


II - 13                Medical report dated 24th March 1983 by Mr A.F. Rushforth


14 - 16                Medical report dated 7th January 1986 by Mr A.F. Rushforth




                                                               :   :■   ■   .    ■■■■   ■ .■   .




 Bussell Jones & Walfcer

 Sninton House, 324 Gray's Inn Road, Icndon WELX 8CH
 01-837-2808                        UW(BKJ)
      \ C«~J


LJi
                                                                                           350 CHESTER ROAD
                                                                                          MANCHESTER M169EA
                                                                                                        TEL. 061-848 0612/4

STRANGE             STRANGE           AND      GARDNER           ----   CONSULTING                          ENGINEERS
0„rR.f;C.31536.M JDH/GF
                                                                                     o a. tcm c n . C.Cng. m u m m x
Your   R*f: RH/LR/LETCHFORD                                                          •JWHH £<«&.U.UMOIE
                                                                                     H. ■ a e tO M H                      tiH m V L , M CM t.
Date        3rd January 1985                                                         J. P. B WH U A . »E«* (Tacit.). C£n»_ ULMaOiC.
                                                                                       U.LPME.JUUU.
                                                                                     J. 0 HAVE&M e..           M.I.C.E.
                                                                                     0jiMUk.dK
                                                                                     t L .HOOCH CA * . M.LUKM.
                                                                                     t w f WMNJLfY. CE*». U Lm avt
                                                                                     » J . o c n o o t C .& *. U L U tont-. HtM-T
                                                                                     j s mTW.
                                                                                     e . m e w w e i. c a » . m w d iE .. a i F w t
         Russell Jones & Walker                                                      s.Mraicing.rjjMiE.
                                                                                     O*.HOWtHC..CE«*.U-LHcAI.HLt£.
         Solicitors
         Swinton House
         324 Grays Inn Roail
         London      WC1X 8DH




          CONFIDENTIAL REPORT

          MRS TIBBY (NEE LETCHFORD) v WOKINGHAM FOOTBALL CLUB

          We refer to your letter of instruction in the above matter dated 9th October 1984
          in accordance with which, on the 15th November we met your representative
          and Mrs Tibby at the Football Ground in Wokingham and inspected the scene
          where she sustained her injury.


          SYNOPSIS


          W P C   Letchford was on duty at Wokingham Town Football Club's ground during
          a match between Wokingham Town and Cardiff City Football Clubs.                                   Whilst standing
          in front of the barrier to the side of the ground and in front of the stand
          the barrier gave way and the crowd surged forward knocking W P C                               Letchford
          to the ground, trampling her underfoot, and from which she sustained serious
          injury.


          DESCRIPTION


          We enclose 2 prints each of 9 photographs taken at the time of our inspection
          and to which we will refer in the body of our report.


          We understand that certain of the posts supporting the barrier rail above
          the perimeter of the ground have been changed since the time of the accident
          and we have a copy of a quotation from Hasrange Ltd, Roofing Consultants for
          clearing away broken stanchions and digging out concrete posts and for supplying
          five new concrete posts and a barrier rail.
                                                                    H |
         BIRMINGHAM BRISTOL CARDIFF LEEDS LIVERPOOL NORTH &SOUTH LONDON MANCHESTER NEWCASTLE NOTTINGHAM SHEFFIELD
i




    Our photograph No 1 shows the North side of the Wokingham Town Football Ground
    an we understand that the accident occurred not far from the centreline, a
    short distance to the left hand side as seen in that photograph and where
    there are signs of some new concrete posts having been positioned.


    Photograph No 2 shows the front of the terrace.    Between the edge of the pitch,
    the white line, and the edge of the concrete step at the bottom of the terrace
    is a distance of 5' 5".    20" out fromthe step is a gravel area, as can be
    seen from photograph No 2, and which we assume to be the top of a french drain.




    Photographs 3 and 4 show the construction of the terrace.      As mentioned earlier,
    at the bottom there is a concrete step some 13%" high, and this extends for
    a width of 3' 6" in from the edge.    From here there are six separate steps
    formed, as can be seen from photograph No 3, from timber sleepers fairly regularly
    disposed and with a height of step varying between 3)£" and 5 ,     but generally
    4     The sleepers are maintained in position by means of spikes, as can be
    seen from photograph No 3.    The length of steps between risers is generally
    about 1' 9", but does vary between 1' 8%" and 1' 10" at the place we measured.
    At the top there is a broader step, which is formed by ash situated behind
    the two sleepers forming the front of the step and this width is some      3' 7".
    All in all, from the front of the concrete to the back of the terrace is a
    distance of just under 16' at the place where we measured.


    As can be seen from some of the photographs, a lot of the terrace is covered,
    and there are circular standards at the back of the third step from the front,
    supporting the corrugated roof section.     The back of the terrace is formed
    by vertical corrugated iron sheets.


    As can be seen from photograph No 4 there is a rail situated at the edge of
    the terrace.     There are a series of concrete posts at approximately 10' or
    3m centres.    Between the posts is a circular section steel rail the centre
    of which is 35" above the level of the concrete.       The rail is inset into the
    top of the concrete post.


    We noted that there were new concrete posts in places somewhere about where
    the accident occurred and these were of slightly different dimensions from
    the old posts.     The old posts measured 5%" from front to back and were 5"



                                                       2
                                     -   3 -




wide, as seen from, say, the football pitch.      The new posts were 6" by 4"
in place of the 5%" x 5".    The front of the posts are between 5" and 6" in
from the edge of the concrete, as seen in photograph No 4.        Photograph Nos
5 and 6 show two of the new posts with a new concrete about the bases.        Photograph
No 7 shows one of the posts close by where the accident apparently occurred
and this has several deficiencies.       At the top left hand side, as seen in
photograph No 7 there is an area where the concrete has spalled away from
the face leaving the reinforcement bars exposed and as seen in our photograph
No 8.   Further down, on the front face, there is a line of cavity, seen to
best advantage in our photograph No 9, which undoubtedly follows the length
of one of the reinforcing bars and which, again, is an area of spalling.
Both of these items will reduce the strength of the concrete post, and furthermore,
the bearing of the rail within the posts will be diminished considerably in

this instance.


Mrs Tibby told us that at the beginning of the game she had been stationed
near the turnstiles in the North Eastern corner of the ground on reserve with
some of the Inspectors.     Apparently as the game went on she was deployed along
the pitch facing the crown, and she along with other Policemen and/or women
were ranged along the front of the North terrace.         Mrs Tibby says that as
far as she can recall there were Cardiff City supporters directly in front
of her, towards the front of the terrace and that there were other supporters
behind, possibly Chelsea supporters as opposed to Wokingham Town.


Mrs Tibby's recollection of the occasion is rather vague.         She told us that
 she remembers that she was facing the crowd when suddenly the home team scored.
 The crowd surged forward and the barrier gave way.        The next thing Mrs Tibby
 remembers is waking up in hospital.


 Included with your file of papers are Police reports.        There is one stereo
 type report which is an injury/accident/dangerous occurrence report which
 states that W P C   Letchford was on control duty about the perimeter of the
 pitch when some agitated about the perimeter of the pitch when some agitated
 Cardiff supporters pushed forward and caused the crash barrier to break.
 The barrier is described as being approximately 4' high and at least 10' long.


 There is also a report by Chief Inspector Brown who was second in command
 of the Police operation at the Wokingham Town versus Cardiff City match.
 This report mentions that in the first half of the match, Wokingham Town scored




                                                      3
                                  -   A   -




a goal and youths standing some five or sic deep on on the terrace surged
forward causing one of the concrete posts supporting the metal barrier to
snap near the bottom.   Because the crash barrier at the front was broken stewards
braced another barrier to assist.         Early in the second half, apparently, a
second concrete post collapsed.


About 25 mins before the game was due to finish Chief Inspector Brown describes
a constant surging in a restless Cardiff crowd and this, apparently, caused
a third barrier to collapse as a result of another reinforced concrete post
breaking.   The Chief Inspector mentions that he saw the Cardiff suporters
surge forward over bodies of other suporters who had fallen forward over the
barrier and a short while later he realised that W P C        Letchford was trapped
under the fallen barrier and had been knocked on conscious.


There is a further report by Superintendent Wardle of Thames Valley Police.
Mention is made that immediately the draw for the particular game was made
the Police and the Officials of the club got together.         An initial inspection
of the ground disclosed to the Police, apaprently, that "...the facilities
for spectators were nowhere near the standard found on Football League grounds."
It   later stated "No crown control barriers were situated on the terracing,
but as the terracing was only eight or nine rows deep this was not considered
to be of crucial importance."


Mention is then made of the attendance figures for this "all ticket" match.
After discussions between the two parties and when the club had mentioned
that they were going to provide extra seating for some 1900 people on the
East side of the ground the Police advised that the capacity crown be set
at 4,200.


As wellas the above, the Police apparently required certain alterations to
be made in the ground prior to the game.         One of these was for an area of
the North terrace designated for Cardiff supporters to be separated from the
adjoining areas and for their to be a "no mans land" on either side.


The Football Association at Lancaster Gate were apparently consulted about
the advisability of holding the match at Wokingham an they said that the match
should go ahead unless the Police said it could not be effectively Policed.
Consideration had been given to Wokipgham playing the match at Cardiff or
at Reading.



                                                       4
Superintendent Wardle finishes his report by saying that he was convinced
that had the reinforced concrete posts not collapsed the match would have
been concluded without major crown disturbances.   Thereafter mention of a
total attendance of about 4,100 is made.




                                V
J D Hayes B Sc C Eng MICE
                                  - 6 -



C.31536.M


CONFIDENTIAL CONCLUSIONS


1.     In this accident W P C   Letchford had been instructed by her superiors
       to watch over a section of the crowd in the North terrace of Wokingham
       Town Football Club's ground.       During some state of agitation on the
       part of the spectators in front of her, when/they all surged forward,
       the crash barrier or perimeter fence collapsed so that the front members
       of the crowd fell down and the remainder from behind surged forward.
       Miss Letchford was struck to the ground by the fence and, apparently,
       trampled by the crown and sustained injury.


2.     We understand from Superintendent Wardle's report to Chief Superintendent
       Webb, both of the Thames Valley Police, that it was known both to the
       Police and to the Club as a result of an initial inspection of the
       ground that the facilities for spectators were nowhere near the standard
       found on Footwball League grounds.       This form of check up was made
       because Wokingham Town, a non league football team were playing in
        the first round of the cup against a third dividion football team,
        Cardiff City.   We understand that this was the first occasion on which
        a competitive match involving a league team had been played on the ground,
        and that consideration had been given to playing elsewhere.      However,
        in spite of the known lack of facilities the Police set a capacity
        number for the ground and required certain other minor alterations
        be made in order to facilitate effective Policing.


 3.     The Home Office/Scottish Home & Health Department issued a booklet
        in 1976 entitled "Guide to Safety at Sportsgrounds (Football)".       The
        description given within the booklet is that "This booklet is a guide
        to measures for improving spectators safety at existing football grounds."
        Although the booklet is an authoritative guide it is a voluntary code
        and has no legal force.    However, in our view it can be considered
        to be a guide to the reasonable practice which should obtain.       Section
        2 of the booklet outlines the problem to be overcome and separates
        it into three sections.    Paragraph 2.3 states "The second type is far
        more important.    When large crowds are present and densities are high,
        pressures build up within the crowd either through motion or swaying
        which make it difficult, or even impossible for individuals to control



                                                       6
                           - 7 -




their own movements.     Under these conditions crowd pressures can escalate
to a dangerous state and if a person stumbles or falls the crowd cannot
adapt to avoid him or stop to help.      Since this type of danger arises
from crowd pressures its remedy relies in their removal or restraint
within safe limits.    These dangers arise in particular on terraces
and in exit routes, and so careful attention must be paid to restraining
surges and similar pressures on the terraces and to ensuring free movement
throughout the exit systems.       Such free movement is dependent upon
the capacity of all the various sections of the exit systems and
interactions between them."


Section 4 deals with inspections and tests which are considered necessary.
Paragraph 4.1 advocates a detailed inspection of the ground and all
components and installations, annually.         Paragraph 4.2 advocates a
general visual inspection of the ground for signs of damage which might
create a potential danger to the public after each event and mentions
that crash barriers should be examined for deformation or any other
overt signs of weakness.


The last paragraph in this section states that the testing of crash
barriers should be carried out in accordance with an appendix of the
code and that a representative sample of barrier should be selected
for testing.   After these tests further testing should only be necessary,
according to the Guide, at intervals of several years unless special
 circumstances obtain.


 The Guide states in section 7 that terraces are recognised as presenting
 a special safety problem.     Failure to p r o v i d e spectators with an
 unobstructed view, according to the Guide, invites them to stretch
 and strain and so generate dangerous pressures within the crowd.            It
 is for that reason that the Guide recommends a distance of 3m between
 the touch line and the face of the terrace where the gradient is 30°
 or steeper and where it is shallower for this distance to be increased
 so as to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.         On this ground
 the gradient of the terrace is just under 14j£° and the distance between



                                                7
                            - 8 -




the front of the terrace and the edge of the pitch is 1.65m.      This
clearly is well below the required level.


Paragraph 7.4 deals with terrace steps and the preferred length is
between 355mm and 380mm and the absolute requirement is 280mm and 380mm.
In actual fact, on this terrace, the approximate length of the step
is 533mm.     Clearly this is far in excess of the recommendation.    The
height of the risers is in accordance with the requirements and the
gradient is satisfactory, also.


The railing at the bottom of the terrace might be termed a crash barrier
or else a pitch perimeter fence, but the structural requirements are
the same.


The Guide, in section 12, gives a maximum horizontal distance between
barriers depending on the gradient of the terrace and also depending
upon which of two strength requirements the crash barriers satisfy.
In this event, on the consideration that the area where the accident
occurred is not a peak viewing area the maximum horizontal distance
between barriers should be 3.7m if the barriers satisfy the lower of
two strength characteristics.       In fact, the distance from front to
back of the terrace is 4.8m which would suggest that the barrier had
a strenth of somewhere between the upper and lower criteria given in
table 13.3.


We have checked the strength of the rails assuming them to be the same
as say scaffold poles, and assuming that their supports are satisfactory^
and find that they are grossly overstressed even when loaded in the
lesser of the two manners mentioned above.        Therefore, there should
be an extra guard rail on the terrace in any event, and the existing
one should be strengthened.     If, however, the existing one was strengthened
to satisfy the upper criterion given then there would be no       need for
an extra crash barrier.


According to the Guide, the top rail of the crash barrier should be
between 1.02m and 1.12m above the nosing of the step immediately behind
the barrier.     But there is no step immediately behind it.    However,
reference to the pitch perimeter fence gives the height of 1.12m and




                                              8
                                 - 9 -




     so, in our view, this rail should be between 1.02m and 1.12m above
     the bottom concrete slab.   In actual fact, it is just under 890mm from
                                                                                 /

     concrete surface to the centreline of the tube.


6.   Lastly, we have the estimation of safe ground capacity.     This is given
     in the Guide quite precisely in the number of people per square metre.
     We find, however, that we are unable to comment upon this particular
     aspect because partitions had been made within the terrace in order
     to isolate the Cardiff crowd and we cannot tell the area denied spectators
     on this account.


7.   The actual posts which gave way at the time of the accident have now
     been destroyed and were not available for inspection.     But one such
     post which was close by the place where the accident occurred is shown
     on our photographs 7, 8 and 9.      It can be seen from these photographs
     that the post is badly affected by spalling and which has most likely
     taken place on account of rusting of the reinforcement.      This will
     account for both the loss of the face at the side of the post at the
     top and the longitudinal crack along its outside face, as seen in
     photograph 9.   Both of these aspects will weaken the post considerably
     It is impossible for us to check the design strength of these posts
     because we do not know the type of reinforcement which is used, nor
     if it is only four wires or more which have been used for reinforcing
     the posts.   Furthermore we do not know the construction below a concrete
     slab, and what degree of resistence there is in this place.      Because
     it would appear as if some of the posts caused the concrete in which
     they were embedded to give way.      But in any event, this particular
     post must have been recognised as having lost concrete and cracked
     because it has been painted over these deficiencies.


8.   We are therefore of the view that the shape of this terrace does not
     conform to the Guide, there is insufficient space between the edge
     of the terrace and the edge of the ground and furthermore that the
     crash barrier or pitch perimeter fence is grossly inadequate.      Furthermore,
     there appears to be evidence that at least the visual inpection following
     each event has not been carried out, and where the Guide particularly
     mentions "crash barriers and balustrades should be examined for deformation




                                                     9
                                      -   10 -




       or any other overt signs of weakness."         It would also be illuminating,
       in our view, if a copy of the annual detailed inspection could be obtained
       together with copies of physical tests made to the crash barriers.


       We are therefore of the view that it was negligent of Wokingham Town
       Football Club to have held this match at this ground with the facilities
       as they were, and allowing the crowd that they did.         Our view, therefore,
       is that the injury which W P C        Letchford sustained can be attributed
       directly to the negligence of Wokingham Town Football Club.


10.    However, Thames Valley Police Force knew that "...the facilites for
       spectators were nowhere near the standard found on Football League
       grounds."     Furthermore, it was they who gave Wokingham Town Football
       Club advice on the numbers to allow in.         In the light of this, we doubt
       if Thames Valley Police can be consideired blameless, and our view
       is that they, too, contributed towards W P C        Letchford's injuries by
       instructing her to work in an unsafe place.


       Furthermore, the Police account mentions two other occasions when the
       crowd pushed down the perimeter fence or crush barrier.         And from the
       description it would appear as if there might have been a mischievous
       intent of this section of the crowd merely to push down the barrier
       which they realised was not capable of resisting their surging forward
       against it.     In the circumstances, therefore, we cannot see how Thames
       Valley Police can avoid taking some responsibility for the injury which
       W PC    Letchford sustained.


       W P C   Letchford was directed to stand in the place where she sustained
       her injury.     The distance between the touch line and the crash barrier
       was such that we doubt if she was capable of standing at a safe distance.
       In any event, however, she was under the close supervision of her superiors.
       For this reason we do not think that she wil be considered to have
       contributed in any way whatsoever towards the injury which she sustained.




J D Hayes B Sc C Eng MICE
                                                      Mn. A. F. R U S H F O R T H .


                                                                                            79. H A R L E Y S T R E E T ,
      ,          BREDON.
                                                                                              L O N D O N , WIN I DE
A, A B B E Y A V E N U E ,        STEPH ENS,
                                                                                                   01- 93B 1933
  S ' A L B A N S , H E R T S . A L 3 4A Z
             St A L B A N S   SS763-


                                                Miss Sarah Jafce Letchford

                                                      A^ed 21 years



                                                            Reading,
                                                             Berks.



          HISTORY:




          OCCUPATION:                          Hiss Letchford said she is a •police constable in
                                               •hhft nni form branch.




          ^CREATIONS:




          DC’G S T IC ’.VCRK:                  Miss Letchford lives alone.




                                                                                           continued/


                                                                                      11
          /continued.




PREVIOUS IIISTOSY:


P22SE..T STATE:




o ?i ::i c n :
                                    -   2 -




    Miss Sarah Jane Letchford (continued)




    AFH/PS
    24th March 1983
!
i

                                              13
                                                    Mr . A. F. R U S H F O R T H .

              BREOON,                                                                          79, H A R L E Y S T R E E T .

A B B E Y A VE NU E . ST S T E P H E N S .                                                      L O N O O N , WIN l O E
                                                                                                      01*938 1033
ST A L B A N S , H E R T S . AL3 4AZ
         st a l s a n s   ssrea

                                        M E D I C A L                  R E P O R T

                                             Mrs.   Sarah       3ane T i b b e y,


                                                        Reading,
                                                       Berkshire




       O C C UP AT IO N:                      Mrs. Ti bb e y says si-ie remains a uniformed
                                              pol ic e constable.




     R EC R E A T I O N S :




      D O M E S T I C WORK:                   Mrs. T i bb e y said she thought she had con­
                                              ti nu ed her dom est ic work in an entirely
                                              normal way.

      PRESENT             STATE:




                                                                                     14   continued/
          /continued




ON   EXAMINATION:




OPI NI O N:




                       15
                                    (2)




ftrs.   Sarah Jane TI33EY    (continued)




 AFR/PC
 7fch J a n u a r y   1986
