                                                                                                               M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                      jte and tim e raised               —7
                                                                                            —
                                                                                                  ________ L _ J L -            N um ber

        /
Title L M                                                                       it f c /         ll-tC p r jgi. i /             h& Sji~C        J    / i   ///%
(Include source and a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)

                                                                                           /~:   r.,„ .»~v     A   t",//C?
R e c e iv e s instructions — urgent action   -yesffio
                   ■'j?p {S&.                                                                                                                       Receiver

      IT
                                      /                                                                                                    «55>'0 &.
Document registered/indf              indicated                                                                                                     Indexer


No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                                     % 3G
Statement reader's instructions                                                                                                            S tatem ent Reader
                                          ■/,            U >f                                                             C*v
                                              77
      c.    •        ■     if   Olf                                     U
                                                                       T*
                                                                            /*>                              c4.                           ■5~st?r,
indexed as ijidjeSted                                               C4-V"              * ~ •/ ' /                     ^•rk *?                       Indexer


No(s) o f actions raised                                                                           flu u 2 }£ J J £ A
                                                                   vAvr-Ho
Examined - ■ fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                                                                  sio
                                                                                                                                           CK
                                                                                                                                           iS5>»
F u rth e r action No(s)                                                                                                                            Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                           POLICE HEA DQ UARTE RS
                                                                                           SNIG H IL L
                                                                                           SHE FF IEL D S3 8LY
                                                                                           T ELEPHONE 10742) 768522
                                                                                           T E L E X 547996



 ALL CO M MUNIC ATIO NS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
 'THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”

                                                                                           YOUR REFERENCE
J M Jones Esq MSc
Assistant Chief Constable                                                                  OUR REFERENCE             ACC(OPS)/TFB/HMW
West Midlands Police                                                                       DATE                      1 December 1989
PO Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway                                         j
Bi rmingham
B4 6NQ


 Dear Mr Jones
 In confirmation of your telephone conversation with my Deputy Chief Constable,
 Mr P Hayes earlier today, I write in relation to additional facts which have
 been uncovered, pertaining to the Upper North West Terracing at the Hillsborough
 Stadium and, in particular, in relation to the calculated capacity for that
 area of the ground.
 When the Semi Final took place on 15 April 1989 the capacity for the Upper
 North West Terrace was 2,800 and, obviously, that number of tickers would
 be sold. Following the disaster, this section of the ground remained unused,
 nevertheless, the Local Authority in line with the recommendations of Lord
 Justice Taylor, reassessed the capacity as 2,300. As the season progressed
 it became necessary to use the Upper North West Terrace as an emergency contingency
 area to accommodate visiting fans, and this was encapsulated in the Safety
 Certificate issued by the Local Authority.
 Before the evening of 21 November 1989 only a few hundred spectators had
 been accommodated in the area referred to but on the evening mentioned ie:
 21 November 1989 Sheffield Wednesday played Sheffield United at the Hillsborough
 Stadium in the Zenith Data Systems Cup. As will be appreciated, there was
 much local interest in this match and with the consent of the Local Authority
 Advisory Group, the Upper North West Terrace was used to accommodate Sheffield
 United fans. I repeat that at this time the authorised capacity had been
 assessed as 2,300 and that amount of tickets, or thereabouts, were sold for
 this area.
 Five minutes before kick off the area was full and no more spectators could
 be safely accommodated. It was seen that there was between 200 and 300 people
 standing in the gangways to the terrace and at the bottom of the stairwells
 waiting to gain access, but due to the density of the crowd they were unable
 to do so. The Chief Superintendent in charge, Mr Nesbit, concluded that
 no more spectators could be safely accommodated within this terrace area
 and those who were waiting to gain access were taken to another part of the
 ground. Whilst this exercise was being carried out it was seen that a further
 100/150 spectators were still outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, waiting
 to be admitted.

        THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE I S ............................................... EXTENSION ................

ADM/1
During the game it was necessary for spectators comfort to remove a further
350 from this terrace. Estimations are that once spectators had been removed
about 1,700 people remained but they were still closely packed.
As stated previously this was the first time since the Semi Final on 15 April
1989 when the area had been at capacity, and it was abundantly clear that
the number of spectators shown on the certificate, ie: 2,300 could not be
accommodated, but at the time of the Semi Final the fixed capacity for this
area was 2,800. Immediate discussions took place between Chief Superintendent
Nesbit and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell,
and they agreed an emergency figure of 1,500 maximum. On 23 November 1989
I wrote to Mr H M Webster - copy letter enclosed - the Head of Sheffield
Administration and Legal Department advising him of our concern and a special
meeting of the General Purposes Panel was called for 2.00 pm on Monday 27
November 1989.

Between times, it was discovered from an officer of the Council, Mr John
Derricott, the Safety in Sports Ground Officer, that the plans which the
Local Authority used to determine the capacity for the North West Upper Terrace
had been drawn to a scale which showed the terrace to be larger than it actually
was.
At the meeting on 27 November 1989 an emergency item was introduced which
encapsulated the information contained in this letter to this point. A copy
of the notes for this meeting are included.
There was prolonged discussion as to the revised capacity for this area of
the ground and Mr John Strange, who was representing Eastwood and Partners
at the meeting, suggested that the capacity to be fixed at 1,400 will allow
time for exact calculations to be made, but he was sure that the figure of
1,400, whilst erring on the side of safety, would not be too far from the
exact figure. So, on 15 April 1989 we had a capacity of 2,800 which has
now been reduced to 1,400, a reduction of 100%!
At the meeting, the question was never asked, or indeed, considered relative
to the accuracy of the plans for the Leppings Lane Terrace on which the capacity
had been calculated, a question which I have now addressed to the Local Authority
in my letter, a copy of which is attached.
I need not spell out the implications which surround the facts now brought
to light, but if I can be of further help to you in this matter, I would
be pleased if you could contact me.
Yours sincerely



______________________________ I
                              Kj *
A/Assistant Chief Constable
Operations
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                         POLICE H E A DQ UARTE RS
                                                                                         SNIG H IL L
                                                                                         SH E FF IE L D S3 8LY
                                                                                         TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                                         T E L E X 547996



      ALL CO M M UNICAT IO NS SHOULD BE ADDRE SSED TO
      T H E CHIEF CONSTABLE"
r   Councillor J Butler                                                                  YOUR REFERENCE
    Chairman
    General Purposes Panel                                                               OUR REFERENCE                 ACC(OPS)/TFB/HMW
    Sheffield City Council                                                               DATE                          1 December 1989
    Town Hall
    Sheffield SI 2HH
L                                                              J



    Dear Councillor Butler
    I refer to the meeting of the General Purposes Panel held at the Town Hall
    on Monday 27 November 1989 and, in particular, to the report prepared by
    the Head of the Administration and Legal Department to the General Purposes
    Panel as an EMERGENCY ITEM relating to:-
            'Capacities of terrace areas at certificated football grounds and, in
            particular, the North West Upper Terrace, Sheffield Wednesday football
            g r o u n d 1.
    Note 2.1 states
            'Mr Butler informed by Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds), Mr Derricott,
            in a telephone conversation at approximately 10.30 am on 23rd November,
            that Mr Strange of Messrs Eastwood &Partners, Consulting Engineers,
            had spoken to Mr Sherriff, Principal Structural Engineer, Department
            of Land and Planning, and suggested that the plan on which capacities
            had been calculated for the North West Upper Terrace of the West Terrace
            was incorrect'.
    My understanding is that the scale of the plan referred to showed the North
    West Upper Terrace as being larger than it actually is. Can you please confirm
    that fact or otherwise?
    Additionally, I am anxious to ascertain the accuracy of the plans and the
    subsequent calculation of the capacity for the Leppings Lane Terrace prior
    to 15 April 1989. Again, can you assist, please?
    Yours sincerely




    A/Assistant Chief Constable
    Operations

        THE OFFICER DEA LING WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE I S .................................................EXTENSION

    ADM/1
                                                      L ,A . ''A'             Sio/Ji
\        ^                               *-     tZ^   / ' 1
                          REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                                        TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                      r ^ —. f I l4~Oo   'L t ^ i   Q*y_
         i   7*       .       1                            EMERGENCY ITEM                                   ,
     <|                           4Wju3< ^4-6*.— L ~ A ,        L   C a S ic ^< 3 > (*- ^               r       .
         *        '       '       SAVF.TY OF SPORTS GROUNDS A C T          1975      (A S   AM ENDED)


         Capacities of Terrace Areas at Certificated Football Grounds and in
    particular the North West Upper Terrace, Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground


    1.       Introduction

    1.1      On Wednesday, 22nd November, 1989 at the request of the South Yorkshire
             Police, Officers from the Administration and Legal Department, the
             Department of Land and Planning and the South Yorkshire Fire Service
             attended at Hammerton Road Police Station to view extracts from the
             Police video of the football match that had taken place at Hillsborough
             Sports Stadium the night before.

    1.2      The Police highlighted the problem that had been experienced by a
             number of spectators in the North West Upper Terrace of the Ground and
             the action they had taken to alleviate the problem,N     !>£c.-(W

    1.3      It was suggested that in the absence of further data, a revised
             capacity of 1,500 be placed in this area and that the General Safety
             Certificate in respect of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be amended
             to reflect this. It was pointed out by the Police that the Club had no
             objection to this and the proposal was confirmed by Mr. Mackrell on
             behalf of the Club on Thursday, 23rd November, 1989.

    1.4      The General Safety Certificate was amended with the approval of the
             Chairman of the General Purposes Panel on Friday, 24th November, 1989 .
             I attach a copy of the amendment.

    2.       Building Surveyor's Memorandum of 23rd November, 1989

    2.1      Mr. Butler informed my Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds), Mr.
             Derricott, in a telephone conversation at approximately 10.30 a.m. on
             23rd November, that Mr. Strange of Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
             Consulting Engineers, had spoken to Mr. Sherriff, Principal Structural
             Engineer, Department of Land and Planning, and suggested that the plan
             on which capacities had been calculated for the North West Upper
             Terrace of the West Terrace was incorrect.

    2.2      Mr. Butler confirmed this in a memorandum to me dated 23rd November,
             1989, and received by my Chief Licensing Officer at 11.30 a.m. on 24th
             November, 1989. I would draw your attention to paragraph 6 of the
             memorandum.

    2.3      The capacity of 2,300 was incorporated into the Safety Certificate
             after I received a memorandum from the Building Surveyor dated 11th
             August, 1989 (copy attached). This amendment was authorised by the
             Panel at its meeting on 17th August, 1989.
                                      2.



3.    Messrs. Eastwood & Partners

3.1   My Assistant Solicitor, Mrs. Woodhead, telephoned Messrs. Eastwood &
      Partners on Friday afternoon, 24th November, 1989 at approximately
      1.00 p.m. and spoke with a Mr. Strange.

3.2 Mr. Strange pointed out that a revised plan was being drawn up based on
     calculations that had been made that day. He informed my Assistant
     Solicitor that the initial calculations for the area put the capacity
     at 1,594. This figure has not yet been confirmed by Messrs. Eastwood &
     Partners.

3.3   My Assistant Solicitor queried whether or not the plans for the Spion
      Kop Terrace area were correct. Mr. Strange   confirmed that the plans
      deposited with the Council for the Spion Kop were, as far as he was
      aware, up to date and correct.

3.4   I have written to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners confirming my Assistant
      Solicitor's telephone conversation and inviting a representative to the
      Panel meeting on 27th November (copy letter attached).

4.    Items for Consideration

4.1   To confirm the actions of the Chairman in conjunction with the Head of
      Administration and Legal Department in authorising the amendment to the
      General Safety Certificate in respect of Sheffield Wednesday Football
      Club reducing the capacity for the North West Terrace Upper from 2,300
      to 1,500.

4.2   To consider what further action, if any, is needed in view of the
      forthcoming match on Wednesday, 29th November, 1989.

4.3   To consider asking the Club to submit a full set of plans in respect of
      the Ground for the purposes of reassessing capacities.

5.    Documents Attached

5.1   The amended Schedule of Capacities incorporated into the General Safety
      Certificate for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

5.2   The Building Surveyor's memoranda dated 11th August, 1989 and 23rd
      November, 1989.

5.3   My letter to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners dated 24th November, 1989.

6.    Recommendations

6.1   The Panel is recommended to:-

      (a)   confirm the action taken by the Chairman in conjunction with the
            Head of Administration and Legal in reducing the capacity for the
            North West Terrace Upper of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
            1,500;
      (b)    ask the Advisory Group to prepare a set of plans regulations which
             can be used by the Club to draw up a set of plans to enable
             capacities to be reassessed at the Sports Ground.




                                                                 H.          M. Webster
                                                        Head of Administration
                                                          and Legal Department
 Town Hall
 SHEFFIELD

November, 1989




SGIAAD/JJJ
                     SHEFFIELD CITY CODNCIL

                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

        NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                  ISSUED ON 21ST DECEMBER 1979


TAKE NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED TO SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED IN RESPECT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM,
PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ON 21ST
DECEMBER 1979 (AS AMENDED ON 11TH, 18TH AUGUST, 1989 AND 15TH
SEPTEMBER, 1989) IS HEREBY FURTHER AMENDED

The amendment is as specified in Appendix 1.

THIS AMENDMENT IS ISSUED BY THE SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL IN RESPECT OF
THE PREMISES DESCRIBED ABOVE BEING A SPORT GROUND DESIGNATED BY ORDER
UNDER SECTION 1 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197 5 AS A SPORTS
GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which Sheffield
City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
safety at the Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in
respect of which this Certificate is issued.


The amendment shall come into operation on the 24th day of November,
1989.


Dated the 24th day of November, 1989.



                              Signed .... ........................

                                        Mr. H. M. Webster,
                                        Head of Administration and
                                        Legal Department on behalf
                                        of and duly authorised by the
                                        Sheffield City Council



TO:- Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
                             A PP E N D IX   1 -   AMENDMENT



The Safety Certificate issued by the South Yorkshire County Council on 21st
December 1979 and amended on 11th, 18th August and 15th September 1989 shall be
further amended to read as follows

Schedule 3

The number of spectators admitted to the Sports Ground and to the various areas
of the spectator accommodation within the Sports Ground shall not exceed the
following figures:

Spion Kop                                              16,800

South Stand   Upper                                     5,567

South Stand   Lower                                     3,310

West Stand                                              4,465

North West TerraceUpper                                 1,500

North Stand                                             9,700


Total Crowd   Capacity                                 41,342




PB/63/DE139
                                     Wl «   I   W(   r i £ . i . u   —    t i i u i u w i m t i u w i i i

.-til
        From   The Building Surveydr,                                To        Acting Head of Administration and
                Department of Land and Planning                              . Legal Department

        Qate    11th August, 1989                                    For the attention of Mr. D. M. Bownes
        Ref     BSD/AB/JB
        Tel Ext       - Mr. Butler                                   Ref.




                                        Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC
                     *.                  Estimated Terrace Capacity

                I refer to the telephone call between Mr. Bownes and my Principal District
                Surveyor, Mr. Butler, earlier this afternoon.

                The approximate holding capacities produced for the standing terrace
                areas do not take account of any turnstile ingress limitations, or
                those of egress or emergency egress limitations since it is my understanding
                that the Fire Authority will consider all these matters being that they
                have the primary function of estimation of terrace capacity.

                These figures therefore need to be carefully checked with those produced
                by the Fire Authority to ensure that account is taken of the need for
                any further limitations' for the purposes of the proposed certificate
                amendment.

                My calculations based on the "green guide" modified by the Taylor Inquiry
                recommendations give the following

                1.   Spion Kop                             18,200
                2.   North West Terrace (Upper)             2,300
                3.   North West Corner (Lower)                 680                    (Pen        7)

                In accordance with our consultations, figures have not been produced for
                Pens one to six of the West Terrace.

                I would appreciate the sight of the Fire Authority figures before the
                Certificate is amended.
                                CI TY OF SHEFFI ELD — M E M O R A N D U M

•From
             The Building Surveyor,                   To     Head of Administration and Legal
             Department of Land and Planning                 Department

D ate
             23rd November, 1989                             For the attention of Mr. J. Derricntt-
Ref.
             BSD/ABu/KTH/Kl0ADK
             4162 - Mr. A. Butler
Tel. Ext.                                             Ref.




            Safety of Sports Grounds
            Sheffield Wednesday Football d u b PLC
            Capacity of Opper ifarth West Terrace

            Subsequent to a meeting at Bamnerton Road Police Station on 22nd November
            to discuss various matters arising fran the match between Sheffield
            Wednesday and Sheffield United on 21st November, I have had cause to
            revise the reooranended holding capacity for this area of the ground.

            You will recall that the present capacity figures were produced within
            hours, on list August, 1989, and therefore only a paper exercise was
            carried out in that restrictive time.

            A site visit earlier today revealed the extent of the area of terrace
            partially blinded by the screen between the North West Terrace and the
            North Stand.

            Accordingly that area has been emitted from the gross available area of
            terrace.

            The holding capacity of the remaining areas has been re-calculated and
            modified in accordance with the Taylor reccnmendations, giving a resultant
            figure of 1,700.

            Eastwood and Partners drawing number 1610/64E has been used for the layout
            of^this area. In a telephone conversation between Mr Strange of Eastwood
            and "Partners and my Principal Structural Engineer, late this afternoon, it
            was intiaated that this drawing may not be accurate, and that the gross
            available space may be slightly smaller than is shown on the drawing.

            Until the area has been resurveyed and revised drawings received, I would
            recommend that the holding capacity for the Opper North Vfest Terrace be a
            maximum of 1,500.
                rw
              WE/JAS/JAH/11621
              24tb November, 1969


Messrs* Eastwood t Partners,
 Consulting Engineers,
■St. •Andr*v*• ■House»7*4
 23 Kingfiald l o a d ^ T p : J



Por the attention of Hr. J. Strange           1
             'TSr*'              V. i.;           ..-tv.
Dear -Mr* - ' S t r a n g e , A \ ; * r:

The Sheffield Wednesday Football Clob — Capacity of liortb Oeat Terrace

I refer to your telephone conversation with     J           act tbe 24th November,
1989* I confirm that the Chair of the General Purposes t a d % M authorised
that the safety certificate be amended to reflect tbe fact-tfcat tbe capacity of
the north vest terrace should be reduced to £1,500 In view---off the crowd control
difficulties there were at the Batch on the 21st lioveaber* ~*X.understand that
this accords with the new calculations you hare made ttrisweek. I look forward
to hearing from you with the revised plan you have prepared at this portion of
the stadium.

As you are aware from the conversation with                the Building Surveyor
hss advised me that the plaa upon which the original calculations «a« based was
Incorrect. In view of the fact that fresh calculations have W e n made in
respect of the north vest corner, this appears to resolve tbe jproblea in that
respect* However, I aa concerned about the plans and calculations for the
remainder of tbe ground. With reference to tbe Kop area, 1 understand that you
are confident that these plans are correct* I would be grateful if you vould
confirm this*

I an pleased to note that you will be attending the General Psnyoses Panel
Meeting at 2*30 p.m. on Monday, the 27th November, since 1 an sure members will
require clarific&cion of a large nunber of matters at that meeting-

Yours sincerely.




Head of Department




BH20/FW2411
                                                  734004
            Gr/Fv



            15th August, J539




The County Fire Officer,
tuvi^ian..! Headquarters,
\.\Ilington Street,
Sheffield 1.

Beer Sir,

    Scfety Certlficotes - Sheffield United Football Club
r.L :
and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

As you ore ovare, an Intcric Certificate has been issued to Sheffield United
Football Club vlth rvvased figures for capacity and stevording aod the
existing Certificate for Sheffield Wednesday Footbv .11 Club has been
sinularly ao-.-nded. As you art cwart, this is with a view to implementing
vhat is prob* bly the d o c i important intc-rio recoont-ndation Bade by Lord
Juttict. Taylor m his report upon the- Hillsborough Diststcr.

Kowfc-ver, I understand froc conversations that ny staff have had with our own
Building Surveyor thut there hr.6 not been sufficient tide to cooplete the
necessary calculations using the fornula laid down by Lord Justice Taylor
for this purposs m his interim reeomn«ndetions.     It is clearly essential
that the relevant calculations erp made as soon as possible with r view to
the Certificates being amended to reflect this fact. 1 consider th*t it is
Dost important that the Certificates arc aoended before big matches take
place at the respective Sports Grounds.    Please would youtherefore liaise
with the Building Surveyor to ensure that the neccssary calculations are
made and the relevant figures available as a natter of urgency. 1 confirm
that 1 have written to the Building Surveyor in siali&r terms. II there is
any difficulty, please contact Mr. Bownes, ray Chief Licensing Officer.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Departsent.


JU
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                             POLICE H E A DQ UAR TE RS
                                                                                                             SNIG H IL L
                                                                                                             S H E F F IE L D S3 8 L Y
                                                                                                             TELEPHONE (07421 768522
                                                                                                             T E L E X 547996



     A L L C O M M U N IC A T IO N S SH O ULD BE ADDRESSED TO
     "T H E CHIEF CO NSTA BLE"                              _j
r                                                                                                             Y O U R REFERENCE
      H M Webster Esq LLB
      Head of Department                                                                                     O UR REFERENCE                   ACC (0)/TFB/KIH
      Sheffield City Council                                                                                  date                            23 November 1989
      Administration & Legal Department
      Town Hall
      Sheffield   SI 2HH                j
L

      For the personal and urgent attention of
      Mr John Derricott




      Dear Sir

      HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND - THE NORTH WEST TERRACE

      As you are aware, on the evening of 21 November 1989 Sheffield Wednesday played
      Sheffield United at the Hillsborough Stadium. As a contingency the north west
      terrace was taken into use to accommodate the Sheffield United fans. The present
      capacity of this terrace is 2300 but, in the view of the officer in charge on the
      night - Chief Superintendent Nesbit 'F' Division - that number cannot be safely
      accommodated. Approximately five minutes before the kick-off there were 200/300
      people standing in the gangways and at the bottom of the stairwells, being unable
      to gain access into this terrace. Having examined the situation, Chief
      Superintendent Nesbit concluded that this number of people could not be safely
      accommodated within the terraced area and made pleas to have them transferred to
      another part of the ground. Whilst this exercise was being carried out it was
      seen that a further 100/150 spectators were still outside in Leppings Lane
      waiting to be admitted. These people, too, were accommodated in the north stand.

       It will be seen that around 450 people could not be accommodated and this was at
       a time when tickets had been sold which should have ensured that the capacity
       would not have been exceeded.

       It is the view of Chief Superintendent Nesbit that the capacity for this north
       west terrace should be reduced, and he has held preliminary discussions with the
       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell, who has agreed
       that a realistic figure should be 1500 maximum.




                                                                                                                                                Cont'd . . .


                                                                                                                                                  3403
            THE O F F IC E R D EA LIN G W IT H T H IS CORRESPONDENCE I S ................................................ E X T E N S IO N ................


    ADM/1
                                      -   2   -




Clearly, urgent attention needs to be given to this matter since the fixture next
week on’29 November - Sheffield Wednesday -v- Liverpool - is expected to draw a
good crowd and it would seem that lessons had not been learnt if on that night
gates had to be closed before the official maximum capacity had been reached.

I await your early reply.

Yours faithfully




A/Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)
