Sheffield a          Pen | i o | i.l s

From:   J M HILLIER FIFM DMA                                    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        ASSISTANT CHIEF OFFICER                                 HEADQUARTERS
        (Administration)                                        PO Box 32, Lloyd House
                                                                Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                Telephone: 021-236 5000




        Chief Superintendent I Mountain
        South Yorkshire Police
        Snig Hill                                       Our Ref:       ADM/DSH/DL
        Sheffield
        S3 8LY                                          Dates          20 March 1991

        Dear Chief Superintendent Mountain

        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - EQUIPMENT

        Further to our meeting on Thursday, 7 March 1991 regarding the equipment used
        for the Hillsborough Enquiry, I write to confirm the following:-

        Category A

        Equipment, consumables and services to the value of £358,199 were purchased
        specifically for the Hillsborough Inquiry.

        Category B

        Equipment was hired from the private sector and eventually off-hired (costs
        included in Category A ) .

        Category C

        Equipment purchased for other purposes by the West Midlands Police was
        diverted to the Hillsborough Inquiry for varying periods of time.

        Category D

        Existing equipment already in use by the West Midlands Police was diverted to
        the Hillsborough Inquiry for varying periods of time.

        Categories C and D were regarded as "hired" to the Hillsborough Inquiry at a
        charge of £48,368 by mutual agreement.

        Now that the Hillsborough Inquiry is nearing completion a decision needs to
        be taken regarding the final ownership of the equipment purchased under
        Category A.

        It could be argued that the equipment (or at least a proportion) belongs to
        the Home Office, but, since it has no residual value in financial terms, I
        would propose that it remains with our respective Forces.

        Of the original purchase value of £358,199:-

        £28,439 was for goods and services at Furnival House and in the West
        Midlands, eg cleaning, electrical work, of which £3,438 appears in
        Appendix A - denoted *.




                                                                           Continued ...
                                                    - 2 -
                                                                                            , 1 V
                                                                                       0
              £17,398 was for consumables, eg paper, video tapes.                            i n

                                                                                             q n
              £13,233 was for maintenance cover for the HOLMES.
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                 i j   y_
              £14,989 was for upgrading of switchboard at Nechells Green.
                                                                                   , Q - i t 1
                                                                                   L I
              £284,140 was spent on equipment

                                          Appendix A - £197,401
                                          Appendix B - £86,739

              I would propose that the equipment itemised at Appendix A should become the
        n     property of the South Yorkshire Police; and the equipment itemised at
 Ulh/'y
              Appendix B should become the property of the West Midlands Police.
•s YP oj'e.
              I have asked Mrs          :o arrange a further meeting for us to discuss and
              finalise matters

              Yours sincerely




              Assistant Chief Officer
              (Administration)


              cc           Esq
                                                      REF:             MS/CH
FROM:   Deputy Chief Constable
                                                      STATION/DEPT:    HEADQUARTERS
TO:
                                                      DATE:           . 22 March 1991


        SUBJECT:   THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        It is anticipated that the inquest into the Hillsborough Tragedy will
        end on or about Thursday 28 March 1991 and unless there is a need for a
        criminal investigation the West Midlands Inquiry Team wiVI commence the
        handing over of paperwork and equipment to South Yorkshire as soon as
        possible thereafter.    In order that the hand-over can be properly
        controlled, the lease on Furnival House will be retained until the end
        of April.
        Assuming that hand-over can commence as indicated above, it is proposed
        t h a t the A s s i s t a n t Chief Constable Staff Services (Discipline &
        C o m p l a i n t s ) take over responsibility for all residual inquiries.
        Initially PS 758 Morgan and PC 931 Greenway should be attached to
        Discipline & Complaints to deal with all the residual matters under the
        supervision of the Head of the Discipline & Complaints Department.
        Dependent on the extent of work involved, it may be possible to release
        PS Morgan from these duties at an early stage but in any case the
        situation should be regularly monitored to see if there is a need to
        retain either or both officers.
        Once it has been established that hand over can take place, PS Morgan
        and PC Greenway should liaise with the West Midlands Officers with a
        view to arranging
        (a)   the hand over of the inquiry paperwork and property and
        (b)   the necessary training so that they can input the computer.
        Arrangements have been made for five bays to be made available in the
        basement store room (room 13) to house the paperwork. It is suggested
        t h a t the p r o p e r t y be stored in one of the empty ex-divisional
        headquarters rooms at Hammerton Road. If it is to be housed there then
        a security alarm would be required to be fitted. The property should
        not be accepted from the West Midlands Team unless and until it has all
        been properly documented and accounted for. It is suggested that this
        property be retained for two years after which time it -can be disposed
        of.
        The computer used by the West Midlands Team is to be housed in the
        Computer Room at Force Headquarters and all arrangements for this
        transfer are to be made by the Computer Department.     The need for a
        computer terminal and its location should be considered by the Head of
        the Discipline & Complaints Department.
                                  -   2   -



The cancellation of all services to Furnival House (electric, cleaning
etc.) will be the responsibility of Management Services as will be
a r r a n g e m e n t s for the removal, storage, disposal of equipment and
furniture, (other than the computer).




Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                                              HARPER/13/MR


     West Midlands Police                             '
                                                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                      Headquarters Administration
                                                                      PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                      Coimore Circus Queensway
                                                                      Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                      DIRECT LINE: 021-626      5010
                                                                      TEL: 021-626 5000 Ext 2010
 rChief   Superintendent I Mountain
                                                 n                    FAX: 021-233 3256     TELEX: 337321

   South Yorkshire Police                                 Your Ref:
   Snig Hill
                                                          Our R ef:         ADM/DSH/MR
   Sheffield
   S3 8LY                                                 Date:             11 April 1991
                                                          Piease Ask For:   Mrs
 L                                               J

   Dear Mr Mountain

^ H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUIRY - USE OF PHOTOCOPIER, TOWN HALL

   During the final stages of the Hillsborough Inquiry, Hillsborough Inquests, a
   colour photocopying machine was urgently required at Sheffield Town Hall.  The
   machine was used to supply colour photocopies of documentary exhibits to
   solicitors and bereaved families.

   Following discussion with Superintendent Payne, a decision was made to hire
   this machine at an initial cost of £400 (to include the first 100 copies) and
   40p a copy thereafter.

   As you know I have made every attempt during this long Inquiry to identify
   costs attributable to South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield City Council as
   appropriate. At that stage in the Inquest it was held that as this was a
   requirement made of the Coroner's Officer that South Yorkshire Police should
   bare the initial cost.

   I have recently been advised of the total number of copies that were made
   during this period. Appropriate invoices have been forwarded to solicitors and
   bereaved families by Sheffield City Council.  Income from supply of transcripts

•  and photographs etc, would normally be received by the City Council under the
   conditions of the Coroner’s Act.

   You may, I believe, wish to offset some of the hire charges, made to you by
   this Force, to Sheffield City Council and I bring the matter to your attention
   in order that you may pursue as you deem appropriate.

   Yours sincerely




   PRINCIPAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
    The Chief Constable                             Your Re f :
    West Midlands Police
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                           Our Ref:     MS/GEP/JW
    Colmore Circus Queensway
    BIRMINGHAM      B4 6NQ                           Date:        7 May 1991


    For the attention of Mr
    Systems Communications Manager




    Dear Sir

    TRANSFER OF COMPUTER BULL DPS 6+ MODEL 413

    I refer to the above Computer which is to be transferred in the near future
    from your Force to the South Yorkshire Police.

    In confirmation of our telephone conversation of earlier today, the South
    Yorkshire Police will be responsible for arranging a new software and
    hardware maintenance agreement in respect of the above equipment.

    In addition, we will arrange with Bulls for the equipment to be
    decommissioned.
m
    I trust this information is of assistance.

    Yours faithfully




    Superintendent
    for Chief Constable




    The officer dealing with this correspondence is Supt Payne          Ext: 8475
    All communications should be addressed to "The Chief Constable”
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:    C C O /A B / C J D


   From :   Inspector Barker                                  Station/Dept: Discipline/
                                                                                 Complaints
   TO       Acting Chief Superintendent Fell                  Date:              7 May 1991



            SUBJECT:    Hillsborough enquiry file/property

            1 was recently given the responsibility of accepting the property
            relative to the Hillsborough Enquiry as and when the Police Complaints
            Authority announce their findings and the West Midlands Police Force
            hand the property to South Yorkshire Police.

            As a result I have liaised with Police Sergeant Morgan and Police
            Constable Greenway who have the responsibility for the South Yorkshire
            end of the enquiry.  I have also liaised with Superintendent Beechy
            and Police Constable Landers of the West Midlands Police Force.

            As a result I have ascertained that the property will no doubt fit
            in the property store allocated at Ecclesfield Police Station.
            However, the file itself is considerable in bulk and includes 1080
            lever arch files, 300 - A4 size boxes approximately 4 inches deep
            containing original statements, 25 large boxes approximately
            2 foot x 2 foot x 2 foot, containing videos, photographs etc.

            To date we have been offered various accommodation for the material
            which will become the responsibility of the Complaints and Discipline
            Department when the Police Complaints Authority announce their
            findings.  None of that accommodation has been suitable either because
            of its size or its lack of security and the fact that other material
            is presently stored there and those responsible appear reluctant to
            dispose of it.

            Wherever we store the material needs to be accessible and secure and
            should in my opinion be in one location.  I respectfully submit that
            we should identify the location as soon as possible in order that we
            can make the necessary security arrangements in order that the 'hand
            over' can be carried out speedily and efficiently. To this end I would
            ask that the old Headquarters Buildings at Hammerton Road Police
            Station be considered.  If accepted all the material including the
            property would be available in one location and we could set about
            preparing the storage and security as soon as permission is granted.

            Another consideration is the location of the computer and its operator
            who I understand is to be Police Constable Greenway.  If we can
            establish whether he and his equipment is to be based at Headquarters
            or elsewhere we can make the necessary furniture arrangements etc.




            i

                                  Ce^e. d> i^sL




GEN/2
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE



                                                          REF:             MS/IM/JW
FROM:       Chief Superintendent, Management Services
                                                          STATION/DEPT:    HQ MANAGEMENT SERVICES
TO:         Deputy Chief Constable
                                                          DATE:            9 May 1991



            SUBJECT:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


            On 27 March 1991, you issued the attached memorandum in relation to the
            handover of paperwork and equipment from the West Midlands Inquiry Team
            to South Yorkshire and at that time it was thought that the paperwork
            could be accommodated in the basement store room (Room 13).

            It now appears that there is insufficient space in the basement store
            room and that the only possible place in which to house all the inquiry
            paperwork and property is in the empty ex divisional headquarters rooms
            at Hammerton Road.

            Your approval is therefore sought for this course of action.




            Chief Superintendent
            Management Services




        r        6 -   f/


        Ct^, (,          A/(#[«*'
                          & / f    fan**''     F(
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    Ref:           DCC/JEL

From       Deputy Chief Constable                                   Station I Dept: Headquarters

TO                                                                  D ais:         27 March 1991
           ** see distribution list



       SUBJECT.          THE HILLSBROROUGH INQUIRY

       It is anticipated that the Inquest into the Hillsborough tragedy will
       end soon and unless there is a need for a criminal investigation the
       West Midlands Inquiry Team will commence the handing-over of paperwork
       and equipment to South Yorkshire as soon as possible thereafter.
       In order that the hand-over can be properly controlled, the lease
       on Furnival House will be retained until the end of April.

       Assuming that hand-over can commence as indicated above, it is proposed
       that the Assistant     Chief Constable   (Staff Services/Discipline &
       Complaints) take over responsibility for all residual inquiries for
       production of or reference to documentation or exhibits.      Initially
       Sergeant 758 Morgan and Constable 931 Greenway will be attached to
       Discipline & Complaints Department to deal with matters under the
       supervision of the Head of the Discipline & Complaints Department.
       It may be possible to release Sergeant Morgan from these duties at
       an early stage but in any case the situation will be monitored to
       determine the continuing need to retain either or both officers.

       Once it has been established that hand-over can take place, Sergeant
       Morgan and Constable Greenway should liaise with the West Midlands
       officers with a view to arranging:-

         a'.   the hand-over of the Inquiry paperwork, property and computer;

         b.    the necessary    training   so   that   they   can    input   the   computer
               index records.

       Arrangements have been made for five bays      to be available in the
       basement store room (Room 13) to house 'the paperwork.    The property
       will be stored in one of the empty ex-divisional Headquarters rooms
       at Hammerton Road.   A security alarm will be required to be fitted.
       The property should not be accepted from the West Midlands team unless
       and until it has all been properly documented, indexed and accounted
       for.   It is suggested that this property be retained for two years
       after which time disposal will be considered.

       The computer used by the West Midlands team     is to be located in the
       Computer Room at Force Headquarters and all arrangements for this
       transfer are to be made by the Communications & Computer Department.
       The need for a computer terminal and its location should be considered
       by the Head of the Discipline & Complaints Department.

       The cancellation of all services to Furnival House (electric, cleaning
       etc.) will be the responsibility of Management Services as will be
       arrangements for the removal, storage, disposal of equipment and
       furniture (other than the computer).




       Deputy Chief Constable
    >




V       copy to;

        Chief Officers (floating folder) - for information
        ACC(Staff Services/Discipline & Complaints), Mr Anderson
        ACC(Management Services), Mr Davies
        A/Chief Superintendent Fell, HQ Discipline & Complaints
        Supt Parker, HQ Communications & Computers
        Det Chief Insp Brooke (Hillsborough liaison officer)
                                                      REF:             M S /IM /JW
FROM:   Chief Superintendent, Management Services
                                                      STATION/DEPT:    HQ MANAGEMENT SERVICES
TO:     Deputy Chief Constable
                                                      DATE:            9 May 1991




        SUBJECT:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        On 27 March 1991, you issued the attached memorandum in relation to the
        handover of paperwork and equipment from the West Midlands Inquiry Team
        to South Yorkshire and at that time it was thought that the paperwork
        could be accommodated in the basement store room (Room 13).

        It now appears that there is insufficient space in the basement store
        room and that the only possible place in which to house all the inquiry
        paperwork and property is in the empty ex divisional headquarters rooms
        at Hammerton Road.

        Your approval is therefore sought for this course of action.




             i
        Chief Superintendent
        Management Services
                                      I




                                                      REF:            MS/IM/JW
FROM:   Chief Superintendent, Management Services
                                                      STATION/DEPT:   HQ MANAGEMENT SERVICES
TO:     Superintendent, Comms & Computers
                                                      DATE:           13 May 1991




        SUBJECT:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - ACCOMMODATION


        I refer to a telephone conversation with your Communications Department
        on Thursday 9 May 1991 and hereby confirm the need for a telephone to be
        installed in the old divisional headquarters building at Hammerton
        Road.

        Supporting correspondence is attached and I would suggest that liaison
        be maintained with Inspector Barker of the Discipline and Complaints
        Department as to the siting of the equipment.




        Chief Superintendent
        Management Services
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                             R e f:   CCO/AB/LM

             From        Inspector Barker                                   Station /D ep t: Complaints/
                                                                            Data-           Discipline
             To          Acting Chief Superintendent Fell
                                                                                      9 May 1991



                         SUBJECT:      Hillsborough file - accommodation


                         On the morning of Thursday, 9 May 1991, I visited Hammerton Road Police
                         Station in company with Police Sergeant Morgan and inspected the premises
                         with a view to accommodating the Hillsborough File there as and when
                         it is handed to us by the West Midlands Police Force. The accommodation
                         as shown on the attached sketch plan would appear to be ideal and consists
                         of the following:-

                         The room marked as the office is 9' x 6' 10" and can accommodate telephone
                         points and computer points. It can be made secure with a passive beam

/, # //                  alarm and the addition of window locks to the 2 large windows in the
                         office.                    '

                         The room marked property store is ideal, will accommodate all the property
                         involved, is totally secure, there are no windows to this room and the
             ;/          door would simply need providing with a secure lock.

                      The main file room is 18' 8" x 11' 10" and with suitable Dexion shelving,
                      which will be referred to later, will accommodate quite easily 1,300
                      files. The following measures would have to be taken to make the room
                      secure. The existing external door, which would not be required, would
                      need to be made totally secure- by~eitTier“being" blocked_ofF‘ or screwed
I , ,•<**•
                      up. The 4 windows t o t h e room would require "window locks and 'the main
                     'door into theroom would require a substantial lock and'a contact alarm.

                         The file room B is 13' 8" x 11' 3" and would be ideal for the remainder

                    //   of the file. There are 2 windows to this room, but arrangements are
                         in hand to have them boarded from the inside which would make the room
                         totally secure if a suitable lock and contact alarm point was placed
                         on the door/

                         The equipment needed to make the accommodation feasible would obviously
                         be an office desk capable of taking the computer and an electric
                         typewriter and 22 Dexion units, 3' wide x 15" deep x 7' 6 " tall and a
                         telephone.                              "'"r-
       . /V '
   u-f''                 I am at present liaising with Detective Constable          of the Crime
                         Prevention Department regarding the final security arrangements that
                         would be required and their possible sources.

                         I submit this report for your attention and consideration,
From:   J M HILLIER FIPM DMA                                   WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        ASSISTANT CHIEF OFFICER                                HEADQUARTERS
        (Administration)                                       PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                               Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                               Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                               Telephone: 021-236 5000




        Chief Superintendent I Mountain
        South Yorkshire Police
        Snig Hill                                   Our Ref:    ADM/DSH/MR
        Sheffield
        S3 8LY                                      Date        15 May 1991




        Dear Mr Mountain

        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - EQUIPMENT

        I refer to our meeting on 24 April 1991 and apologise for the delay in
        replying.   I am now in a position to confirm that the items identified for
        transfer to South Yorkshire Police have been collated and will be transported
        as follows s-

        All furniture by removal company 17 May 1991
        Remaining equipment during weeks commencing 20 May and 27 May 1991.

        I attach herewith a list of the agreed items indicating dates of removal.

        Yours sincerely




        ASSISTANT CHIEF OFFICER
        (ADMINISTRATION)
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                  R ef:    C C O /A F / C J D

    From :   Acting Chief Superintendent Fell                     Station/ Dept:Discipline/
                                                                                     Complaints
    To       Assistant Chief Constable                            Date :             17 May 1991
             (Discipline & Complaints)__


             SUBJECT:      after the hillsborough investigation

              1.   It is currently anticipated that all the original and documentary
                   material gathered by the investigation carried out by Chief
                   Constable Dear in the course of his duties as investigator for
                   the Taylor Enquiry, investigating officer in relation to
                   complaints of criminal and disciplinary conduct of officers of
                   this Force and as coroner's officer for HM Coroner's inquests
                   into the deaths will eventually come by agreement into the
                   possession of South Yorkshire Police.

              2.   It is currently anticipated that all the property of which the
                   owners are known and of which the owners are unknown that came
                   into police possession at and subsequent to the time of the
                   disaster will similarly, by agreement come into the possession
                   of South Yorkshire Police.

              3.   It is currently anticipated that all the other original evidence
                    that relates to Hillsborough that did not pass into the possession
                   of the Dear Investigation but which arose from the conduct of
                    the civil action will come together with that identified at
                   paragraphs (1 ) and (2 ).

              4.   All the above material it is suggested isto be housed at
                   Hammerton Road Police Station and arrangements are advanced for
                   providing the necessary security, shelving and workspace for it.

              5.   The material is believed at present to be lodged mainly at
                   Furnival House, Nechells Green Police Station in Birmingham and
                   at South Yorkshire Police Headquarters.

              6.   The quantity of material involved has caused it to be indexed
                   using a HOLMES system on a computer. That machine is in
                   Birmingham, shortly to be delivered to our Headquarters.

              7.   The computer information has been extracted from the machine onto
                   disc and onto tape and so is not accessible.  The information
                   is being retained at Birmingham and no decision has been made
                   for its release.

              8.   The World Student Games require the computer to be available and
                   if the Hillsborough material is to be fed into the machine, that
                   work will have to be completed before (say) 1 July 1991.  If the
                   disc/tape material is made available in the next few days it will
                   be entered on the machine at the same time the machine is
                   commissioned. Otherwise the information will not be put into
                   the computer and so will not be accessible until after the World
                   Student Games and will take about six weeks to put on.
                   Effectively if it is not ready before 1 July 1991 it will not
                   be ready before 1 October 1991 or thereabouts.

              9.   Although responsibility for the Paragraph (1) (2) and (3)
                   material, decisions as to access and return to owners of any item
                   and decisions as to disclosure of material is yours, there is
                   as yet no policy established.
GEN/2
10.   The ability to access the material will largely arise from
      interrogation of the HOLMES computer. No one in this Department
      has as yet received the necessary training to do this.

11.   The nature of Paragraph (1) (2) and (3) material is such that
      it needs to be carefully documented and checked so that there
      is written agreement as to precisely which items have been
      received by the Force.

12.   The logistics of handover demand, I suggest, that West Midlands
      Officers, assisted by South Yorkshire Officers remove everything
      from Furnival House and set it in position at Haimnerton Road in
      a proper order to be accessed. When this has been done the two
      forces can check and agree what there is and an official handing
      over can occur that is documented and cannot give rise to any
      future embarrassing dispute.

13.   There needs to be agreement by letter between the Forces (and
      perhaps PCA?) of the decision to handover, the logistics of the
      handover and the agreement that the handover has occurred.

14.   If it is true that   the documents, statements, films, photographs,
      some of which will be subject of copyright and owned by BBC, ITV,
      pressmen, etc, are only retrievable by reference to an index
      held on computer the handover cannot satisfactorily occur until
       the computer is capable of being accessed.

15.   I recommend that these problems be addressed without delay, the
      necessary decisions made, confirmation of agreements set down
       on paper so that all matters are clear to all involved parties.




Acting Chief Superintendent



      & |c u .   V   /   •




                                                        2 1 MAY 1991
                                                             AG G
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                Ref:

    From:    < 5                                Station/Dept:
                                                Date:23-'
                       (7^7. S    .)



            SUBJECT:




Gen/2
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              R ef.   C C O /A F / C J D


From :   Acting Chief Superintendent Fell                     Station/Dept: Discipline/
                                                                                 Complaints
To   :   As below                                             Date:              5 jUne 1991



         SUBJECT:      after the hillsborough investigation

         Attached for your information and retention is a report dated 30 May
         1991 submitted by me outlining matters relating to the Hillsborough
         Enquiry. I would particularly draw your attention to paragraph two.




         Acting Chief Superintendent




         To:   Chief Superintendent Mountain
               Chief Superintendent Nesbit
               Superintendent Parker
               Superintendent Bettison
               Chief Inspector Brooke
               Mr
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            R ef:   C C O /A F/LM

From   Acting Chief Superintendent Fell                     Station/Dept: Complaints/
                                                                                 Discipline
To     Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints & Discipline Pate:     3 0 j |a y   1991




       SUBJECT:      after the hillsborough investigation

       Further to our discussions today I feltit would be useful to set                 out
       intentions and circulate to all persons who have been involved in                the
       various initiatives relating to the Hillsborough aftermath.

       If you are to be responsible for the Hillsborough        material,with medoing
       the   necessary work involved, it is important that all.-initiatives and
       decisions are made known to me that might effect the planning and
       implementation. I would ask that this policy operates forthwith.

       I believe that there are different    types of material involved as follows:-

       A.   Documents of the Dear Enquiry

       B.     Material supporting the    Dear Enquiry

       C.     Property of the deceased

       D.   Property collected at the scene, identifiable and unidentifiable

       E.   Documents of the Wain Enquiry

       F.   Material supporting the Wain Enquiry

       I believe A, B, C and D material is indexed using the "West Midlands"
       computer and E and F material is indexed using the "South Yorkshire"
       computer.

       1.   With the co-operation of West Midlands Police the plan is to bring
            material C and D to Hammerton Road, set it up in order, check it
            and accept it. Target time is week commencing 3 June 1991 with
            the work to be completed by 7 June 1991 •

       2.   Transfer material E and F from Castle Green to Hammerton Road, set
            it up in order, check it and accept it. This will require approval
            decisions and appropriate hand over from the person presently
            responsible for it. The timing of this needs to be decided by the
            person currently controlling and accessing this material.  Will
            you please discuss this with DCC to resolve the unknowns.

       3.   Obtain the "West Midlands" machine and data and set up so that the
            index is accessible from the VDU located in Complaints and
            Discipline. This work is currently being dealt with by Computer
            Section. Target time is now until 1 July 1991 when it should be
            finalised.

       4.   Once 3 is finalised with the co-operation of West Midlands Police,
            training of personnel in the use of the "West Midlands computer
            to be carried out.  It is anticipated this will take 5 days and
            the personnel involved would be Police Constable Greenaway and
            Miss|         |. There may be staff implications in such a proposal
            that need considering.
5.   Once 3 and U are finalised with the co-operation of West Midlands
      Police, material A and B will be brought to Hammerton Road, set
      up in order, checked and accepted. Target for this is week
      commencing 8 July 1991 with work to be completed by 12 July 1991.

6.   As soon as material is housed in Hammerton Road, from that date
      the alarm system protecting the area needs to operate. Suggest
     keyholder for this should be officer in charge FI Control Room with
      the actual key housed in glass front holder (as with armoury key).

Will you formally approve this plan please or indicate those areas that
need modification. I will then circulate to interested parties and liaise
with West Midlands Police and others to secure implementation.




Acting Chief Superintendent




Copy to:   DCC (for perusal)



 /   -r\ .
