POL 17/8/12

COMPLAINT 2/89

The complainant initially alleged, via a solicitor’s letter to South Yorkshire Police, that he was
lying on the pitch with an injured ankle, having sustained this injury whilst climbing out of pen
4. He stated he was picked up by two uniformed officers and thrown into advertising
hoardings on the perimeter track.

The complainant was later seen and reinterviewed by West Midlands Police officers when he
qualified his allegation by saying he was more bundled than thrown onto the hoardings.

The complainant was shown video footage in which he pointed himself out. The Investigating
Officer, however, was dubious as to whether this was an authentic identification, in any case
the footage did not record the alleged incident. The complainant was unable to identify the
officers involved.

Enquiries by West Midlands Police involved speaking to two supporters who attended the
match with the complainant. They had become separated from him and did not witness the
incident. Three further supporters corroborated to various degrees the alleged incident but
differed by describing the complainant either on the pitch or behind the goal area during the
police contact. None of the witnesses were able to corroborate what was said by the officers,
nor could they identify the officers involved.

Witnesses from St Johns Ambulance Brigade state they were directed to the complainant by
the police. They located the complainant behind the goal area and assisted the complainant
to the North West corner of the pitch where he was placed on a trolley stretcher. They
informed him that his ankle was fractured and needed to go to the first aid room for
treatment. The complaint refused and wished to remain on the trolley and watch the match
as he had paid a considerable amount of money for his ticket. He only consented to be taken
to the first aid room after the match had been abandoned. During the course of his time with
the St Johns Ambulance officers he did not make any mention of how he was dealt with by
the police.

West Midlands Police examined video footage, photographic evidence and officers reports.
They concluded that at the material time there were approximately 15 uniformed officers at
or near to the location who could have been involved with the complainant. The investigation
exhausted all further lines of enquiry concluding that it was impossible to take the matter
further.



OUTCOME

The Investigating Officer observed that although the St Johns Ambulance staff evidence
adds nothing to the alleged incident it was included as it indicated the complainant’s attitude
and demeanour shortly after the alleged incident and the fact that he never complained or
mentioned it to anyone his degree of concern at the time. This evidence and the dubious
identification of himself on the video raised concerns that the complainant may be
exaggerating his allegation.
The conclusion were that neither the complainant nor any of the witnesses were able to
identify the police officers concerned and that the necessary enquiries had been made to try
to identify the officers to no avail. It was also concluded that the removal of the complainant
from the pitch by the police officers would have been regarded by them as a quick response
to a potential pitch invasion, one fleeting incident among many, in a rapidly changing and
chaotic period of a few minutes.

The investigation report was submitted to the Police Complaints Authority who was satisfied
the investigation was carried out to their satisfaction and there was insufficient evidence to
prove any criminal offence.
