                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                      POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                            Telephone Barnsley
Clerk and Financial Officer                               Please reply to:                     Fax Barnsley

                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

Our Ref   SW/MVO/POL                           YourRsf.                              Date2.5   July 1991
This m atter is being dealt with by   MiSS M V OddeS                                 Telephone e x t   315

    Mr J T Sleightholme
    38 Park Square
    LEEDS LSI 2PA



     Dear Sir,
     RE: HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - DISCIPLINE PROCEEDINGS
     Please find enclosed instructions in respect of which I would welcome your
     advice.
     Once Counsel has had the opportunity of reading the instructions. I should be
     grateful of the opportunity of discussing with him (either on^lie telephone or
     in conference), before he proceeds further, the re.qu&simade by the PCA, for the
     proposed charges to be looked at by Counsel. As indicated in the instructions I
     have interpreted the request to mean that Counsel should be asked to consider
     the wording and merit of the charges in the light of the available evidence. I
     am however conscious that Mr Richard Payne has already considered the merit of
     the charges and his Opinion has been considered by the PCA. Counsel may
     consider further clarification should be sought from the PCA. In any event I
     consider it would be worthwhile to discuss informally what may be described as
     the "terms of reference" of the request and I will await to hear from Counsel o j>                       ,
     his Clerk in respect of this matter.

     Yours faithfully,




     S Walker
     Solicitor


  S 'ifA
7




IN THE MATTER OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER AGAINST CERTAIN OFFICERS OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE




RE:-

        CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
        SUPERINTENDENT BERNARD DEAN MURRAY




        INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL TO ADVISE

        COUNSEL:- MR J T SLEIGHTHOLME




    S WALKER
    SOLICITOR
IN THE MATTER OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER AGAINST CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD AND
SUPERINTENDENT BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
COUNSEL HAS HEREWITH
1)    The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 SI 1985 No 518
2)    Home Office Guidance to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and
       Discipline Procedures
3)    The Complaints & Discipline files in respect of Chief Superintendent
       Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray (Investigating Officers's reports)
4)    21 Files relating to the West Midlands Police Inquiry into the Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Ground Disaster
5)    Memoranda and accompanying letter of 28 March 1991 from ACC Mr Anderson
       to Brigadier Pownall of the Police Complaints Authority (PCA)
6)    The summing up of Doctor Stefan Popper, Coroner for South Yorkshire
7)    Interim and Final Reports of Lord Justice Taylor into The Hillsborough
       Stadium Disaster
8)    Instructions to Mr Richard Payne and his Opinion dated 21.6.91 on
       discipline charges recommended by the Police Complaints Authority
9)    Draft Discipline Charge Forms, prepared for service on Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray together with letter
       dated 18 July 1991, referring the forms to the PCA for approval
10)   Transcripts of interviews:
      a)    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield - 3 July 1990 - interviewed by Chief
            Constable Leslie Sharp;
      b)    Superintendent Murray - 25 June 1990 - Interviewed by Detective Chief
            Superintendent Foster
11)   Correspondence:
      a)    letter from Police Complaints Authority dated 7 May 1991
      b)    letter from Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria dated 16 May
            1991
      c)    letter from DPP dated 30 August 1990
       d)   letters of 10 April 1991 from PCA to ACC Mr Anderson and reply
       e)   letter from ACC Mr Moore to PCA dated 26 June 1991
       f)   letter from PCA to ACC Moore dated 11 July 1991
2




INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL to advise on charges, evidence and generally
Instructing Solicitor acts in this case for Assistant Chief Constable Mr Graham
Moore of the South Yorkshire Police and Counsel is instructed on his behalf.
As Assistant Chief Constable, he is the discipline authority responsible under
The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985, for the function of deciding whether
a disciplinary charge should be brought against any member of the South
Yorkshire Police Force below the rank of Assistant Chief Constable. This
responsibility has been delegated to him, by the Chief Constable in accordance
with Regulation 15 of the Discipline Regulations.

These instructions are concerned with disciplinary proceedings arising out of
the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster and in particular relate to disciplinary
charges which are to be preferred against Chief Superintendent David Godfrey
Duckenfield and Superintendent Bernard Dean Murray. For completeness and ease
of reference I propose to repeat in these instructions the background
information which I detailed in the instructions sent Mr Richard Payne (see
enclosure 8). The circumstances in which Mr Payne was consulted for advice are
dealt with later on in these instructions.

Counsel has a general knowledge of the disaster and is probably also aware that
arising out of the disaster a number of public complaints were made against a
number of police officers including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray. The complainants and the nature of their complaints are
detailed in schedules A and B of the complaints file for Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and the Complaints against Police form, page 1 of the file relating
to Superintendent Murray (see enclosure 3 for both files).

Those complaints were referred to Mr Geoffrey Dear, the Chief Constable of West
Midlands Constabulary, for investigation under the terms of The Police
(Discipline) Regulations 1985 and his investigation was supervised by the
Police Complaints Authority (PCA) under the provisions of section 89 of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1989 (PACE).

On the retirement of Mr Geoffrey Dear, the papers were passed to Mr Leslie
Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, to complete the investigation. The person
appointed to carry out an investigation is referred to in the Regulations as
the Investigating Officer and I propose to refer to use that term for ease in
these instructions. On completion of the investigation the Investigating
Officer sent copies of his findings to ACC Mr Anderson, the PCA and the DPP.
Before relating further the background to the proposed discipline proceedings,
I will mention at this point the extent of the available^evidence amassed since
the Hillsborough disaster occurred and which may be considered relevant to the
proposed proceedings. I understand my assistant Miss Oades has briefly touched
upon this in telephone discussions with Counsel. The matter is also dealt with
at page 4 of Mr Payne's Opinion.
3




PRIMARY EVIDENCE
Witness statements and transcripts of unsworn evidence to Inquiry by the Rt.
Hon. Lord Justice Taylor (174 witnesses)
Witness statements and transcripts of sworn evidence to Coroner's Inquest (234
witnesses)
Bundle of documents used at Taylor Inquiry
Bundle of Coroner's exhibits (540 documents)
Video tapes and bundles of photographs
EXPERT EVIDENCE
Reports by engineers Mr Byrne and by expert Police witnesses ACC of Devon and
Cornwall Constabulary Mr. Phillips, and former Senior Police Officer Mr Stalker
HEARSAY EVIDENCE
Taylor Interim and Final Reports
Coroner's Summing up
Reports by Chief Constable of Cumbria Constabulary
This evidence is currently housed at Hammerton Road Police Station and
fortunately is indexed on computer. It is proposed, subject to the agreement
of the accused officers, that traditional service of the evidence to be relied
upon in support of the charges should be dispensed with in view of the extent
of the likely evidence and that in lieu thereof, the representatives of the
accused officers be given access to the material and copying facilities at
Hammerton Road. It is intended to make a room available for the consideration
of material.                              "                                ~
Enclosed with these instructions is what may be described as a "culling" of the
available evidence. In the telephone discussions with Counsel, Miss Oades
indicated that the material referred to as enclosure 4), would be provided in
due course. Upon reflection I have decided that Counsel should be provided
with the same at this stage. The material contained within the files sent to
Counsel is evidence collected in the course of the West Midlands Inquiry and is
referred to in the Investigating Officer's reports enclosed. Other evidence is
referred to by the Investigating Officer eg. the Interim and Final Reports of
Lord Justice Taylor and transcripts from the Public Inquiry.   If there is
evidence referred to, which is not with the enclosures sent to Counsel and
which Counsel requires, will he please advise Instructing Solicitor, who will
take steps to secure the same.
4




Returning to the sequence of events. Following receipt of the Investigating
Officer's reports, ACC Mr Anderson gave consideration to the question of
whether the officers whose conduct was complained of and which had been the
subject of investigation, should be charged with any discipline offences. The
officers concerned in addition to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray, were PC Smith, PC Illingworth, Superintendent Marshall
and Superintendent Greenwood. ACC Mr Anderson concluded on the evidence
presented by the Investigating Officer, that no disciplinary action was
appropriate in respect of any of the complaints against the officers.


In accordance with the requirements of s90 (5) PACE, ACC Mr Anderson in due
course completed memoranda to the PCA indicating his decision as regards the
preferment of disciplinary charges and his reasons for concluding that no
disciplinary action was appropriate. The memoranda touching upon the
complaints against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield are enclosed, together with
a letter of explanation dated 28/3/91 from ACC Mr Anderson to the PCA (see
enclosure 5).

The PCA considered that ACC Mr Anderson should have provided fuller information
concerning his reasons for not proposing to prefer disciplinary charges and by
letter dated 10 April 1991 the PCA requested that he provide his more detailed
views (see enclosure 11 d). There was a further exchange of correspondence, as
Counsel will see from the enclosures, which culminated in a letter from the PCA
dated 7 May 1991, addressed to ACC Mr Moore, recommending under s93(l) PACE
that disciplinary charges be preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
and Superintendent Murray. Counsel is referred to that letter which is
enclosure 11 a) for the detail of the charges specified by the PCA.

Where the PCA have recommended charges they are required to consult the Chief
Officer concerned, in this case ACC Mr Moore and if after such consultation the
Chief Officer is still unwilling to prefer such charges as the PCA consider
appropriate, they may direct him to prefer such charges as they may specify -
s93(3) PACE.

In their letter of the 7 May 1991, the PCA invited ACC Mr Moore to submit a
response to the recommendations. In considering his response ACC MR Moore
sought the views of the Investigating Officer and these are set out in the
Investigating Officer's letter to ACC Mr Moore dated 16 May 1991 (see enclosure
11 b). On behalf of ACC Mr Moore, Counsel's Instructing Solicitor sought the
opinion of Mr Richard Payne, on whether there was sufficient evidence to
support the charges recommended by the PCA. Mr Payne concluded that none of
the proposed disciplinary charges had a realistic chance to succeed. Mr
Payne's Opinion is enclosed for Counsel's consideration. That Opinion and the
letter received from the Investigating Officer, have both been considered by
the PCA and as part of the consultation process ACC Mr Moore and Acting Chief
Superintendent Fell (Discipline and Complaints) have attended the offices of
the PCA for discussions.
 5




 The consultation process concerning the "recommended11 charges was concluded
 with a letter from the PCA dated 11 June 1991 (see enclosure 11 f), wherein the
 PCA formally directed that disciplinary charges be preferred against Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray as set out in their letter
 of 7 May 1991.

 In accordance with that direction disciplinary forms have been prepared for
 service on the two officers in respect of the directed charges and these were
 submitted to the PCA for approval by letter dated 18 July 1991 (see enclosure
 9).

1 Instructing Solicitor is advised that the PCA via the Deputy Chairman,
  Brigadier J L Pownall, OBE, have suggested that all of the charges should be
  looked at by Counsel and that in the light of Counsel's Opinion t n e cnarges
 Inight be reconsidered. The Brigadier, as has already been indicated to Counsel
 -is anxious that the charges be considered without delay and I believe he
  expressed the hope to have Counsel's 0piniorTlirtttilTr^^we^k.

 Instructing Solicitor considers this timescale unrealistic, if the PCA wish, as
 appears to be the case, Counsel to consider the wordfng~and merit of the
 charges in the light of the availahle evidence. In the circumstances, 1 have
 advised ACC Mr Moore that FwTTl ask Counsel to give an indication (by Monday
 29/7/91 if possible) of the time Counsel considers he will require to advise on
 the wording and merits of the charges proposed.
 Counsel, will note that there is provision made on the prescribed discipline
 form, for the names and addresses of witnesses to be called in support of the
 charge specified. Regulation 10 of the Discipline Regulations also deals with
 disclosure of documents. Twenty one days before the hearing an accused officer
 is to be provided with copies of a variety of documents which include not only
 copies of statements made by witnesses to be called in support of the charge
 but also of any statement relating to the charge made by any person, other than
 a witness to be called in support of the charge, to the investigating officer
 or to anybody on his behalf, together with the person's name and address.
 Counsel's advice is requested on both evidence to be called in support ofthe
 charge and the names and addresses of witnesses to be specified on the
 discipline forms and also on the list of witnesses whose statements may be said
 to relate to the charge but whose evidence is not to be called in support of
 the charges.

  The draft discipline forms indicate that the names and addresses of witnesses
  to be called in support of the charge are to be supplied later. Instructing
  Solicitor wishes Counsel to address this particular matter. Instructing
  Solicitor holds some reservations as to whether this is acceptable or meets the
  requirements of the Regulations. It may be acceptable given the extent of the
 (evidence to say copies are availableat HammerTon~~Road, but ^he interests_of
 jjusTic^aruTeconomy^Suggest that the defence ought to know at the earliest
jposs 1bTe s t a p The evidence considered to support the charges. WiTl Counsel
I pi ease- aclVise.
  6




   The proposed discipline proceedings are to be heard by a Tribunal made up of Mr
   John Newing, the Chief Constable of Derbyshire Constabulary and two members of
   the PCA. There is a possibility that the proceedings against each officer will
   be heard a t separate Tribunals. The Officers are entitled to be legally
  crepresenjte376nd they have indicated that they wish w n 5 e i e g a T i y ^ ^ r e s e n t e d . /
   BotfTCtne^Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray at the outset
   of the Hillsborough investigations, had available to them personal liability
   insurance of

   That cover has been applied by the two officers in meeting their legal
   representation to date and both officers now have effectively only
   available to them to cover the costs of legal representation in connection with
   the discipline proceedings. Chief Superintendent has in fact exhausted his
   cover but the Police Authority has already agreed to make available to him
Lj           The
             m e iChief
                   meT LConstable      considers
                         o ris ta u ie c o n s i d e r s ithat
                                                           n a i the
                                                                 u i e lcost  ofi representation
                                                                         u il u                            may
                                                                                  ic p i w c u i a u u i i m
I exceed           and is to submit a report to the Police Authority on the 9
   August to ascertain whether the Authority is prepared to consider a commitment
   to the funding of independent legal advice for the two officers beyond the
           available to each. Instructing Solicitor considers it ■highly_likely
   that the two officers will be legally represented and in that event ACC Mr
   Moore would want Counsel to present the case against the accused officers.
   As indicated to Counsel by Miss Oades, if the officers are not represented,
   then Instructing Solicitor will present the case. I will advise Counsel
   further in this regard in due course.


   WILL COUNSEL PLEASE ADVISE

          On the likely timescale in which he will be able to deliver his advice on
         Jthe wording^ and merits of the disciplinary charges to be preferred
         ~againsT Chief Superintendent Duclcenfie 1d and Superintendent Murray.
   2.       On the wording and merits of the charges referred to in the preceding
           paragraph
   3.      On disclosure generally and in particular as follows:-
           a)   the names and addresses of the witnesses to be called in support of
                each of the disciplinary charges to be preferred, so as to enable
                this information to be provided on the discipline forms to be served
                on the officers;
           b)   the names and addresses of witnesses whose statements are considered
                to relate to the charges but who Counsel considers need not be called
                in support of the charges.
           c) whether it is acceptable to supply details of the names and addresses
              of the witnesses to be called in suppport of the charges subsequent
              to the service of the discipline charges
   4.      Generally.
                                                                                                    ACC(DIC)CJD

                                                                                                   28 March 1991


Brigadier J Pownall OBE
Deputy Chairaan (Discipline)
Pol let Coaplalnte Authority

London
SW1


Dear
     win recall at our meeting In London on 18 October 1990, when you, Gerry
Gil laan Jane Helllcar and Colin Daulby were preaent we diecueeedthe progreee
ofthe^Hlllsboroufh file. Again, you will recall It was a««.d that a very
early declalon, within 48 houre, would be Bade following the sutaission by
Byself of the relevant papers.

Despite the loaa to the Authority of Gerry Gillaan, I m            ****'*}
able to confirm, in our telephone conversation on Monday ** * ? £ •      700
»hii «ndeavour to reach a decision with regard to the possibility of
 disciplinary offenc* at the earliest possible tiae. Indeed, your intention
 £ £ F r i d a y 5 April is .uch wslcced and if you can c o m to a decision
 prior to that date this would be even »ore helpful.

 I can infora you that the Inquest caae to an end today at 12.15 p». '      the
 i«rw returned verdicts of accidental death in respect of each deceased. I

 ZiT.i u«A f,,-- that decision that no further evidence was forthcoming which
          £ £ ? £ £ t S * L « U . « « P . th . l nv . . t l « . t . n, o f f l = . r , f o r t h .
 collection of a d d itio n a l * . t . r l . l , . t . t t » . n t . . t c , to m pport c r l .i n .1
 proceedings.
 The aeaoranda I enclose with this letter are based solely upon the evidence
        . . t __          report of the supervised investigation undertaken by
 E u l i u Sharp.tlw C hitf^C ooB tabl® o fC u » b rU . You .111  th a t I h .v .
  S n c " d i J th a tn o d l.c lp lln a rjr * t l o o 1 . .p p r o p r l.t. In r . . p . c t of       of th .
  complaint* against the six officers.
  T ausDect that both the result of the Inquest and any decision that the PCA
  nake will attract media attention, but, in accordance with your etateaent on




                                                                  k          m              s s s : s.
   thea.

   Yours
NOTES OH MEETING AT PCA OH 18.10.90

Present

PCA           Brigadier Pownall
               Gerry Gillman
               Jane Hellicar
               Colin Daulby

SYP           ACC Mr Anderson
               A/Chief Supt Fell
               A/Supt Drabble


 1. After discussing at length it was agreed that no decision could
    properly be made until the conclusion of the inquests as fresh
    evidence may come out.

 2.   It is intended that the decision on discipline should quickly
      follow the result unless substantial new evidence is given
      revealing possible criminal or discipline matters which have not
      already been encompassed by the investigation to date.

 3.   If that does happen the way forward will be for the investigating
      officer to consult with Noel Taylor as to whether further
      investigation is necessary in which case the decision would have
      to be delayed until any further report had been considered.

 4.   If no further investigation is required, we will do the necessary
      memos to the PCA immediately the result is known to enable them
      to swiftly reach their decision.

 5. To this end we and the PCA will read the file so as to be prepared
     to react quickly as at (4).

 6.   Consultation between us and the PCA will continue whilst the file
      is being read in the hope that the positions both adopt eventually
      are not too uncomfortable for each other.

 7.   When the PCA have reached a decision they will do a full press
      release, write to the complainants, inform us and send us a copy
      prior to the release so the officers can be informed but with
      details embargoed until their statement is made.

 8.   PCA indicate that they will not hold a press conference or take
      part in television discussion programmes.

 9.   In the event of the decision being made that disciplinary action
      would ensue we would probably go for a tribunal because of the
      outstanding public interest.

10.   In the event of discipline the PCA will say virtually nothing
      to the press until the proceedings are complete.
 11.       The Brigadier expressed concern that the Coroner may request an
           early decision to free the officers from jeopardy so that they
           could be called to give evidence.

 12.       Meeting concluded that even if such a decision was made it was
           unlikely that the officers’ legal advisers would allow them to
           give evidence as they would still be in jeopardy from
           (a) a private prosecution or (b) a verdict of unlawful killing.

 13-       ACC informed meeting that the 'Jackson' file could cause problems
           if the Police Authority members, when they receive the report,
           were to disclose its contents to the media or other interested
           parties and that this could create difficulties when considering
           action against the other 6 officers.

 14.       It was suggested that Mr Gillman might like to discuss this
           problem with Stephen Walker. PCA felt they could not do so and
           ACC indicated he would.

 15-       ACC emphasised that SYP wished that all our actions should
           indicate and demonstrate to the public our desire to ensure that
           a proper decision had been reached on the question of either
           criminal or disciplinary process and that we would do all in our
           power to facilitate such decision making.




Copy to:       Chief Constable
               Deputy Chief Constable




 ( t f 3       ? % c ^ .




j s   /    j    ^


7fcC




                                        2
merits of complaint

Mr Hicks, his wife and two daughters attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
on 15 April 1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and the
two girls were tragically killed in the crushing in area 3-

Mr Hicks has made a number of allegations against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

1)   That he failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters
     outside the gates.

2)   That he failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent
     to the opening of Gate C.

3)   That he failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was slow
     to effect a rescue operation.

4)   That he was deceitful and intentionally misled senior police officers
     and members of the public regarding his command and control of officers
     on that day.

                               OR

5)   That he colluded with the Assistant Chief Constable to mislead the
     public over the opening of Gate C.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting on the advice of his legal representatives
declined to be interviewed during the course of this Enquiry. The Investigating
Officer has, therefore, relied on the evidence that he gave, whilst not under oath
to the Taylor enquiry, and other evidence resulting from his enquiries.

In respect of allegation 1) the Investigating Officer points out that the police
had taken various steps to prevent such an occurrence, perhaps the most important
 being tn request, the fans to arrive early, the evidence indicating that the
Nottingham Forest fans heeded the request and did so. It is a fact that Liverpool
 fans did arrive later in large numbers, resulting in a situation very different
TroiiPthe previous year. As far as the allegation that he failed to control the
 movement of supporters is concerned, the report makes the point that the opening
 of the actual gate was presented to Mr
 and that, although it is correct that he did not make any arrangements for such
 control the Investigating Officer considers it doubtful if it could be "proved
 that he should havedone." In respect of his response to the tragedy, once the
 reality of what was happening had been identified, the report indicates 'that it
 was done to the best of the officer's ability given the inforaaagn_ayajlafelfi_flDd-.
 the cffcumstances prevailing at the time." As far as complaint 4 is concerned,
 the Investigating"0fficerHrs~of~the— opTrri6n that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
 did mislead people but that the evidence indicates that it was not__deliberate or^
 deceitful. It is, however, a fact that two gates were forced by the Liverpool fans
 IrPrespect of the suggestion of collusion with the Assistant Chief Constable, it
 is apparent from the evidence that there was no such collusion.
 LnoONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE

The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable malfeasance and
he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to warrant criminal
proceedings. The same evidence which has been considered for culpable malfeasance
applies to the disciplinary offences of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief
Constable (Complaints & Discipline) considers that there is similarly insufficient
evidence to warrant disciplinary actions for neglect of duty (allegations 1-3-)

In respect of the allegation that he intentionally misled people, the Investigating
Officer considers the complaint to be unsubstantiated and, for the final
allegation, that there is no evidence to support it. The Assistant Chief Constable
(Complaints & Discipline) agrees with the Investigating Officer in these matters.
*
MERITS OF COMPLAINT         (278/F3V89)

Mr Hicks, his wife and their two daughters attended at Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club on 15 April 1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest. The two girls were in standing area 3 and were tragically killed.

Mr Hicks makes three complaints of neglect of duty against Superintendent Murray

1)   That he failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside the
     gates.

2)   That he failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening
     of Gate C.

3)   That he failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was slow to effect
     a rescue operation.

Superintendent Murray denies that he neglected his duty. In respect of the build
up he says that there was no way of foreseeing the large number of late arrivals,
that the control room was unable to see the extent of the build up and was reliant
on Superintendent Marshall and that they provided him with what he requested in
the way of reinforcements. In respect of the movement of supporters subsequent
to the opening of the gate, such was the enormity of the life or death situation
outside, he admits that he gave no thought to the consequences, other than to
think that the fans would be absorbed and that the crowd would find its own level.
On this point the Investigating Officer considers that the direct responsibility
rests with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. Superintendent Murray contends that
his response to the tragedy was effective, and the Investigating Officer says
in the report that it is clear that he made every effort to deal with the
situation.

REASONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE

The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable malfeasance and
he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to warrant criminal
proceedings. The same evidence as considered for culpable malfeasance applies
to the disciplinary offence of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief Constable
(Complaints &. Discipline) therefore considers that there is similarly insufficient
evidence to warrant disciplinary action for neglect of duty.
MERITS OF COMPLAINT            (345/F44/89)

Mr Jones' son attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 15 April
1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and was
tragically killed in the crush.

Mr Jones has made a number of allegations against Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield:-

1)   That he failed to acquaint himself with the planning and problems
     related to the control of the semi-final.

2)   That he failed   to monitor crowd numbers packing into pens 3 and 4.

3)   That he failed   to act when it became obvious that pens 3 & 4 were
     over full when   he had an excellent viewpoint from the police box above
      the pens.

4.   That he failed to make provision for the fans coming through Gate C
     after he had given the order for the gate to be opened.

5.   That he failed   to act when it was obvious that people were in distress.

6.   That he attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable and others,
     namely representatives of the clubs, the FA and the fans themselves,
     regarding the origin of the order for Gate C to be opened by inferring
      that supporters had forced open the gate when he had, in fact, given
      the order to open the gate.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, acting on the advice of his legal
representatives, declined to be interviewed during the course of this
Enquiry. The Investigating Officer has therefore relied on the unsworn
evidence which he gave to the Taylor Enquiry and other evidence gleaned
during his enquiries.

In respect of the first allegation that he failed to acquaint himself with
 the planning, Mr Duckenfield took over a plan based on the experiences of
the successfully run semi-final involving the same teams the previous year
and acquainted himself with it. As to failing to monitor areas 3 & 4, no
one, either police officer or club employee, realised that they were
"seriously overcrowded until it was too late. The same applies to the^
Allegation tnat he failed to act wherTTt became obvious that the areas were
over-full. The fourth allegation about failing to make arrangements to M
receive the crowd following the opening of Gate C is undoubtedly correct. d
However, The report indiea£es““TfraT fte was 3eaTTng with a life or death
situation outside and whilst he made no arrangements the Investigating
Officer doubts if it could be "proved that he should have done." In respect
of the allegation that he failed to act when it was obvious people were
 in distress, the fact is that the Control Box were aware that something
was happening and that senior officers were at the location but there is
no evidence that they knew what the nature of the incident was or that
people were in distress. Once they did realise the Major Incident Plan
was implemented. The final allegation that he attempted to mislead people
about the opening of Gate C, the Investigating Officer feels that Mr
Duckenfield did mislead people but that the evidence indicates it was not
deliberate nor deceitful and it is a fact that two gates were forced open
by the Liverpool fans.
REASONS FDR NO DISCIPLINE
The file has been considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions in
respect of the possible criminal offences of manslaughter and culpable
malfeasance and he has indicated that there is insufficient evidence to
warrant criminal proceedings. The same evidence which has been considered
for culpable malfeasance equally applies to the disciplinary allegations
of neglect of duty and the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints &
Discipline) considers that there is similarly insufficient evidence to
warrant disciplinary action in respect of allegations 1 - 5 .

As far as the allegation that he deliberately tried to mislead people, the
Investigating Officer is of the opinion that the complaint is not
substantiated and the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints & Discipline)
agrees.
*
MERITS OP COMPLAINT         (410/F59/89)


Mrs McBrien's son attended at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 15 April
1989 for the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and was
tragically killed in the crush.

She has complained that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield should not have
opened the gates under any circumstances giving unlimited and uncontrolled
access into the ground by supporters.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield has asserted that he had no option but
to open the gates, a position with which Lord Justice Taylor agreed.



REASONS FOR NO DISCIPLINE

The Investigating Officer considers the allegation to be unsubstantiated
a decision with which the Assistant Chief Constable (Complaints &
Discipline) agrees.
                     HOME OFFICE


            THE HILLSBOROUGH
             STADIUM DISASTER
                       15 APRIL 1989


                   INQUIRY BY
         THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


                  INTERIM REPORT

                            Presented to Parliament
               by the Secretary o f State for the Home Department
                          by Command o f Her Majesty
                                    August 1989




                                  LONDON
                  HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
                                 £10.30 net

Cm 765
                     HOME OFFICE


            THE HILLSBOROUGH
             STADIUM DISASTER
                       15 APRIL 1989


                   INQUIRY BY
         THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


                  INTERIM REPORT


                            Presented to Parliament
               by the Secretary ofState for the Home Department
                          by Command o f Her Majesty
                                  August 1989




                                  LONDON
                 HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE



Cm 765
                                                  CONTENTS
                                                                         Paragraph       Page
INTRODUCTION                                                                                  l
PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
C H A P T E R 1 - T H E G R O U N D A N D PRE-M A TCH
ARRANGEM ENTS                                                                4
             Fixing T he Venue                                                    21
             T he G ro u n d                                                      22
             The T urnstiles                                                      29
             Travel to the G ro u n d                                             33
             A llocation o f Places and Tickets                                   35
             Access from Leppings Lane                                            37
            Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles                                   40
            Policing A rrangem ents                                               47
            Sheffield W ednesday’s A rrangem ents                                 48
            Police C om m u nications                                             49
C H A P T E R 2 - 1 5 A PRIL: T H E B U IL D U P T O 2.30 p m                                 9
             Early A rrivals                                                      54
            Public H ouses                                                        55
            T he G ath erin g Crowd                                               57
C H A P T E R 3 - T H E CRISIS AT T H E T U R N ST IL E S                                     11
             “ O pen the G ates”                                                  66
C H A P T E R 4 - T H E D ISA STER                                                       13
C H A P T E R 5 - T H E A FT E R M A T H                                                      15
             Rescue A ttem pts                                                    81
             First A id                                                      87
             In the C o ntro l R oom                                              91
             N o In form ation                                                    97
             M isin form atio n                                                   98
             Public A nnouncem ents                                               100
             Fire Brigade                                                         101
             South Yorkshire M etropolitan A m bulance Service (SYMAS)            105
             G y m n asium                                                        107
             T he D e a d an d the Injured                                        108
C H A P T E R 6 -S P E C IF I C IN C ID E N T S                                               19

 PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?
 C H A P T E R 7 - T H E LAYOUT AT T H E L E P P IN G S LAN E E N D                           21
              T he H istory                                                       119
             T he 1981 Sem i-final                                                123
             T hree Pens                                                          125
             T he 198 5 Changes                                                   12 7
             New R adial Fences                                                   128
             Barriers                                                        129
             T he T urnstiles and Concourse                                     130
             B arrier 144                                                       133
             Effects o f the Layout                                               134


                                                            iii
                                                                                    Paragraph   Page
C H A P T E R 8 - LACK O F F IX E D CAPACITIES F O R T H E PEN S                                  24
             D ep artu res from the G reen G u id e                                       139
             Safety C ertificate                                                          143
             W hy was the Safety C ertificate no t A m ended?                             147
             T h e C ity C ouncil                                                         150
             S um m ary                                                                   159
C H A P T E R 9 - LACK O F E FFE C TIV E M O N IT O R IN G O F T H E TER R A C ES                28
             W ho should M o n ito r the Terraces?                                       161
             T h e Interim Popplewell R eport                                            16 3
             T h e Final Popplewell Report                                               164
             A rrangem ents at Hillsborough                                              166
             Case for the South Yorkshire Police                                         168
             H arris -v- Sheffield U n ited Football Club L im ited                      169
             Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End                                    170
             “ F in d T h e ir O wn Level”                                               171
             W hen is an Area “ Full” ?                                                  17 5
             F ear o f Hooliganism                                                       182
             Sum m ary                                                                   133
C H A P T E R 1 0 - T H E B U IL D -U P AT T H E T U R N S T IL E S                              33
             T h e Physical Layout                                                       186
             T h e N u m b er o f Turnstiles                                             187
             T he “ Late” Arrival o f Liverpool Fans                                     191
             Traffic Delays                                                              193
             Fine W eather and D rinking                                                 194
            Was D runkenness a M ajor Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?            196
            R educed Efficiency o f the Turnstiles                                       198
            W ere Fans W ithout Tickets a M ajor F actor in the B uild-U p?              200
            T h e “ C onspiracy” T heory                                                 203
            Liverpool Supporters at Away M atches                                        205
            N o C onspiracy                                                              208
            T h e Police O p eratio n at Leppings Lane                                   209
            Previous Experience                                                          213
            Policing in 1988                                                             214
            Police Intelligence in Advance                                               216
            Police Intelligence on the D ay                                              221
            M r M arshall an d M r G reenw ood                                           222
            C ontrol Lost                                                                223
            P ostponem ent o f K ick-off                                                 226
            Sum m ary                                                                   228
C H A P T E R 11 - T H E B L U N D E R O N O P E N IN G T H E GATES                              40
C H A P T E R 1 2 - T H E BA RRIERS IN PE N 3                                                    41
             B arrier 144                                                                233
             W hen d id B arrier 124a Fail?                                              236
             D r Eastw ood’s Testing o f the Barriers                                    237
             C orrosion                                                                 240
             C au sation                                                                243
C H A P T E R 1 3 - T H E C R U S H IN G N O T R E C O G N ISE D                                 43
             O bservation from C ontrol Room                                             244
             O fficers on the Track                                                      245


                                                            IV
                                                                                Paragraph     Page

C H A P T E R 14 - T H E RESPO N SE O F T H E PO LIC E                                         44
            T he O fficers in C o m m an d                                           2 50
            Police on th e Pitch                                                     253
            Fans on th e Pitch                                                       255
            False R eports                                                           257
C H A P T E R 15 - T H E P E R IM E T E R GATES W E R E T O O SM ALL                            45

PART III - CONCLUSIONS
C H A P T E R 16 - B R IE F SU M M A RY O F CAUSES                                              47

C H A P T E R 17 - T H E FA’S C H O IC E O F G R O U N D                                        48

C H A P T E R 18 - PO L IC E                                                             49
             Choice o f Ends by the Police                                            272
             Police Planning                                                          273
             Policing on the D ay                                                     277
             T h e Police Case at the Inqu iry                                        285
C H A P T E R 19 - T H E C IT Y C O U N C IL A N D T H E SA FETY CERTIFICA TE                   51
C H A P T E R 20 - T H E CLU B A N D D R EASTW OO D                                             52
C H A P T E R 21 - FIR S T A ID A N D E M E R G E N C Y SERVICES                                53
            N o Fault by the Emergency Services                                       296
C H A P T E R 2 2 -C O M M U N IC A T IO N S                                                    54
PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
C H A P T E R 2 3 - IN T R O D U C T IO N                                                       55
             Lim ited O bjectives                                                     304
             P erim eter Fences                                                       306
             R educed N u m b ers                                                     313
             Safety C ertificate                                                      314
C H A P T E R 2 4 - T H E R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S                                          57
             M axim um C apacities for Terraces                                          1
             Filling an d M onitoring Terraces                                          4
             Fences and G ates                                                          6
             C rush Barriers                                                           11
             Safety Certificates                                                       13
             D u ties o f each Football Club                                           18
             Police Planning                                                           26
             C o m m un icatio ns                                                      31
             C o -ordinatio n o f Emergency Services                                   35
             First Aid, M edical Facilities an d A m bulances                          39




                                                           v
APPENDICES
1.    Plan o f Sheffield W ednesday Football Club, H illsborough G ro u n d
2.   Leppings Lane: the p erim eter gates an d turnstiles
3.   T h e west stand and terraces
4.   A rrangem ent o f barriers at west terrace
5.   T he west terraces at 2.59 pm
6.   Specific incidents
          M r Hicks’ Evidence
          T he G oalkeeper an d G ate 4
          Oxygen
          Calling the Fire Service
          M r K enny Dalglish
7.   List o f parties and th e ir representation
8.   List o f those giving oral evidence to th e Inquiry in o rd e r o f appearance
T he R t H on D ouglas H u rd CBE, M P
Secretary o f State for th e H om e D ep artm en t


                           THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                       15 APRIL 1989

                                          INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY


                                                     INTRODUCTION
   1. O n 15 A pril 1989 a football m atch to decide a sem i-final ro u n d o f the FA C up co m petition was to be
played betw een th e Liverpool a n d N otting ham Forest Clubs. T he neutral venue chosen was H illsborough
Football Stadium , Sheffield W ednesday’s ground. O nly six m inutes into the game, play was stopped w hen it
was realised th a t spectators on the terraces b ehind th e Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. In the result,
95 died an d over 400 received hospital treatm ent.

   2. O n 17 A pril 19891 was app oin ted by you to carry out an In quiry w ith the following term s o f reference:

       To inqu ire into the events at Sheffield W ednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 an d to m ake
       reco m m en datio ns ab out the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports events.

   3. Two Assessors were ap pointed to assist me: M r B rian John so n Q PM , C h ief Constable o f Lancashire,
an d Professor L eonard M aun der OBE, BSc, P hD , ScD, FEng, FI M ech E, Professor o f M echanical
Engineering at the U niversity o f Newcastle u p o n Tyne. T h e ir help has been invaluable and I am very grateful
fo r th eir expert advice an d wise counsels. W hile th e sole responsibility for this report is m ine, I a m com forted
in th e knowledge th a t b o th Assessors agree w ith it.

  4. M r R ob ert W halley was app oin ted Secretary to th e Inquiry. H e and his assistants have w orked
prodigiously an d skilfully to give m e all the advice an d supp ort I could have wished. I also wish to acknowledge
the help I have received, as always, from m y clerk, M r E rnest Pott.

   5. T he policing arrangem ents for 15 April were in th e hands o f the South Yorkshire Constabulary. T he
efficacy o f those arrangem ents and th eir im plem en tation was from an early stage called into question. It was
therefore decided th a t the investigation o f th e disaster an d the gathering o f evidence for this Inqu iry should be
conducted by an independ en t police force. M r G eoffrey D ear Q PM , C h ief C onstable o f West M idlands
Constabulary, un dertook this task. H e was m ade responsible directly to me; he ap pointed A ssistant C h ief
C onstable M ervyn Jo nes to take full-tim e charge o f the investigation. I am deeply indebted to b o th o f them .

   6. O n 18 A pril I visited H illsborough Stadium . I inspected the scene o f the disaster on the terraces an d all
 relevant parts o f the stadium and its approaches. My Assessors an d I have m ad e fu rth er visits during the
 Inquiry. I also visited Liverpool on 21 a n d 29 April.

     7. T h e L ord M ayor an d the Sheffield City C ouncil kindly offered to m ake the accom m odation an d facilities
 o f Sheffield Town Hall available for the hearing o f oral evidence. T h is offer was gratefully accepted an d I w ould
 like to record m y thanks for those facilities and for the co-operation afforded to the Inquiry by th e authorities
 in Sheffield.

    8. O n 28 April 1989,1 held a p relim inary hearing to annou nce th e date w hen the oral evidence would begin,
 to give som e directions as to th e procedure I in tended to follow an d to h ear applications from those w ishing to
 be represented at the hearing. I accorded representation to the following:
        (i)     T hose bereaved o r injured as a result o f the disaster.
        (ii)    T h e Football Supporters’ A ssociation.
        (iii)   T h e Football Association.
        (iv)    Sheffield City Council.
        (v)     Sheffield W ednesday Football Club together w ith the Football League, the Club’s casual sta ff and
                th e ir insurers, the Sun Alliance.
        (vi)    South Yorkshire Constabulary.
        (vii) South Yorkshire Fire an d Civil D efence Authority.


                                                                1
 Subsequently, during the hearing, I fu rth er accorded representation to:
       (viii) T rent Regional H ealth Authority, for the South Yorkshire M etropolitan A m bulance Service
             (SYMAS).
an d   (ix)   D r W Eastwood, consultant engineer to Sheffield W ednesday Football Club.

    9. Since the circum stances o f the disaster raised urgent questions o f safety, especially at football grounds,
you indicated at the outset th a t you w ould welcome any recom m endations, even o f an in terim nature, which I
m ight be able to give in advance o f the new football season due to com m ence in m id-A ugust 1 9 8 9 .1 therefore
a n n o u n ced at the p relim inary hearing o n 28 A pril th a t I w ould conduct an oral hearing w ith all possible
ex pedition as the first phase o f the Inq uiry to discover th e facts an d causes o f the disaster an d enable m e to
m ake any im m ediate interim recom m en dation s necessary in th e short term .

    10. T he West M idlands Police investigation began on 24 April. A “Freephone” n u m b e r was advertised to
enable m em bers o f th e public, especially those w ho had atten d ed the m atch, to offer th e ir evidence to the
Inquiry. Initially this n u m b er was available for three days on 28 different lines. T he response from the public
was such th at the lines were co ntinued for a fu rth er three days by the en d o f w hich 2,666 calls h ad been
received. T here were also m any w ritten offers o f help. Som e 440 West M idlands officers were deployed on the
Inquiry. To service th is operation, special police offices were established in B irm ingham , Liverpool and
Sheffield and co m p u ter technology was used to the full. In all som e 3776 statem ents were taken. T here were
also som e 1550 letters to M inisters, to the Inquiry an d to m e personally all o f w hich I read. T he police,
Sheffield W ednesday Football Club a n d the BBC h ad video cam eras film ing at the ground on 15 April. In
aggregate, they recorded som e 71 hours o f film covering the p erio d before, during an d after the disaster. T hus
th e m aterial gathered and potentially available for presentation at the oral hearing was enorm ous. From this
m ass it was essential to select only sufficient good a n d reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
causes o f the disaster.

   11. W here it seem ed likely th a t any allegation or criticism m ight be m ade o f the co ndu ct o f any person or
party, the Treasury Solicitor, after consultation w ith Counsel for the Inquiry, w rote to the party concerned
setting out the likely grounds for com plaint. T his followed the practice established by the Royal C om m ission
o n T ribunals o f Inquiry (the Salm on Com m ission).

    12. T he hearing began on 15 May. It continued, sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 June. In
th a t period, 174 witnesses gave oral evidence. C ounsel’s subm issions were delivered in w riting on 7 July and
on 14 July I heard th e ir b rie f oral subm issions supplem enting th e w ritten argum ent.

    13. W itnesses were not sworn. Since this is a dep artm ental inquiry, there was no pow er to a d m in ister the
o a th b u t there was no instance o f any w itness giving evidence w hich I considered m ight have been different
h a d he o r she been sworn.

   14. T he w itnesses called were only a sm all fraction o f those from w hom statem ents w ere o r could have been
taken. N evertheless, I am satisfied th a t they were sufficient in n u m b er and reliability to enable m e to reach the
necessary conclusions. To have called m ore would have prevented m e from presenting an interim report in the
required tim e an d would not have a dd ed significantly to th e relevant evidence. I have, however, been able to
take into account m any w ritten statem ents in addition to oral testimony.

    15. A part from the evidence called by C ounsel for th e Inquiry w hich was draw n from statem ents taken by
th e West M idlands Police an d others volunteered by individuals, each o f the represented parties was given full
o p p o rtu n ity to pu t forw ard any witnesses they considered should be called. A final subm ission was m ade by
C ounsel for the South Yorkshire Police th a t since the investigation by West M id lands Police is still continuing,
all the evidence has not been assem bled an d it w ould be unsafe for m e to m ake findings o f fact. I should
therefore m ake clear th a t th e investigation continues principally to furnish as m uch detail as possible to H M
Coi^nerTofTEFT!rFvW^EeTTIHg^Slo~niF7aTisiriiiJPGPHiWl \ __________________ ___ ______
m ovem ent o f each o f th e 95 victim s individually. I a m assnred by C h ief C onstable D e a r and A ssistant C hief
C onstable M ervyn Jones th a t it is m ost unlikely any fu rth e r evidence gathered will significantly alter o r add to
th e history o f events w hich em erged at the hearing.

  16. I should like to th a n k all those w ho m ade it possible for the oral hearing to take place so soon after the
event and for evidence to be efficiently presented an d tested so as to give a full a n d fair account o f w hat
hap p en ed in all its aspects w ithout irrelevancy o r duplication. I pay trib u te particularly to th e West M idlands
Police for th e ir speed and dedication in gathering th e evidence an d to all those responsible for processing it.


                                                           2
T he m ost elo quen t trib u te to the fairness an d thoroughness o f the police investigation cam e from the Secretary
o f the Football Supporters’ A ssociation. H e said there h a d been initial anxiety in Liverpool as to w hether th at
investigation w ould be fair and objective. His A ssociation therefore collected 200 w itness statem ents
them selves. H aving heard the opening statem ent by Counsel to the In quiry based upon the evidence gathered
by the police, he found th a t it accorded entirely w ith his A ssociation’s evidence and the initial anxiety was
wholly dispelled.

   17. Before an d during the Inquiry I derived great assistance on a w ide range o f technical issues from the
H ealth an d Safety Executive w ho providentially have a laboratory in Sheffield (the Research and L aboratory
Services D ivision) w here tests were conducted and reports p rep ared swiftly an d efficiently. T his was done
in close consultation w ith Professor M aunder. I am m ost grateful to the D irector, D r A Jones, and to the
D eputy D irector, D r C E N icholson, for th e ir invaluable help.

   18. I wish to com m end Counsel to the inquiry, M r Andrew Collins QC, M r Alan G oldsack an d M r
B ernard Phillips for th e ir industry, care an d fairness in selecting an d presenting the necessary evidence; also,
Counsel for all those represented w ho tested th a t evidence fully bu t expeditiously. T his Interim R eport could
n ot possibly have been prepared in so short a tim e had I n ot h ad the w hole-hearted co-operation o f all those
m en tio n ed a n d m any others.

    19. T he second phase o f the Inquiry will be directed to m aking final an d long term recom m endations ab out
crowd control a n d safety at sports grounds. I need to consider in dep th inform ation, opinions an d argum ents
from a wide range o f sources an d contribu to rs both here a n d abroad. It was clear from the outset th a t this
second phase could not be carried to com pletion before the next football season. However, a t an early stage o f
th e oral h earing I invited evidence from all w ho wished to contribute to it and specifically from m any sporting,
local authority, emergency service and police bodies as well as technical consultants. I asked th a t subm issions
should be in w riting an d should be m ad e prom ptly so th a t the second phase o f the Inquiry could
follow im m ediately after the first. I shall now proceed to consider the large body o f w ritten evidence w hich has
been subm itted. I shall w ant in som e instances to have further oral evidence o r discussion in conjunction w ith
my Assessors. We will also need to m ake a n u m b er o f visits and inspections.

   20. I now present my Interim R eport and R ecom m endations. I shall prepare my Final R eport and
 R ecom m end ation s as soon as reasonably possible.




  1 August 1989                                                                                      PE T E R TAYLOR
                     PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
                                                     CHAPTER 1

                            T H E G R O U N D A N D PR E -M A T C H A R R A N G E M E N T S

Fixing T he Venue
   21. O n 20 M arch 1989, the Football A ssociation (the FA) requested th a t th eir C up sem i-final between
Liverpool an d N o ttin gham Forest be held on 15 April at H illsborough Football Stadium . T he corresponding
sem i-final betw een the sam e two team s h ad been held there in April 1988. T he arrangem ents h a d been
successful in the view both o f the police an d o f the host club. Sheffield W ednesday (the Club) were therefore
willing to accom m odate the 1989 m atch. South Y orkshire C onstabulary were prepared to police it bu t only if
the ticketing arrangem ents were the sam e as those for 1988. O therw ise, the FA w ould have to look elsewhere.
Those arrangem ents did no t please L iverpool o r its supporters either in 1988 o r 1989. They thought the ticket
allocation was un fair for reasons to be explained later. Reluctantly, however, the police requirem en t was
accepted and th e m atch was fixed for 15 April at Hillsborough.

T he Ground
  22. T h e H illsborough Stadium is som e 2'k m iles to the north-w est o f central Sheffield in the d istrict o f
Ow lerton. T he ground was o pened in 1899 on w hat was then a greenfield site by the river D on. T he pitch lies
roughly east to west. A plan o f the ground an d its im m ediate environs is at A ppendix 1.

  23. T he west end, w ith w hich this In quiry is principally concerned, is known as the Leppings Lane end. The
east en d abuts on Penistone Road, the A 61. To th e south is the river D on an d to the n orth a residential street,
Vere R oad, w hich runs betw een Leppings Lane an d Penistone R oad N orth.

   24. Alongside the river is a private roadw ay giving access to the south stand, to the D irectors’ an d players’
entrances, an d to the adm in istrativ e block u n d er th e stand. T he roadway gives bo th vehicular an d pedestrian
access betw een Penistone R oad and Leppings Lane, b u t there are gates w hich can shut it o ff at each end. T here
is som e car parking along this roadway principally for Directors, players and em ployees o f the Club. T he south
stand dates from 1914 an d is th e oldest at th e ground. It is all seating w ith places for 8,800. 5,500 o f those are
roofed over an d 3,300 are uncovered.

  25. T he n o rth stand is also all seating an d accom m odates ab o u t 9,700. B ehind it is a gym nasium or sports
hall. T here are also a first aid room an d police room close by.

  26. T h e east en d is all terracing and is known as the Spion Kop. It was enlarged an d roofed over in 1986 an d
now accom m odates som e 2 1,000 standing spectators. T here are crush barriers in the Kop running parallel to
the goal line b u t no dividing fences to prevent free m ovem ent from side to side.

   27. At the west or Leppings Lane end o f the ground there is terracing close to the pitch. Behind it is the west
stand w hich provides covered seating an d was built in 1965 for W orld C up m atches, som e o f w hich were held
at H illsborough in 1966. T he covered stan d accom m odates 4,456 seated spectators. T he terracing in fron t o f it
extends higher in the corners betw een the stands a n d its total capacity was stated to be 10,100. A t both the Kop
end and the west end access to the pitch is barred by p erim eter fencing. T he fencing is abo ut eight feet high
m oun ted upon the low wall at the foot o f the terracing. At the top o f the fencing the wire returns back at a sharp
angle for som e 15 inches to m ake it difficult for anyone to clim b over towards the pitch. T here are gates at
intervals along the p erim eter fencing to afford access between terrace an d pitch. These gates are less th an a
m etre wide an d were designed to be o pened only from the pitch side for police purposes or in an emergency.
They are m arked a n d n um bered on the plan A ppendix 1.

   28. U nlike the Kop end, the west terracing has not only crush barriers parallel w ith the goal line b ut radial
fences at right angles to it, dividing the area into pens. T his division was begun after an FA C up sem i-final in
1981 w hen crushing occurred due to overcrow ding an d gates had to be opened. It proceeded in stages, the final
arrangem ent being shown on the plan A ppendix 1. T h e first section o f the west terracing moving south to n orth
contains gates 1 an d 2 a n d is known as pens 1 an d 2 although in fact constituting only one pen. N ext is pen 3
w ith one gate; next pen 4 w ith one gate; pen 5, w hich is extrem ely narrow, was in tended as a sterile area to
divide pen 4 from pen 6. T his was to isolate hom e an d away fans on occasions w hen bo th m ight be
accom m od ated on th e west terracing in separate pens. Finally there is pen 7 at the north-w est corner. Pens 5 ,6
an d 7 each have a perim eter gate. At the back o f the pens, u n d er the fron t o f the west stand, there is a gate in


                                                           4
each radial fence. W hen those gates are open, the back row o f the terracing is intended to perm it access from
pen to pen along the whole west side. In practice, w hen substantial num bers are present, those gateways are not
readily visible o r accessible. T h e present layout o f the pens, fences, crush barriers a n d gates has resulted from a
series o f piecem eal changes. T he n ature an d effect o f those changes m u st be considered later.

The Turnstiles
   29. Because o f the housing in Vere R oad there is no access from the no rth side o f the ground. Along
Penistone R oad N orth there are som e 46 turnstiles which usually give access both to the Kop and to the east
end o f the n orth stand. They are m arked 43 to 88 inclusive on the plan. T he 12 n um b ered 77 to 88 are designed
to feed the n o rth stand bu t were no t used for th a t purpose on 15 A pril in order to segregate supporters o f the
two team s as appears later. Two o f them , 77 and 78, were however used for access to the Kop.

   30. At the south side o f the ground there were 24 turnstiles (num bered 19 to 42 on the plan). T hose
n um bered 37 to 42 led to the K op a n d the rest to the south stand.

  31. In sum m ary, the south an d east sides o f the ground accom m odated som e 29,800 whose access on the
day was through 60 turnstiles.

  32. T he o th e r two sides o f the ground, n orth an d west, w ith a capacity o f 24,256 were fed solely from the
Leppings Lane entrance where there were only 23 turnstiles.

Travel to the Ground
   33. M ost supporters were expected to com e by ro ad although rail tran spo rt was available. N ottingham
supporters travelling by train would arrive at the m ain line Sheffield M idland Station whence they would be
directed an d escorted northw ards by the police. They would arrive at the ground along Penistone Road.
N ottingh am supporters travelling by coach, m ini-bus o r car w ould approach Sheffield from the south m ainly
o n the M 1. Again th eir arrival at the ground would p red om inantly be via Penistone R oad o r H erries Road.

   34. Liverpool supporters travelling by norm al rail service would arrive at Sheffield M idlan d Station ju st
like th eir N otting ham counterparts. T he police aim ed to segregate th e rival fans an d pu t them into separate
coaches. Liverpool fans could alternatively travel by special train to Wadsley Bridge, a British Rail station
catering solely for football supporters an d situated to th e north o f the ground. A police escort was available to
c ond uct th em on foot to the Leppings Lane entrance. T hose com ing from Liverpool by road would approach
Sheffield eith er via the M 62 an d down the M 1 from the north o r across the Pennines from the north west. All
such routes w ould bring them to the ground via one or o th er lim b o f Leppings Lane as shown on A ppendix 1.
Broadly, therefore, arrivals from Liverpool would be from the n o rth and west; arrivals from N ottingham
w ould be from the south an d east.

Allocation of Places and Tickets
    35. Experience in recent years has produced a policy o f segregation to prevent trouble betw een supporters
 o f rival team s. T he need for this policy to be m ain tain ed was endorsed and em phasised by the Popplewell
 R eport following the B radford City disaster in 1985. Accordingly, before the 1988 semi-final the police decided
 th a t sections o f the Hillsborough Stadium should be allocated so as to achieve efficient segregation o f
 Liverpool and N ottingham Forest fans. T he section to be granted to each was d eterm ined by the direction
 whence each p redo m in an tly approached. Thus, L iverpool were allotted the n orth and west sides o f the ground
 for which access was from Leppings Lane. N ottingh am Forest were allotted the south an d east sides with access
 from Penistone Road.

    36. T h e effect o f the decision was th a t for this all-ticket C up Tie, Liverpool were allotted only 24,256 places
 as against 29,800 for N otting ham Forest. This, although average attendance o f supporters at hom e m atches
 was substantially higher at Liverpool th a n at N ottingham . M oreover, w ith standing tickets at £6 and seats at
 £12, N o ttin gham Forest had 21,000 standing places com pared w ith Liverpool’s 10,100. So, Liverpool’s
 allocation was m ore expensive as well as smaller. U nderstandably, Liverpool were aggrieved by the allocation
 o f places an d tickets. T hey sought w ith som e support from the host club and the FA to have it changed in
 1988, bu t the police were adam ant. To switch ends would, in th eir opinion, have involved rival supporters
 crossing each o th er’s path s w hen approaching the ground thereby frustrating attem pts at segregation and
 creating a risk o f disorder. In 1989, w hen the sam e plan was proposed, Liverpool again challenged it. The
 police, however, m ain tain ed th e ir view, adding th a t those w ho h ad attended in 1988 would be fam iliar w ith the
 arrangem ents a n d th a t any change w ould lead to confusion.


                                                             5
A ccess from Leppings Lane
   37. As the plan Appendix 1 shows, the approach to the west turnstiles is across a narrow neck or forecourt at
a bend in Leppings Lane where, com ing from the no rth, it tu rn s to the south-west an d crosses a bridge over the
river D on. Parking areas for the Liverpool supporters had been arranged no rth an d west o f the ground. They
were therefore expected to arrive on foot along both lim bs o f Leppings Lane an d would converge on the
forecourt at the bend. In an arc across th a t forecourt is a line o f railings w ith six sets o f double gates. Inside
those perim eter gates is the short app roach to the turnstiles. As shown in the photographs A ppendix 2, the
latter are in two sections d ivided by a fence. T he north ern section consists o f turnstiles 1 to 16. N um bers 1 to
 10 gave access to the no rth stand. T h us there were 10 turnstiles for the 9,700 w ith n o rth stan d seats. T heir
tickets were m arked “E ntrance A ” an d were colour-coded brown. T urnstiles 1 to 10 correspondingly had the
letter A above them an d brown boards on the wall.

   38. T urnstiles 11 to 16 were for those w ith seats in the west stand. T h us 4,456 were served by six turnstiles.
They were the next block to the right o f those m arked A. However, instead o f these turnstiles an d the west stand
tickets being m arked B as m ight alphabetically have been expected, they were m arked C. T h e ir colour-code on
tickets an d boards was red.

   39. O n the other side o f the d ividing fence in the approach area, there were only seven turnstiles to serve
 10,100 w ith tickets for the west terracing. T hose seven turnstiles were labelled A to G. T h is was because there
had originally been 18 turnstiles at Leppings Lane an d the sequential n um bering con tinu ed from 19 upw ards
on the south side o f the ground. W hen the num b er at Leppings Lane was brought up to 23 the present
arrangem ents o f 1 to 1-6, A to G an d then 19 upw ards was ado pted to avoid re-num bering all ro u n d the ground.
However, above the lettering A to G was a large letter B. “ Entrance B” also appeared o n tickets for the west
terrace. T hus, the three blocks o f turnstiles encountered by a ticket h older at the Leppings Lane end read from
left to right A, C, B. T he colour-code for west terrace tickets and the boards beside turnstiles A to G was mauve.
To the right o f turnstile G is a tubu lar steel b arrier to divide the q ueue for th a t turnstile from the roadw ay to the
south stand.

Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles
   40. T urnstiles 1 to 10 gave access to a passageway leading to the n o rth stand. T here is an exit gate (m arked A
o n A ppendix 1) between turnstile 1 a n d the adjacent housing.

  41. Inside turnstiles 1 to 16 is a concourse leading to pens 6 a n d 7 a n d the steps to the west stand. T here is a
wall dividing this area from th a t inside turnstiles A to G. It had been built to segregate hom e an d away fans at a
tim e w hen th e Club intended they should share the west terrace. T h a t idea was no t pursued bu t the wall
rem ained. T here was, however, a gateway in the wall w hich did p erm it access between the two areas. An exit
gate (m arked B on A ppendix 1) was provided from the area inside turnstiles 11 to 16.

   42. Finally, anyone using turnstiles A to G entered a concourse bo u n d ed on the left by the wall ju st
m en tio n ed an d on the right by the wall o f the private roadway com ing from the south stan d to Leppings Lane.
T here was an exit gate in the latter wall (m arked C on A ppendix 1) ju s t inside turnstile G.

   43. All three exit gates, A, B an d C, were o f concertina design. T hey could be opened only from the inside
a n d were n o t intended for entry o f spectators into the ground.

   44. T hose entering through turnstiles A to G h a d three optio ns once inside the ground. They could by
m oving to the right go rou n d the south end o f the west stand an d gain entry into pens 1 an d 2. They could go
through the gap in the dividing wall tow ards the concourse behin d turnstiles 11 to 16 and then rou nd the north
end o f th e west stan d into pens 6 or 7. However, there were no conspicuous signs inviting them to take either o f
those courses. T he obvious way in was straight ahead o f the turnstiles where a tunnel u n d e r th e m iddle o f the
west stan d gave access to pens 3 an d 4. Above its entrance in large letters was the w ord “ Standing” a n d a large
letter “ B” . T hus B ticket holders were draw n tow ards the tunnel.

   45. T he length o f the tunnel is som e 23 metres. It rises slightly at first th en levels o ff b u t finally descends
tow ards the terraces at a gradient o f 1 in 6. As it emerges onto the terrace, th e way ahead is bisected by the radial
fence betw een pen 3 on the right and pen 4 on the left. A short sp u r o f brick wall projects forw ard from each side
o f the tunn el at its m outh. Those em erging are thus guided straight forw ard rath er th a n to eith er side. The
photograph at A ppendix 3 shows the west stand an d terraces.

  46. As w ith the layout on the terraces, the configuration o f the Leppings Lane turnstiles an d the areas inside
them was effected by a series o f piecem eal changes. Again, it will be necessary to analyse th eir resultant effect.


                                                            6
Policing Arrangements
    47. A t the 1988 sem i-final, policing h ad been u n d e r the control o f C h ief S u perintend en t Mole, then
C o m m a n d e r o f F D ivision w ithin whose area H illsborough lies. H e was still in post on 20 M arch 1989 when
the FA b roached the 1989 semi-final, bu t he was due to h a n d over c o m m a n d o f F D ivision on 27 M arch to
S u perinten den t D uckenfield on the latter’s prom otion to C h ie f Superintendent. Both were present at an initial
m eeting on 22 M arch, b u t on 27 M arch M r M ole bowed o u t an d M r D uckenfield took over. U n d e r him were
Sector C om m anders, all S up erintendents w ith m uch experience o f policing football m atches at H illsborough
a n d elsewhere. In particular, S up erintendent M arshall was in charge o f the area outside the Leppings Lane
e ntrance an d th e approaches to it. S u perintend en t G reenw ood was in co m m an d inside the ground, but this
included the area between the turnstiles and the p erim eter fence. They thereby swapped roles from the
previous year. U n d e r M r D uckenfield’s overall co m m an d were som e 801 officers an d m en on duty a t the
ground plus traffic officers and others from D D ivision to deal w ith the influx o f supporters into the city centre.
In all, therefore, som e 1,122 police were deployed for this m atch am oun ting to ab o u t 38 per cent o f the total
South Y orkshire force. Included in the m ou nted section o f 34 were officers from Liverpool an d N ottingham to
assist respectively in m arshalling th eir hom e supporters. T he total at the ground was divided into serials
consisting usually o f eight to ten C onstables plus a Sergeant an d an Inspector. T he serials were posted to duties
a t various stations in a n d aro u n d th e ground in three phases: before, during a n d after the m atch. All o f this
was provided for in an O perational O rd er which followed closely th e O rd er draw n up for the 1988 semi-final
a n d took into account the force’s “Standing In stru ctions for th e Policing o f Football G ro u n d s”. T he O rder
described th e duties o f each serial at each phase. It was supplem ented by oral briefings before an d on the day o f
th e m atch.

Sheffield Wednesday’s Arrangements
   48. T h e Club provided 376 stewards, gatem en an d turnstile o perators for duty on 15 April. T he stewards
w ere briefed as to th e ir duties on the m orning o f the m atch by police Inspectors a n d were allocated ro und the
ground. T hey wore yellow tabards. T he C lub’s control room , situated below th e south stand, could
c o m m unicate by V H F radio w ith th e stewards. C losed circuit television was installed by the Club with
screens in th e ir control room showing all the turnstiles ro u n d the ground. A co m puterised counting system was
in co rporated in th e turnstiles. T his flashed on to a screen in the Club control room the running total o f
spectators passing through the turnstiles section by section. T hus, at the Leppings Lane end, there would be
separate runn ing totals for turnstiles 1 to 10 (north stand), turnstiles 11 to 16 (west stand), and turnstiles A to G
(west terraces). W hen the total for any section was w ithin 15 per cent o f its perm itted capacity a warning pulse
showed on th e screen. For the west terracing th at w arning would occur w hen the num bers were w ithin 15 per
cent o f th e total terrace capacity o f 10,100. W hat th e system could n o t do was m o n ito r the d istribution o f fans
on the terracing, pen by pen. It could give no w arning therefore if one pen was full beyond its safe capacity.

Police Communications
    49. T he nerve centre for police control is the control room o r box situated at the south-west corner o f the
ground between the south stand an d pen 1 o f the west terracing. T he box is elevated an d reached by a num ber
o f steps. It has windows com m anding views across the pitch an d straight along th e line o f the west perim eter
fence. T he box is very small an d has seats for only three officers. S uperintendent M urray was in control o f it
a n d was advisor to M r D uckenfield as he had been to M r M ole the year before. N ext to him sat Sergeant
G o d d a rd w ho operated the radios. T h e th ird seat was for Police C onstable Ryan who operated the telephone
an d public address systems. At the back o f the box stood Police C onstable Bichard who was in control o f the
police closed circuit television system operated by a row o f consoles on a bench in front o f him an d b ehind the
three seated officers.

   50. T here were five television screens showing views o f five roving cam eras fixed at high points on the
stan ds and directed both inside an d outside the ground. T here was also a m aster screen which flicked in
rotation from o ne cam era view to an o th er an d which m ade a video recording. T h e cam eras have a zoom
facility to close in on any p o in t o f interest. Specifically, there were good cam era views o f the west terracing, o f
the Leppings Lane turnstiles an d beyond them o f Leppings Lane itself.

  51. T h e Tannoy public address system was relayed through speakers fixed at vantage p oints inside the
ground an d outside th e turnstiles. It was used by a disc jockey, housed u n d er the police control box, to relay
m usic before th e m atch, b ut it could be overridden by the police. Messages could be relayed through all
speakers o r if a ppro priate to on e area only.




                                                              7
   53.     R ad io contact at H illsborough from control to serials operating b oth inside an d o utside the ground was
U H F on channel 25. T h ere was a W1 F U portable base station in the control box an d if it failed there was a
stand-by station und er the o perato r’s bench. H a n d sets were issued to all ranks o f Sergeant an d above.
C om m u n ity C onstables on duty w ould already have th eir own. O th er C onstables had no radio.
C o m m u n icatio n was on “talk th rough” i.e. any message from any source would be h eard by everyone tu n ed in
an d if m ore th a n one source spoke messages could becom e garbled. Ear pieces were issued to som e officers in
an a tte m p t to overcom e the loud crowd noise which m ade receipt o f signals very difficult. T here were other
radio channels open to Sergeant G od d ard : V H F to police H eadquarters at Snig Hill, channel 35 to FI
Sub-divisional H eadq u arters at H a m m e rto n R oad an d channel 19 used by CID . T here was also a set tu n ed to
Sheffield W ednesday’s radio system betw een its control room an d the stewards.
                                                      CHAPTER 2

                                     15th APRIL: TH E B U IL D -U P TO 2.30pm

Early Arrivals
   54. 15 April 1989 was a w arm sunny spring Saturday. T he m atch was a sell-out, so 54,000 ticket holders
were expected. O thers would com e w ith ou t tickets hoping to acquire them or even to gain access otherwise.
T h e following account concentrates, as d id the evidence, on the western approaches and the Liverpool
supporters since the disaster occurred at th eir end. They began to arrive in the Hillsborough area quite early in
sm all num bers. Som e brought cans o f beer w ith th em an d were seen drinking as they walked; others took
advantage o f th e w eather an d sat ab o u t on walls an d open spaces. W hen the public houses opened, m any
resorted there, drinking inside or spilling ou t into the sunshine. Leppings Lane an d its environs com prise a
m ixed shopping an d residential area. Local residents saw groups o f Liverpool supporters keen to find a public
house or off-licence. M any were asking for tickets o r “spares” . T here were a few touts selling them at inflated
prices. From an early stage, som e o f the fans were using private gardens an d yards to urinate. As the m orning
w ore on, n u m b ers increased. R equests for tickets an d trespass to u rinate also increased. Still the prevailing
m o o d was on e o f carnival, good h u m o u r an d expectation.

Public Houses
  55. T here were som e 74 shops w ith off-licences in and aro u n d Sheffield. In general, they opened at 8 am.
Liverpool su pporters d id visit them b u t th e evidence d id n o t suggest a great am o u n t o f alcoholic d rink was
bought there.                          ts .—             —                 ~      —                  —    mm ~

   56. O pening tim e at public houses was in general 11 am . Som e rem ained closed all day. O f the others, some
72, m ostly in the city, were frequented by local patrons only. Som e 23 public houses, however, served over a
h u n d red Liverpool supporters each. A nother 51 served m ore th an 20 each. Little trouble was reported, b u t
m any supporters d rank enough to affect th eir m ood. At first excitem ent: later frustration.

The Gathering Crowd
   57. Towards the end o f the m orning, fans gathered on an d aro u n d the bridge near the Leppings Lane
entrance. T hey seem ed reluctant to enter the ground early. All turnstiles were open at 12 noon an d one o r two
as early as 11.30 am . Som e 53 police h a d been deployed to operate outside the turnstiles and in the Leppings
Lane area. They enquired a t ran d o m w hether fans h a d tickets. T hose who h ad n o t were advised to go away;
nevertheless, m any retu rn ed m ore th a n once. T hose w ho h ad tickets were guided in the right direction. T he
police tried to persuade them to en ter the ground early. Officers, m ale a n d female, had been posted outside
each turnstile w ith the duty o f searching en tran ts for w eapons, d rin k or drugs. O nce through the turnstile, an
e n tra n t was liable to be searched again by one o f a serial o f officers positioned ju st inside.

   58. At ab o u t 12 noon C h ie f Inspector C reaser asked S u perin ten d en t M urray w hether the pens on the west
terrace w ere to be filled one by one successively, b u t was told th a t they should all be available from the start and
the fans should find their own level.

   59. By 2 p m it was app aren t to those inside the ground an d those m onitoring events in the police an d Club
control roo m s th a t the nu m b er o f N o tting h am fans in th eir places greatly ou tn um b ered those from Liverpool.
T he Kop an d the south stand were filling up steadily, b u t the n orth an d west stan ds were h a lf empty. It was
noted ab o u t th a t tim e th a t the turnstile figures showed only 12,000 h ad entered as against 20,000 at the sam e
tim e the previous year. O n the west terraces, although pens 3 an d 4 were filling, the wing pens 1 ,2 ,6 and 7 were
nearly empty. At 2.15 pm a Tannoy message asked fans in pens 3 an d 4 to move forw ard an d m ake room for
others.

  60. T h ere h a d been three special trains from Liverpool in 1988. T his tim e, there was only one. It arrived
early, ju st before 2 pm , a t Wadsley Bridge station. T he 350 passengers were m et by b oth m oun ted an d foot
police officers w ho escorted them in a crocodile down Leppings Lane. T hey were orderly an d passed through
the tu rnstiles into the ground by ab o u t 2.20 pm w itho u t incident.

  61. By th is tim e the police Traffic D ivision reported th a t the Liverpool routes were clear, so the m ajority o f
Liverpool fans were in the Sheffield area. T he n um bers converging on the Leppings Lane entrance were
increasing rapidly. Between the perim eter gates and the turnstiles the crowd becam e congested. T here was no
longer a separate queue at each turnstile b u t a single phalanx filling th e w hole approach area. T he foot officers
outside th e tu rnstiles were no longer able to search everyone an d h a d difficulty in searching even selectively.


                                                             9
M o u n ted officers in an d outside the turnstile area were having difficulty m anoeuvring in such a dense crowd.
T he police were beset by fans bem used by the ticket an d turnstile labelling asking for directions. M any h ad
been drinking b u t u p to an d ju st after 2.30 pm th e m oo d rem ained good.

   62.     S u perintendent M arshall was on foot am ongst the crowd. H e becam e anxious about the num bers
com ing down Leppings Lane an d spilling o u t onto th e roadway w here buses an d cars were moving. A t 2.17
pm he radioed to control to have m o to r traffic in Leppings Lane stopped. T his was eventually d one at about
2.30 pm . U p to this tim e, despite the large m ass o utside the turnstiles an d th e n um bers still approaching, there
was still no panic in the crowd; no perception o f crisis by the police. In the control room M r M urray, w ho could
see Leppings Lane on the video, advised M r D uckenfield th a t they w ould get everyone in by 3 pm . M r
D uckenfield reaffirm ed to him the policy ab o u t a delayed kick-off. It w ould be ordered only if there was som e
m ajo r external factor such as fog on th e P ennines or delay on the motorway: n o t if spectators merely tu rn e d up
late even in large num bers.




                                                           10
                                                    CHAPTER3

                                      TH E CRISIS AT TH E TU R N STILES

   63. In the 20 m inutes from 2.30 p m to 2.50 p m there were crucial developm ents bo th inside a n d outside
the ground. In pens 3 a n d 4 there was a steady increase in pressure as m ore fans cam e through the tunnel to the
favoured area b ehind the goal. By 2.50 p m these pens were already full to a degree w hich caused serious
discom fort to m any well used to enduring pressure on terraces. T h e n um b ers at th a t tim e were clearly in excess
o f the m ax im u m density stated by the H o m e Office G u id e to Safety at Sports G rou n d s (1986 Edn) (the G reen
G uide) i.e. 54 persons per 10 square metres. (Although the G reen G uide has no statutory or legal force, it is the
only official advice available about safety at sports grounds.) In th e wing pens 1 , 2 , 6 an d 7, there was still
am ple room an d bare patches o f concrete were visible.

   64. M eanwhile, the crowd grew at the Leppings Lane entrance. As m ore arrived at the back the crush at the
front grew worse. E ntry to th e tu rnstiles becam e m ore difficult. T h eir efficiency was im p aired an d th eir rate
reduced. Arrivals at the back exceeded deliveries through the turnstiles, so the build-up increased. T he foot
officers outside were unable to function a n d in danger them selves so they w ent through the turnstiles an d out
again through gate C where they d id w hat they could to relieve pressure by the tubular barrier. T h e m ou nted
officers were su rrou n d ed by the dense m ass o f people and b ecam e ineffective. S u perintendent M arshall was in
th e m id st o f the turm oil. H e extricated him self an d stood on a p arap et o f the bridge to get a clear view. A
d ru n k en fan tried to push him off: a beer can was throw n at a m o u nted officer. But these were isolated acts by
individuals; th e m enace cam e from th e m assive num bers single-m indedly d eterm in ed to be in for the kick-off
w ith tim e ru nning out. A t the back o f the crowd fans were frustrated by the lack o f progress as 3 o ’clock
approached. Some, m ostly young m en w ho h a d been drinking, trie d to push an d force their way forward. At
the front, people were ja m m e d together a n d against the turnstile walls. Som e panicked as the pressure
intensified. Som e youngsters an d w om en were fainting a n d in distress. They were helped o ut through the
tu b u lar b a rrie r by turnstile G or were passed over th e tu rnstiles elsewhere. Fans clim bed up an d over the
turnstile building or on to the dividing fence. T his was to escape the crush rather th an to gain free entry since
m ost o f th e m had tickets.

   65. At 2.44 pm M r M arshall radioed for reinforcem ents, for the Tannoy to request th e crowd to stop
pushing an d for a vehicle w ith loudspeaker eq u ip m ent to com e an d request the same. Unhappily, at about 2.40
pm , radio co m m u nicatio n on channel 25 becam e defective. For a period o f two or three m inutes the control
room lost contact. A co m m u n ication s officer cam e prom ptly an d sw itched to the standby station. W ith the use
o f a h an d set at control, contact was restored. D espite this hiatus, two o f M r M arshall’s requests were received.
T he Tannoy was used b u t w ith little effect. R einforcem ents, including m ou n ted officers from Penistone Road,
were sent. T h e th ird request, for a Landrover, was received direct by its driver P C B uxton w ho arrived at 2.46
pm an d urged the crowd by loudspeaker n ot to push. T his was no m ore effective th a n the Tannoy. The
m o u n ted officers besieged near the turnstiles cam e outside the perim eter gates. An atte m p t was m ade to shut
th e m against the crowd outside, to enable the throng inside to be dispersed o r at least th in n ed through the
turnstiles. T h e pressure from w ithout, however, opened th e gates again. M ounted officers, now reinforced to
greater num bers, form ed a cordon across the elbow o f Leppings Lane from the sweet shop to the bridge, again
w ith the object o f reducing pressure inside the gates. T hey were successful in this for som e m inutes despite
desperate individuals forcing th eir way u n d er or betw een th e horses. However, this exercise was overtaken by a
m ore d ram atic relief o f the pressure.

“Open the Gates”
   66. Between 2.40 pm an d 2.45 pm the crowd inside an d outside the turnstile approach h ad swelled to
over 5,000. A t the head o f the phalanx conditions h ad becom e intolerable. Those who got through were short
o f b reath an d sweating profusely. M any com plained to police officers on the concourse inside the turnstiles
an d asked th e m in forceful term s to do som ething. Exit gates A an d B were being shaken. It was clear the crowd
could n o t pass through the turnstiles by 3 pm . Police C onstable Buxton radioed from th e Landrover to control
asking th a t kick-off be postponed. T h e suggestion was acknowledged b u t rejected.

   67. S u p erin ten d en t M arshall realised the crowd had becom e unm anageable. Although loth to do so, since it
was contrary to basic police strategy, he decided to request the exit gates be opened to relieve the pressure.
O therw ise, he feared fatalities w ould occur. O th e r senior officers outside the ground agreed. At 2.47 pm he
radioed control to p erm it the gates to be opened. At 2.48 pm , whilst M r D uckenfield was considering the
request, gate C op en ed to eject a youth who h ad clim bed in w ith no ticket. Im m ediately, fans outside took
advantage an d about 150 m anaged to get in before a m o u n ted officer enabled the gate to be closed again. M r
M arshall repeated his request. Still no response from control. H e repeated it a th ird tim e, adding th at if the


                                                           11
gates were n o t opened som eone was going to be killed. In the control room , M r D uckenfield h ad no t m ade a
decision. M r M urray asked him “Are you going to open the gates?” . M r D uckenfield gave th e order an d Sgt
G o d d a rd radioed to M r M arshall “O pen the gates” . N eith er the Club control room n o r any police officers
inside th e turnstiles were told o f this o rd e r before o r after it was given or o f any action it w ould require.

  68. At 2.52 pm , gate C was opened wide. Fans b eh in d turn stiles A to G an d from the concourse beyond
cam e ro u n d to flow through it in large num bers.

   69. A bout two m inutes later th e pressure outside gate A led Sgt Higgins to radio, despite the gatem an’s
objection, for it to be opened. I f it was not, he said, “It’ll go and som eone will get killed” . Perm ission was given,
b u t this tim e reserve serials were alerted to m on itor the inrush tow ards the north stand. G ate B was also briefly
opened against th e gatem an’s wishes an d about 200 o f those pressed at turnstiles A to G gained entry to their
left.

   70. T h e largest entry, however, was through gate C. In th e five m inutes it was open about 2,000 fans passed
through it steadily at a fast walk. Som e m ay have h a d tickets for the stands. N o d o u b t som e h a d no tickets at all.
T he m ajority h a d tickets for the terraces. O f these, som e found th eir way either right to pens 1 an d 2 o r left
through the dividing wall to 6 an d 7. B ut a large pro p ortio n headed straight for the tunnel in front o f them .




                                                             12
                                                       CHAPTER4

                                                    TH E DISA STER

    71. T he initial influx through gate C, augm ented by en tran ts via the turnstiles, cam e through the tunnel
w ith great m o m entum . Fans spoke o f being swept through, feet o ff th e ground. T h e 1 in 6 gradient accelerated
th e ir progress. U p o n reaching the crow ded pens, som e wished to go back b u t were unable to do so. T h e new
arrivals fo un d them selves pushed forw ard an d the pressure becam e intense. A t 2.54 pm , shortly after this
influx began, the team s cam e onto the pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. M any were now
acutely uncom fortable a n d som e were in distress. T he m ass seethed about b u t voluntary m ovem ent by any
individual was difficult; hand s down could not be raised an d som e fans found it h ard to breathe. Still the flow
c o n tin u ed through the tu nn el causing fu rth er surges forw ard. T here were shouts for help a n d for the gates to be
opened to th e pitch. Police officers on the perim eter track d id no t im m ediately react. In the deafening noise
from chanting an d shouting they d id n o t at first recognise the problem . Realisation cam e at different m om ents
to different officers in different places.

   72. G ate 3 sprang open u n d e r the intense pressure from w ithin. An officer quickly closed it. Shortly
afterw ards, it sprang again; officers tried to shut it. T hose seeking to escape were urged an d p ushed back. G ate
4 was opened by a policem an who noticed the crushing. People began to spill o u t through it a n d were directed
to the wing pens w here there was still am ple room . M eanw hile, gate 4 was closed again an d then re-opened. At
gate 3, a Constable, now alive to the crisis, followed strictly his w ritten orders an d radioed for perm ission to
open th a t gate. Receiving no reply, he took it u po n him self to open it.

  73. Ju st before 3 p m , the m atch kicked off. At the sam e tim e, gate C, which h ad been closed at 2.57 pm ,
was reopened a n d a steady trickle c on tinu ed to en ter through the tunnel.

   74. To escape the crush, fans began clim bing the radial fences o ut o f pens 3 an d 4 into pens 2 an d 5. O thers
trie d to get over the fro n t perim eter fence bu t were at first tu rn ed back by police who feared a pitch invasion.
N e a r the front, fans, m ostly youngsters, were w eakened to the p o in t o f collapse a n d in som e instances d eath b u t
they were held u pright by pressure all ro u n d . F u rth e r back. jS^ T V e r e so preoccupied w ith the pain o f being
pressed against barriers an d with breathing problem s th a t they saw nothing o f th e game. But at the rear there
were m any w ho, although cram ped, were watching the football unaw are o f the distress at the front.

    75. A t 3.04 pm , Beardsley for Liverpool struck the crossbar at the Kop end. T here was a ro ar from the
Liverpool fans an d at the sam e tim e a powerful surge forw ards in pen 3. T he several surges which occurred after
the influx from gate C carried the pressure down the pens tow ards the pitch. T h e force becam e such as to twist
a n d b reak two spans o f a crush b a rrie r tow ards the front o f pen 3. T h e evidence does n o t establish with
certainty w hen this happened. Probably it was triggered by th e surge at 3.04 p m . But I am sure it occurred after •'
th e influx from gate C so greatly increased the pressure in the pen. W hen the b a rrie r broke those w hom it h ad
sup p o rted were projected tow ards the perim eter fence. M any fell an d th e involuntary rush o f those behind
pressed th e m down. T he crushing force was tra n sm itte d an d dispersed so th a t all along the front o f pen 3 fans
were pressed h a rd up against the low wall and the w ire m esh o f the fence above it.

  76. In pen 4 no b a rrie r broke. Nevertheless those at the fro nt were crushed against wall an d fence. F u rth e r
back, two b arriers were bowed a n d som e individuals succum bed to the pressure aro u n d them .

   77. Surges on terraces are com m on. Usually, they go forw ard, th en recede. Here, w ith the weight o f
num bers, there was no receding. T h e pressure stayed an d for those crushed breathless by it, standing or prone,
life was ebbing away. If no relief cam e in four m inutes there would be irreversible brain dam age; if longer,
d eath.

  78. In th e control room no-one noticed the overcrowding o r anything am iss in pens 3 an d 4 until the first
fans spilt o u t onto the perim eter track ju st before kick-off. Then, th e officers in co m m an d assum ed th at there
was an atte m p te d p itch invasion. T hey called u p reserve serials w aiting in the gym nasium an d all available
officers elsewhere to go to the pitch. A request was m ad e to H Q for dog handlers.

    79. S u p erinten d ent G reenw ood, the G ro u n d C om m ander, was by the players’ tunnel at the kick-off. H e
n oticed fans on the track an d w ent to the west end b eh in d the goal. As he approached, he d id no t th in k the pens
overcrow ded until he was very close an d saw those pressed against th e fence. Even then, he thought the
situation “ retrievable” if those higher up the p en relieved the pressure. H e clim bed on the wall below the fence
a n d signalled w ith b o th hands to those b eh in d to m ove back. O th er officers jo in e d him . It was impossible.
T hose fans who w ould have wished to com ply were powerless to d o so. B ehind them , there were still many


                                                              13
unaw are o f the crisis, w atching the game. T he football c on tinu ed to joyous shouting an d singing ro u n d the rest
o f the g round while those crushed an d trap p ed slowly expired.

   80.   W hen M r G reenw ood’s signals to move back proved fruitless, he tried to radio for the m atch to be
stopped. A t first, his message was n o t received by control, so he signalled w ith his arm s tow ards the control
box. M r D uckenfield sent M r M urray down from the box to have the m atch stopped via th e linesm an, the
agreed emergency drill. Before he could d o so, M r G reenw ood ran over the p itch to the referee w ho stopped the
game. It was 5/2m inutes p ast 3.
                                                      CHAPTER 5

                                                 T H E A FT E R M A T H

Rescue A ttem pts
   81. From 3 o ’clock, gates 3 an d 4 h ad been open an d rem ained so. A t first, fans had walked o r staggered o u t
w inded a n d faint. But the final surge at 3.04 pm , an d the struggle to reach the open gates, caused a horrendous
blockage o f bodies. T h e dead, the dying an d the desperate becam e interw oven in the sum p at the front o f the
pens, especially by the gates. T hose w ith strength left clam bered over others subm erged in the h u m an heap and
tried to clim b o u t over the fence. They were now helped by police an d o th er fans who hauled them up an d over.
N um bers o f fans were clim bing over the radial fences into adjacent pens. At the back, m any were hauled up
into the west stand to relieve the pressure.

   82. T h e steps from the sum p at gateways 3 an d 4 were so congested w ith bodies live an d dead th a t each h ad
to be p rised from the pile by the police. In itially no officer took effective charge. A n u m b er o f individual
officers a n d fans w orked frantically to free those trap p ed b u t the gateways were so narrow th a t only two o r three
could get a t the entw ined bodies W illing han d s got in one a n o th e r’s way. M ore officers arrived from the
gym nasium a n d elsewhere in the ground. M any used th eir own initiative to help those laid o u t on the pitch, to
assist in getting others over the fencing an d to com fort the distressed. B ut som e stood in groups n ear the
perim eter fence no t knowing w hat to do. T hey h ad been sum m o n ed in response to w hat was thought to be a
threat to public order. W h at they found was a horrific scene o f carnage an d some young officers were shocked
into im potence by w hat they saw.

  83. It was truly gruesom e. The victim s were blue, cyanotic, incontinent; th eir m ouths open, vom iting; th eir
eyes staring. A pile o f d ead bodies lay a n d grew outside gate 3. Extending fu rth er an d further on to the pitch, the
injured were laid down an d attem p ts m ade to revive them . M ore an d m ore walking survivors flooded o ut on to
the p itch as the players left. T he scene was em otive a n d chaotic as well as gruesome. As the enorm ity o f the
disaster was realised, m any o f the fans m illing ab o u t were b itte r an d hostile to the police, blam ing th em for
w hat h ad happened. Officers were confronted, abused, spat upon an d even assaulted. A small n um b er o f
hysterical fans h a d to be subdued.

   84. A dding to the chaos, a n u m b er o f press photographers dodged ab o u t am ong rescue workers apparently
avid to secure photographs at p o in t blank range o f those dying through the wire m esh and those laid on the
pitch. Angry fans sought to assault them . Police h ad to interv ene.

    85. A t ab o u t 3.12 pm , C h ief S u perintendent N esbit, C o m m a n d e r o f the Traffic D ivision, arrived on the
pitch. H e took charge a t gate 3 an d organised a chain o f officers to simplify a n d expedite the extraction o f
casualties from the pen. In the absence o f any m echanical m eans, police an d fans together pulled an d w orked
a t the w ire m esh w ith th eir bare han d s an d th eir feet to breach the fencing. They succeeded in both pens,
enabling officers to get in an d fans to be got out.

   86. By now, som e officers o f th e ir own initiative w ent ro u n d from the p itch to the tunnel where they m et
o th er officers from the turnstiles a n d the west stand. Together, they tried to persuade fans at the rear o f the pens
to go back through the tunnel. Som e com plied, b ut m any resisted, wishing to stand th eir ground. Casualties
were brought o u t through the tunnel, a n d as the pressure in the pens was relieved, officers were able to get
further in a n d bring o u t m ore casualties, dead an d alive. They were laid on the ground in the concourse outside
the tunnel an d attem p ts were m ade to revive them .

First Aid
  87. T h e St J o h n A m bulance Brigade h ad som e 30 personnel posted round the ground for the m atch - 25
adults a n d 5 ju n io r cadets, They were quickly on the scene w hen the first casualties em erged an d sought to
revive them . T h eir D ivisional Superintendent, M r Wells, tried unsuccessfully to help those pressed against the
fencing by feeding oxygen to them through the m esh until they could be got out.

   88. D r Purcell, Sheffield W ednesday’s doctor, cam e from his seat in the south stand a n d attem p ted
resuscitation. Assisted by a male nurse from the crowd, he moved from patien t to p atien t doing w hat he could,
b u t in m ost cases it was too late.

  89. At 3.13 p m a St Jo h n ’s am bulance cam e onto the pitch at the north-east corner an d drove to the
perim eter fence close to gate 3. T here was no call for doctors a n d nurses on the public address system until
nearly 3.30 pm . Nevertheless, as the m inutes ticked past, som e o f them cam e onto the pitch to help o f their


                                                             15
own accord w hen they saw the casualties a n d the am bulance an d realised the gravity o f the situation. M any
fans also worked prodigiously in attem p ts to revive the dead and the dying, in som e cases th e ir own relatives
and friends. Artificial respiration, m o u th to m o uth respiration an d cardiac massage were applied by the skilled
an d the unskilled b u t usually in vain. T hose capable o f survival mostly cam e ro u n d o f th eir own accord. T he
rest were m ostly doo m ed before they could be brought o u t and treated.

    90. T here was an urgent need to get casualties o ff the p itch an d to hospital. T here were six stretchers in the
first aid room an d three in th e St J o h n ’s am bulance. T hey were quickly brought into use. T h en the fans
im provised by tearing down the hoardings a ro u n d the edge o f the p itch a n d against the stands so th a t lengths o f
b o ard could be used as stretchers. Im provising in this way, parties o f fans an d police ran repeatedly the length
o f the pitch bearing casualties to the north-east corner. A n u m b e r were dead on arrival there.

In the Control Room
  91. M r D uckenfield stayed in the control room . C h ief Inspector M cRobbie was there in civilian clothes as
an observer. M r D uckenfield sent h im down to the track to tell a policew om an at gate 1 to ad m it those
displaced from the centre pens. M r D uckenfield d id n o t realise there were injuries until he saw som eone laid
on the pitch. Even then, he d id not realise the nature o f the problem or its scale.

  92. M r M urray retu rn ed from his a tte m p t to stop the m atch an d M r D uckenfield sent him down again to
clear the p itch a n d assess the situation. A message was broadcast requesting fans to clear the pitch. T his was
because M r D uckenfield could n o t from the control room see clearly w hat was happening for the milling and
increasing num bers.

   93. T h e A ssistant C h ief C onstable (O perations), M r Jackson, h ad atten d ed the m atch in civilian clothes as
a guest o f the Club. H e cam e from his seat in the south stand to ask w hat had happened. M r D uckenfield was
unable to say; he d id n o t tell M r Jackson th a t the exit gates h ad been opened on his authority. M r Jackson went
down to the pitch to discover the situation.

   94. At 3.06 p m M r D uckenfield, still prim arily concerned about public order, caused a message to be sent
to H eadq u arters asking for O peratio n Support. T h a t was a call for all available ad d itio n al police resources to
com e to the g round to strengthen the police presence.

   95. M r Jackson was told by M r G reenw ood th a t there were casualties an d retu rn ed im m ediately to control
to m ake sure emergency services were alerted. Meanwhile, M r M urray had seen the plight o f those b eh in d the
fence. H e rad io ed to control th a t a fleet o f am bulances was required. H e also asked for a Tannoy b roadcast to
those in the pens to move back b u t there is no clear evidence th a t it was made.

   96. Only w hen M r D uckenfield received the request for a fleet o f am bulances did he realise the nature and
gravity o f th e situation. T hen, supp o rted by M r Jackson, he caused messages to be sent converting O peration
S u pp o rt in to calls for the M ajo r D isaster Plan.

N o Inform ation
   97. A part from the message to clear the p itch an d the belated call for m edical assistance ab o u t 3.30 pm , no
inform ation o r advice was broadcast on the public address system. M r D uckenfield feared th a t the crowd
m ight tu rn hostile o r m ight all atte m p t to leave together thereby ham pering the emergency services if they were
given in fo rm ation ab o u t w hat had happened. T he result was th a t ap art from those close enough at the west end
to see the terrible tru th for them selves, the m ajority o f the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially
N o ttin gh am supporters in the Kop, still thought there h ad been a p itch invasion or o th er m isbehaviour by
Liverpool fans. They c o n tin u ed singing an d chanting incongruously. T his infuriated som e Liverpool fans who
were already distraught. A few began to run tow ards the Kop end. T h e police feared violence m ight result on
top o f the existing disaster. Accordingly, they deployed a large n u m b er o f officers to form a line across the
w idth o f the p itch at the Kop en d a n d advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as they
m oved. T here the line stood as an insurance against disorder b u t doing nothing. O th er officers were posted to
the perim eter track facing the n o rth stand for the sam e purpose. To those distressed an d distraught who
w anted urgent action, this large contingent o f passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.

M isinform ation
  98. A t ab o u t 3.15 pm , M r G ra h a m Kelly, C h ief Executive o f the FA, M r K irto n also o f the FA an d M r
G rah am M ackrell, Secretary o f Sheffield W ednesday, w ent to the control room for inform ation. M r
D uckenfield told th em he thought there were fatalities and the gam e was likely to be abandoned. H e also said a


                                                            16
gate h ad been forced an d there had been an inrush o f Liverpool supporters. H e pointed to one o f the television
screens focussed on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles an d said “T h a t’s the gate th at’s been forced: there’s
been an in ru sh ”. Inevitably M r Kelly was interview ed a little later live on television. H e spoke o f the two stories
concerning the gate - the fans’ account th a t the police h a d opened it, the police assertion that the fans had
forced th eir way in.

  99. A bout 3.30 pm there was a further m eeting in the C lub’s boardroom . M r D uckenfield w ent there an d
m et M r Kelly, the referee an d representatives o f the three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. M r
D uckenfield indicated the m atch was likely to be a b an d o n ed although no firm ruling was given. H e added that
he d id n o t w ant people to know it was to be ab an do n ed lest the dispersing crowd ham p er the emergency
operations.

Public Announcements
   100. L ater th e m anagers o f the two team s were asked to go to the control room . They were in v ited there to
m ake a public an no u n cem en t to calm the crowd. M r Kenny Dalglish agreed to do so. H e told the crowd that
there were problem s an d asked them to assist the police a n d those rendering first aid. He asked for calm an d his
message was well received. It was then 3.56 pm . At 4.10 pm it was an n ou n ced th at the m atch was ab andoned
for th at day. Again that message was received calmly by the crowd m ost o f w hom behaved responsibly as they
dispersed.

Fire Brigade
   101. M eanw hile the emergency services h ad been in action. At about 3.10 pm a request cam e from the
perim eter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant G o d d a rd contacted the police garage
close by w itho u t success. At 3.13 pm , PC B ichard requested H eadquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting eq u ip m ent to the Leppings Lane entrance.

   102. T h ere was no arrangem ent for a fire officer to be present during the m atch. However, the M ajor
D isaster Plan required all emergency services to be alerted. After ’phone messages which m ust be described
later, fire appliances arrived at both Leppings Lane an d Penistone R oad at 3.22 pm. At b oth entrances their
arrival surprised police who were uninform ed as to why they had been called o r where they should go.

   103. At Leppings Lane a police Inspector told Station Officer Swain “I don’t really th in k we need you” .
A nother police officer then asked for m ore resuscitators as people were dying so M r Swain radioed for ten fire
appliances. Each carries oxygen an d resuscitation equipm ent.

   104. At the Kop end, Leading F irem an Housley arrived w ith an emergency tender a n d Station Officer
Fletcher in an o th er appliance, each w ith a crew. T he emergency te n d e r cam e along the roadway by the south
stan d b u t owing to its height was unable to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings
Lane en tran ce losing som e eight m inutes. From there, M r Housley an d his crew went o nto th e pitch with
resuscitation equipm ent. T hey rendered help there an d later at the gym nasium . M r Fletcher an d his m en ran
along b e h in d the south stand carrying cutting eq u ip m en t an d oxygen cylinders. W hen they arrived at the
fence, the cutting eq u ip m en t was not required as by th en the last o f the dead an d injured were being removed
from the pens. M r Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firem en assisted in carrying
victim s as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYM AS)
    105. Before 1986 there h ad been no SYMAS representative routinely present at H illsborough matches. The
Club was content, as indeed are m any o th er clubs, to rely upon the St Jo h n ’s A m bulance Brigade an d a 999 call
if necessary. From 1986 onwards, after representations, the C lub provided two seats in the south stand for
SYMAS staff at League m atches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
close to the gym nasium w hich had been designated as the casualty centre in the event o f a m ajo r incident. The
south stand seats were allotted as they placed the SYMAS staff closer to the players’ tunnel should a player be
injured. T hese seats were, however, not available at C up semi-finals. SYMAS representatives nevertheless
atten d ed at the semi-finals by arrangem ent w ith the police in 1988 an d again in 1989. T he SYMAS officers
stood on the ram p leading to the p itch at the north-east corner. T hey had one am bulance outside the ground
a n d one on standby.

   106. O n 15 April 1989, Officers Higgins an d Eason were at the ground with an am bulance an d crew. They
n oticed fans on the track an d went to the Leppings Lane en d w hilst the game was still in progress. They began
to atten d to casualties. M eanwhile, at 2.59 pm , there had been a call from Police Constable W augh at police


                                                            17
H eadquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if am bulances were required. T his was on the
instruction o f C h ief Inspector E dm un d so n who h ad heard over the radio, as h a d Police C onstable W augh
himself, crowd noise an d snatches o f speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress a n d possible injuries. T he
reply from the control box was: no reports o f injuries b u t keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing from the
ground th at there m ight be injuries, police H ead q uarters notified SYMAS th at am bulances m ight be required.
T hen, seconds later, M r M urray’s request for a fleet o f am bulances was relayed to SYMAS. T hey reacted at
once. A m bulances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 p m an d at the Penistone Road
entrance at 3.17 pm . In all, som e 42 am bulances attended, 31 o f th em from SYMAS an d 11 from
neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm , they h ad conveyed som e 172 casualties to the N orth ern G eneral
H ospital an d the Royal H allam shire Hospital.

Gymnasium
   107. T h e gym nasium h ad been in use for serving meals to the police. W hen the M ajo r D isaster Plan was
ordered, it was cleared an d divided into two. O ne end becam e a tem porary m ortuary; the o th er was used as a
casualty clearing area for the injured. As the stretchers, designed an d im provised, brought in m ore an d m ore
casualties, the scene was initially an d inevitably chaotic a n d harrowing. T here was intense distress am ongst
the injured an d bereaved; relatives were reluctant to be p arted from the dead an d sought to revive them . T here
were people looking for missing friends an d relations; there were recrim inations, there were scuffles. Som e of
those involved were the worse for drink. D octors an d nurses had followed the casualties in from the p itch and
sought to a tten d the injured as best they could in the adverse circum stances. T hose in m ost urgent need o f
hospital treatm en t were taken to am bulances as they arrived, triage being em ployed to determ ine priorities.
D octors were requested by the police to exam ine each person thought to be deceased to confirm an d certify
death. A police Constable was detailed to atten d an d guard each o f the dead an d a photograph o f each was
taken by a police photographer so th at relatives com ing to identify bodies could be spared the ordeal o f
searching am ongst all who had died.

T he D ead and the Injured
  108. O f the 95 who died, the evidence suggests th at at least 16 an d probably 21 cam e through gate C after it
opened at 2.52 pm . T h a t is established by the statem ents o f relatives an d friends w ho cam e through w ith them
but survived.

   109. By co m m endable h ard work, a team o f pathologists headed by Professor U sh er com pleted
post-m ortem exam inations on all the deceased w ithin 48 hours. They found th at 88 o f the victim s were male
and seven female. Thirty-eight were u n d er 20 years o f age, 39 were between 20 an d 29 years an d only three were
over 50. In virtually every case the cause o f d eath was crush asphyxia due to com pression o f the chest wall
against o th er bodies o r fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all b u t n in e cases th at was the sole cause.
In one, pressure on the chest h ad been so great as to ru p tu re the aorta; in six cases there were also injuries to the
head, neck o r chest; in the rem aining two cases, natu ral disease was a c o n trib u to ry factor. In 18 cases bones
were fractured. T hirteen o f those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured femur, one a fractured
radius an d the rem aining three involved fractures o f bones o r cartilages ro un d the voice box. T hese injuries
suggest the victim s may have been tro d d e n while on the ground.

   110. Blood sam ples were taken from the dead. N o alcohol was found in any o f th e females. O f the males, 51
had no m ore th a n 10 m illigram s p er cent in th eir blood which is negligible; 15 h a d over 80 m illigram s per cent
an d six over 120 milligram s per cent.

   111. A lthough the great m ajority o f those who died were in pen 3, at least five were in pen 4. M ost deaths
o ccurred at the front o f the pens but there were a few fatalities fu rth er back.

  112. In all, som e 730 people com p lain ed o f being injured inside the ground an d 36 outside it. O f the 730,
about 30% are thought to have entered through gate C after 2.52 pm . T he largest category o f injury was
bruising, especially to the ribs an d chest.




                                                             18
                                                      CHAPTER 6

                                               SPECIFIC IN C ID EN T S

   113. I have given my findings as to the basic factual background a n d the m ain sequence o f events in
narrative form . T here was very little conflict as to the principal events save as to som e tim ings an d num bers.
Indeed, the consistency o f the evidence has been a rem arkable feature o f this Inquiry. T he experiences o f m ost
w itnesses were unforgettable an d no d o u b t the early hearing helped to preserve accurate memory. Also, the
existence o f tim ed videos an d photographs a n d o f logged an d tap ed messages provided reliable checks by
w hich to p ro m p t an d test w itness recollection. Accordingly, I have not for the m ost p a rt b u rd en ed the narrative
w ith citations from the evidence o f individual witnesses.

   114. However, there were several instances o f detailed evidence and assertions being highlighted by the
m ed ia in d ram atic a n d em otive term s during the hearing. Since som e o f those m uch-publicised incidents gave
rise to unfair criticism , they ought to be the subject o f specific findings. I have therefore dealt w ith them
individually at A ppendix 6.




                                                             19
                                   PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?


                  “Events o f the m agnitude o f Hillsborough don’t usually happen ju st fo r one
               single reason, nor is it usually possible to pin the blam e on one single scapegoat. . .
               . . . Disasters happen because a whole series o f mistakes, m isjudgm ents and
               mischances happen to com e together in a deadly combination. ”
                                                              D r Jo h n H abgood, A rchbishop o f York, preaching at
                                                             the Hillsborough M em orial Service on 23 April 1989.

    115. T his disaster was the worst in th e history o f British football. It happ en ed because pens 3 a n d 4 becam e
grossly overcrowded. T hey were uncom fortably overcrowded by 2.50 p m at least to a degree w hich required
th a t they should be closed to fu rth er arrivals. Even the num bers com ing through the turnstiles in the last 10
m inutes w ould have increased the pressure beyond danger point an d there would have been injuries if not
fatalities. As it was, the influx through gate C after 2.52 p m so increased the pressure in the two pens as to
cause fatal crushing.

    116. T h e overcrowding up to 2.52 pm was due to a n u m b e r o f factors w hich can be considered broadly
u n d e r three heads.
   (i) T he layout at the Leppings Lane end.
  (ii) Lack o f fixed capacities for th e pens.
 (iii) Lack o f effective m onitoring o f the terraces.

   117. T h e crushing an d fatalities after 2.52 pm m ust be considered u n d er a nu m b er o f headings.
 (iv) T h e build-up at the turnstiles.
  (v) T h e b lu n d e r on opening the gates.
 (vi) T h e barriers in pen 3.
 (vii) T h e crushing not recognised.
(viii) T h e response o f the police.
 (ix) T h e perim eter gates were too small.




                                                           20
                                                     CHAPTER7

                                TH E LAYOUT AT TH E L E PPIN G S LANE EN D

  118. I have already observed th at the layout o f th e tu rn stile area, o f the terraces an d o f the concourse
betw een th e m was the result o f piecem eal changes. A b rie f history o f these changes is now necessary.

The History
   119. Before 1965, the Leppings L ane en d consisted entirely o f terracing like the Kop. In th at year, the west
stan d was built and the terraces rem aining in front o f it were tru n c a te d to th eir present depth, front to back. As
to w idth, they consisted o f a single standing area w ith no dividing fences. D uring the early 1970’s, hooliganism
an d pitch invasions m ade it necessary to prevent access to the playing area an d the p erim eter fences were
therefore erected in 1977.


    120. Section 1 o f th e Safety o f Sports G ro un d s Act 1975 em pow ered th e Secretary o f State to designate a
sports stad iu m having, in his opinion, acco m m o datio n for m ore th a n 10,000 as a stadium requiring a
certificate from the local authority. Hillsborough was so designated w ith effect from 1 January 1979 by SI
1978/1091. In an ticip atio n o f th at date, Sheffield W ednesday instructed Eastwood an d Partners, a firm o f
consulting engineers, to act on th e ir behalf especially in th e ir dealings w ith the local authority. D r Eastwood,
th e principal o f the firm , is a highly experienced civil an d structural engineer an d has advised several m ajor
football clubs. H e reco m m en ded th at a n um b er o f ad ditio n al crush barriers should be ad d ed since those
already in place were insufficient to com ply w ith th e G reen G u id e (1976 edition). T h a t work was approved
an d carried out during 1979.


   121. T he relevant local authority at the tim e was the South Yorkshire County Council. It set up an Officer
W orking Party consisting o f representatives o f the police, the fire service, its own building surveyor’s division
an d its own legal an d a d m in istratio n departm ent. T h e W orking Party m ade inspections an d consulted w ith the
Club an d D r Eastwood. A Safety C ertificate was issued on 21 D ecem ber 1979 for an indefinite period. It has
rem ained in force ever since an d has not been am ended.


   122. Schedule 3 o f the certificate sets out the m ax im u m crowd capacity for various areas in the ground. T he
figure for th e west terrace is 7,200 an d for the north-w est terrace 2,900. T hese figures were intended to be in
accordance w ith the G reen G u id e (1976). Paragraph 15.4 provided for a m axim um “packing density” o f
betw een 54 an d 27 persons per 10 square m etres depending on the condition o f the terrace. D r Eastwood had
calculated 8,000 for the west terrace on the basis o f 54 p er 10 square metres. H e thought this a ju stified starting
figure in view o f his im proved system o f barriers. However, he reduced it to 7,200 because there were no
gangways on the terrace an d he d id not think it feasible to provide any. So, the total figure for th e Leppings Lane
terraces was an d is 10,100.


The 1981 Semi-Final
   123. As already m entioned, there was crushing at the C up semi-final in 1981. T he m atch was between
T otten ham H o tsp u r an d W olverham pton W anderers. T h e police debriefing m inutes after the incident
prophetically refer,


  “to the late arrival o f a large n u m b e r o f spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane
  enclosure w hen the m atch started. T h e flash po in t occurred w hen T ottenham scored” (at the Kop end) “after
  only three m inutes. T h e spectators ju s t entering pushed forw ard to see w hat was happening and caused a
  crush, w hich resulted in the injuries”.


   124. T hose being crushed called for the perim eter gates to be opened o nto the track. T h ere was no
im m ed iate reaction, according to M r Vaux who was there, bu t fortunately a police Inspector gave instructions
an d the gates were th en opened. A bout 250 cam e out o nto the track. T here were broken arm s, legs and ribs and
38 were treated either in hospital o r by the St Jo h n A m bulance Brigade. It is clear from th e docum ents (a) that
the turnstile readings showed the capacity figure o f 10,100 had been exceeded by over 400 (b) th at the police
sh u t o ff fu rth er access to the terraces because o f crushing, an d (c) the police view after the event was th a t the
capacity figure o f 10,100 in the Safety Certificate was too high. T his latter view was co m m unicated to the Club
by the C h ie f S u p erin ten d en t th en in co m m an d o f F D ivision b u t it was n ot pursued.


                                                            21
Three Pens
    125. A fter this incident in April 1981 the police requested th a t the terrace should be d iv id ed into sections.
T he object was to im prove crowd control by reducing sideways m ovem ent. D ivision would enable m ore even
d istribu tion to be effected w hen there was a capacity crowd. It would also enable the west en d to be used for
b o th ho m e an d away supporters w ho could be segregated in separate pens, if necessary w ith an em pty pen
betw een them .

   126. T his proposal was agreed by the Club an d the Officer W orking Party and was approved by the local
authority. Two radial fences were accordingly fitted in N ovem ber 1981. T hey are the fence now separating pens
2 an d 3 and th a t now separating 5 an d 6. T he result was to divide the whole terrace into three pens. Access from
the concourse to the m iddle pen was through the tun n el an d to the wing pens ro un d the sides o f the west stand.
D r Eastw ood suggested an d illustrated an altered layout w hich would have provided separate access through
separate banks o f turnstiles to the n o rth stand, to each end o f the west stand, an d to each o f the three pens.
W hilst the m ain object o f this was segregation, such a layout would have enabled each o f those areas to be
m on itored num erically via the turnstiles so as to ensure its m ax im u m capacity was n o t exceeded. T he plan was
n o t adopted. T he m axim u m capacity for the new centre pen was calculated at 2,200, bu t no alteration was
m ade to th e Safety C ertificate so to lim it it n o r was there any m eans m echanically o f counting the num bers
going into th a t pen.

The 1985 Changes
    127. By 1985, Sheffield W ednesday had been p ro m o ted to the First D ivision an d was draw ing larger
crowds. T h e im provem ent o f the Leppings Lane en d was raised again by the Club an d D r Eastw ood p repared a
n u m b e r o f drawings. These illustrated various schem es for achieving segregation by providing m ore turnstiles
in separate banks and divisions o f the concourse. T he police w anted further divisions o f the terrace itself,
again to im prove control and segregation. T here was m uch discussion o f these schem es w hich included
suggestions o f 29 an d even 34 turnstiles in total. In the result, the following alterations were carried o u t in
 1985.

New Radial Fences
   128. O n the terraces, two m ore radial fences were fitted. O ne divided the existing central pen into the
p resent pens 3 an d 4. G ates were fitted at the m o u th o f the tunnel to enable each o f those pens to be closed off.
T he second fence was placed in the new pen 4 so as to create the narrow pen 5 in tend ed to be a sterile area. Until
those two fences were ad d ed there existed only perim eter gates 1 ,2 ,4 , 5 an d 6. T h e creation o f pen 3 required a
new gate 3 to be fitted w hich was done.

Barriers
   129. T h e lines o f the new radial fences ran across existing crush barriers so th a t w ithout m odification those
barriers w ould have run through the fencing. T h e police considered the barriers would be used by fans as
convenient m ounting points to scale the new fences, thereby defeating their object. T hey therefore w ished
spans to be removed from the barriers. H a d th eir wishes been m et in full the result w ould have been an
un im p ed ed run in pen 3 from the m o u th o f the tunnel down th e south side o f the new fence to the perim eter. D r
Eastw ood dug his heels in against th a t proposal which he rightly regarded as dangerous. H e d id however agree
to som e m odification to the m id d le row o f barriers in the newly created pen 3, chiefly to facilitate access.
Likewise in the new pen 5. T h e 1985 m odifications to the pens are shown on the plan A ppendix 4.

The Turnstiles and Concourse
   130. At the entrance, m odification bu t no increase in n u m b e r was m ade at the turnstiles. T h e bank 1 to 16
was divided from A to G by the m etal fence now in place an d th a t division was projected across the concourse
inside the turnstiles in the form o f a brick wall. A personnel gate was provided for access through th a t wall b u t
was enlarged to its present size at th e request o f th e police. T hose alterations were m ade in the interests o f
segregation. T he m ore elaborate divisions which D r Eastw ood h ad suggested, giving separate access to each
sub-division o f the accom m odation, were not pursued for financial reasons. In M ay 1985 the Bradford
disaster occurred. T h e south stand at Hillsborough had w ooden decking an d the Club realised it would have to
un d ertake expensive rem edial works there. T h e cantilever ro o f o f th e sam e stand was also discovered to
require expensive repairs.

    131. In fact, shortly after the new dividing fence an d wall had been built at the Leppings Lane entrance and
 concourse, the Club, by agreem ent w ith C h ief S u perintendent Mole, ceased to accom m odate ho m e supporters
 at the Leppings Lane end. T here was therefore no longer any need for segregation at th a t end, b u t the wall
 rem ained.


                                                           22
   132. Also in 1985, electronic counting e qu ip m en t was installed at all turnstiles. T his conveyed the running
co u n t for each b an k o f turnstiles, for exam ple A to G , to a television screen in the Club control room where the
figures were displayed. In 1986, an electronic eye was installed in each turnstile booth to catch an d record
anyone who clim bed over the turnstile.

Barrier 144
   133. In Jun e 1986, the police requested th a t the crush barrier nearest to the tunnel at th e entrance to pens 3
an d 4 should be rem oved to assist the flow o f fans into the pens. T hey found it caused obstruction because it
was in a good viewing position an d spectators liked to stan d against it in num bers thereby blocking access by
others fu rth er in to the pens. T he police also suggested it m ight h am p er effective evacuation through the tunnel
especially in an emergency. D r Eastw ood considered the pros an d cons o f this proposal an d accepted the police
view. T h e Officer W orking Party approved the proposal at a m eeting on 7 August 1986 on site. A uthority was
given th en an d there by M r Bownes on b eh alf o f the Sheffield City Council which h ad taken over responsibility
for the Safety C ertificate from South Yorkshire C ounty Council on 1 April 1986.Two s p a n s o fth e barrierw ere
therefore rem oved, leaving only one span in pen 4 as shown on A ppendix 4.

Effects of the Layout
   134. T he result o f these changes was to divide the terrace into a n u m b e r o f small areas w ithout providing
any com puterised or m echanical m eans o f lim iting entry num erically into any one area if all areas were open
for choice. Before the fences an d pens h ad divided the terrace, the overall figure o f 10,100 could be m onitored
via the turnstiles a n d in theory th e crowd could even itself o u t laterally. Even then, it was n o t possible strictly to
ensure com pliance w ith Schedule 3 Part 1 o f the Safety C ertificate w hich prescribed a m axim um o f 2,900 for
the north-w est terrace an d 7,200 for the west terrace. Paragraph 3 o f Schedule 2 o f the Safety Certificate
provides:

  “T he n u m b e r o f spectators ad m itted to the S tadium an d to the several areas o f spectator accom m odation
  w ithin th e S tadium shall n o t exceed the figures specified in Part 1 o f Schedule 3”.

  T h e Club had to rely upon visual m onitoring.

   135. T he situ ation becam e worse however w ith the division o f the west terrace into pens. N o t only were
there m ore an d sm aller discrete areas but som e were likely to attract m ore th a n th eir ap propriate share o f the
 10,100 total. It is well recognised th a t the area behind the goal is very popular. Moreover, the position o f the
tunnel vis-a-vis th e turnstiles A to G, its labelling an d the absence o f signposts advertising the wing pens would
draw to it those w ith terrace tickets. It was therefore highly likely th a t pens 3 an d 4 would fill to capacity an d
indeed exceed it unless preventive steps were taken. H ad D r Eastw ood’s plan for separate turnstile access to
separate sections w ith separate toilet and refreshm ent facilities been im plem ented, total com puterised control
could have been kept.
                                                      CHAPTER 8

                                 LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR TH E P E N S

    136. In 1981, w hen the terrace was divided into three areas, D r Eastwood gave the Club the figure o f 2,200
capacity for the centre pen. H e based this on the G reen G uide, m aking such allowances as he thought right. N o
d o u b t the num bers could have been counted in via the turnstiles if only th a t p en was in use o r if such pens as
were in use were filled sequentially, b u t not otherwise.

    137. A fter the 1985 changes, D r Eastw ood d id n o t him self give any figures for the new pens 3 an d 4.
Som eone on his staff however split the figure 2,200 in to 1,200 for pen 3 an d 1,000 for pen 4. T hose figures did
n o t even take account o f the fact th at pen 5 had been carved ou t o f pen 4 w hich was bo u n d to have a reducing
effect on capacity. Nevertheless, the figures o f 1,200 an d 1,000 were p u t on a draw ing em anating from
Eastw ood an d Partners an d the figures have been notionally regarded since as applicable by the Club an d the
police. T hey are in fact too high.

  138. D r N icholson, at the Research an d L aboratory Services D ivision o f the H ealth an d Safety Executive,
has calculated th a t the figures for pens 3 an d 4 respectively would be 1,015 an d 1,036 i f the strength and
spacing o f the crush barriers had com plied w ith the G reen G uide. But they d id not.

Departures from the Green Guide
    139. In pen 3, four o u t o f five gaps in the lines o f crush barriers do n o t conform w ith paragraph 115 o f the
G reen G u id e (1986). In pen 4, nine o u t o f ten do no t conform . In particular, the spans taken o u t o f the barriers
in p en 3 in 198 5 left gaps well in excess o f the m ax im u m o f 1.4 m etres prescribed. O ne gap was 57% w ider th an
the G reen G uide m axim um . Moreover, th at gap was in direct diagonal line from the m o u th o f the tunnel to the
b a rrie r w hich collapsed. D r Eastw ood justified these larger gaps by the absence o f gangways. Fans h ad to be
able to get in and ou t an d stand ard gaps ten d ed to get blocked up. T he effect o f his reasoning was th a t the
absence o f gangways, recognised as having a safety function, led to the sacrifice o f a second safety feature,
n am ely gaps o f strictly lim ited width.

  140. Again, the removal o f b a rrie r 144 was bo un d , as D r Eastwood conceded, to affect capacity. In fact it
did m ore, as I shall indicate later.

    141. C apacity should also have taken account o f two further departures from the G reen G uide. If, as was
the case, the p erim eter gates were n o t regarded as exits, som e 40% o f those in pens 3 an d 4 were m ore th a n 12
m etres from an exit (and there was no gangway) contrary to the aim o f paragraph 96. F our ou t o f five o f the
crush barriers in pen 3 an d six o u t o f nine in pen 4 were below the height prescribed in paragraph 110. These
were the old barriers which h ad been repaired an d plated where th eir bases h ad corroded an d fresh concrete
had been applied, raising the level o f the steps. T h e p o in t is not academ ic since, in th e event, m any fans were
b e n t painfully over barriers u n d er great pressure.

   142. D r N icholson calculated th a t w hen all relevant factors regarding the configuration an d the G reen
G u id e are taken into account, the m ax im u m capacity for pen 3 should have been 822 an d for pen 4 ,8 7 1.

Safety Certificate
   143. W hatever should have been the m axim um capacities for pens 3 and 4, the fact is th a t no figures at all in
respect o f them were pu t into the Safety Certificate. D espite all the changes in layout o f the fences an d barriers,
the two figures, 2,900 for the north-w est terrace an d 7,200 for the west terrace, have rem ained as the only
m axim a w ith which the Club has to comply.

   144. Section 2(1) o f the Safety o f Sports G ro u n d s Act 197 5 provides (so far as is relevant):

  “A Safety C ertificate shall contain such term s an d conditions as the local au th o rity consider necessary or
  expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stad iu m w hen it is in u s e . . . ”

   Section 2(2) provided (so far as is relevant):

   “W ith o u t prejudice to sub-section (1) above, a Safety C ertificate-
   (a) shall specify the m axim um n u m b e r o f spectators to be ad m itted to the stadium ;
   (b) m ay specify the m ax im u m n u m b e r to be ad m itted to different parts o f it;
   (c) shall include term s an d c o n d itio n s-
   ... (iii) as to the num ber, strength an d situ atio n o f any crush barriers.”


                                                              24
Section 2(2) was repealed by the Fire Safety an d Safety o f Places o f Sport A ct 1987, section 19, which
gave power to the Secretary o f State to lay down, by order, term s an d conditions. N o order has yet been
m ade an d guidance from the H om e Office has recom m ended local authorities to approach th eir
function u n d e r section 2(1) in accordance w ith the criteria in the repealed section 2(2). (See H om e
Office C ircular 71/1987 d ated 25 N ovem ber 1987, Annex A, paragraph 6.)

   145. It is clear th a t w hen the certificate was first issued the S outh Yorkshire C ounty Council w ent
fu rth er th a n sim ply to fix the m ax im u m num bers for the whole Stadium . T hey prescribed figures for
each p a rt o f the ground n ot merely by the four points o f the com pass b u t by specified sections.

   146. Section 8(1) o f the 1975 A ct requires the holder o f the certificate before carrying o u t any
proposals to alter o r extend the stadium or any o f its installations while a Safety Certificate is in
operation to give notice o f those proposals to the local authority. T h a t obligation is specifically
repeated in Sheffield W ednesday’s certificate at Schedule 2 Paragraph 5(2). T he Club com plied w ith
the requirem ent. H aving received notice o f the alterations to the pens an d the barriers, the local
autho rity ought, in my view, to have am en ded the Safety C ertificate accordingly. They did not do so.

Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?
   147. A lthough D r Eastw ood acknowledged th a t the various changes to the layout would have had
an effect on capacity, he d id n o t take active steps to see th a t ap p rop riate am end m ents were made. He
says he m e n tio n e d from tim e to tim e th a t the alterations w ould have an effect on capacity an d th a t he
d id n ot realise the Safety C ertificate was n o t regularly updated. However, I find two m em o ran d a in
early 1987 highly significant. D r E astw ood’s assistant M r Strange was concerned w ith queries from
the FA as to H illsborough’s capacity for a semi-final. M r Strange recorded these questions in a
m em orandum :-

  “ H as any account been taken for alterations d one on Leppings Lane over the last few seasons? Is the 10,200
  o r so figure still correct? I said th a t in my o pinion it needs to be adjusted, better do it now th an later.”

  148. M r Strange’s next m em o (a few days later) records as follows:-

  “ D r Eastw ood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it is, providing police have gates un der West
  stan d open so th a t people can distribute throughout the terrace evenly.”

A lthough he says the last nine words do n o t report him accurately, D r Eastw ood accepts the rest o f th at
message.

    149. In my view the provisions as to capacity in the Safety C ertificate ought to have been reviewed and
altered. T he u nhappy situation is th a t the police believed even the overall figure o f 10,100 to be too high as far
back as 1981. T h a t was reported to the Club b u t apparently no t to D r Eastwood. M eanwhile, th a t global figure
h ad been rendered academ ic by the sub-division o f the terrace w hich was n ot reflected in the Safety Certificate
at all. If p ro p er m ax im u m figures h ad been inserted in the certificate for each o f the pens, the Club an d the
police m ight well have been prom p ted to find som e m eans o f lim iting the n um bers entering those pens other
th a n by visual m onitoring. T his could have been done by im plem enting one o f D r Eastw ood’s plans for totally
separate sections, turnstile to viewing area. It could have been done by insisting on sequential filling o f pens at
all m atches; alternatively, by counting fans into each viewing area.

The City Council
   150. T h a t the Safety C ertificate was n o t am end ed an d individual capacities not reviewed cannot be laid
solely at D r Eastw ood’s door. H e was, after all, consultant engineer to the Club and responsibility for the
certificate was th at o f the local authority. W hen the South Yorkshire C ounty Council h an ded over to the
Sheffield City Council, the latter delegated all its powers a n d duties u n d er the 1975 Act to its G eneral Purposes
Panel. A pparently, therefore, the decision-m aking body on b e h a lf o f the Council was th at Panel, although two
specific functions were delegated to the H ead o f A d m inistration an d Legal D epartm en t - the power to issue a
p roh ib itio n u n d e r section 10 o f the 1975 Act an d the power o f entry a n d search u n d er section 11 o f the Act.

   151. In practice, M r Bownes, the C ouncil’s C hief Licensing Officer in the A dm inistratio n an d Legal
D ep artm ent, bore the b ru n t o f the C ouncil’s duties u n d er the Act.



                                                            25
    152. T h e Officer W orking Party was superseded by a Safety o f Sports G ro u n d s A dvisory G ro u p, but
apart from the change o f the n am e the system continued as before. M r Bownes attend ed the inspections
a n d m eetings o f the A dvisory G ro u p together w ith the representatives o f the police, the fire service, the
d e p a rtm e n t o f health an d co n su m er services, an d the building engineer’s division o f the Council. The
latter was an engineer and ought therefore to have been alive to the sam e issues as D r Eastwood.

  153. T h e A dvisory G roup seem s to have w orked in a very inform al m anner. A short passage from M r
Bownes’ evidence gives the flavour o f it:-

    “Q     W ho was taking the lead in the w orking party as you un derstood it?

      A    T h a t is a good question, sir. Leads were com ing from several different directions really.

      Q    W ho chaired it, if anyone?

      A    N obody as such, sir. It was an inspection rather th a n a m eeting as I un d erstan d it.

      Q    W ho decided w hat should be inspected?

      A     Effectively the group itself, sir, it seem ed to me. T here was also som e input from the Club
            representative as to, if you like, an elem ent o f direction as to w hat should be looked at.

      Q     A part from the inspections the working party m et, presum ably, or d id they only m eet on
            inspections?

      A     N o, sir, I have referred to three previous meetings.

      Q     W ho took the chair w hen it met?

      A     I suppose it could be said th a t I did, to som e extent.

      Q     T here is no point in having inspections unless you form conclusions as a result o f th a t inspection, is
             there?

      A     T h a t is correct.

      Q     T here m ust presum ably have been som e m eeting following the inspection at w hich you all sat down
             together and decided w hat, if anything, should be done.

      A     T here was not, to my recollection, no.

      Q     How d id you decide w hat should be done, if anything needed to be done?

      A      There were discussions on the site, particularly in relation to ba rrie r 144, w hich took place at the
             tim e.

       Q    N othing m ore th a n th at an d no record anywhere o f any decisions th at were m ade?

       A    N o, sir.”

 T h e decision to remove b a rrie r 144 was assented to on b eh alf o f the C ity Council by M r Bownes. It was not
 referred to the G eneral Purposes Panel. W hether M r Bownes strictly had any power to assent to it is to say the
 least very doubtful. But he him self adm its th at he was ill-equipped to do so. H e knew very little about football
 grounds. H e ha d read the file passed on from South Yorkshire C ounty C ouncil an d assum ed all h ad been run
 satisfactorily by them .

   154. It was recorded, however, in a report w hich M r Bownes d rafted th at “the conditions (in th e Safety
 Certificate) give som e cause for concern as they ap p ear to be inadequate or inappropriate in som e areas” . The
 report to the G eneral Purposes Panel suggested th at new Safety C ertificate conditions should be drafted.

    155. T h e task o f revising the Safety C ertificate was begun in Ju n e 1986. In July 1987, a draft was sent to the
 fire service to w hich they replied in August. In Septem ber 1987, the Panel was inform ed th a t the redrafting was


                                                            26
“progressing steadily” an d should be subm itted to the Panel in October. T h e final draft was not circulated until
30 M arch 1989,16 days before this disaster.

   156. M eanwhile, the Safety C ertificate has rem ained u n am en d ed since 1979. T he enlargem ent o f the Kop
in 1986 increased its capacity to 21,000. A lthough this was known an d agreed by the C ouncil it had not been
the subject o f any change in the certificate which still showed the capacity o f the Kop as 16,850. M r Mackrell,
Sheffield W ednesday’s Secretary, raised the question o f am en d m en ts to the Safety Certificate a n d in particular
w ith regard to the Kop in April 1987 w ith Eastwood a n d Partners b u t nothing resulted.

  157. Sheffield U n ited Football Club was designated u n d er the 1975 Act on 3 July 1984. A Safety Certificate
was about to be issued by South Yorkshire C ounty Council at the tim e it h and ed over to the Sheffield City
Council on 1 April 1986. N o certificate has yet been issued to Sheffield U nited.

   158. T he explanation given for these delays was pressure o f work. M r Bownes as C hief Licensing Officer
was responsible for 32 o th er licensing systems w hen this one was ad ded to his burden. H e h ad a staff o f only
five. I fully accept th at the ad d itio n o f fu rth er statutory responsibilities to the already heavy workload o f a local
autho rity w ith curbs on its expenditure creates problem s. But it is clear th at the a tten tio n given to this
im p o rtant licensing function was woefully inadequate.

Sum mary
   159. T he Safety Certificate contained no m axim u m figures for individual pens. T here was therefore no
sanction o r provision focussing attentio n as to the need to lim it entry to the pens by num bers. T he layout at
Leppings Lane as it evolved m ade electronic o r m echanical control over num bers entering individual pens
im practicable if all pens were to be available. G iven an im p o rtan t m atch an d a capacity attendance, fans were
likely to crowd into p o p ular sections like pens 3 a n d 4. T hose pens were likely to becom e overfull well before
w arning cam e from the turnstiles th at num bers were approaching the terrace m ax im u m o f 10,100. Control
over n um b ers an d the avoidance o f overcrowding therefore dep en d ed entirely on visual m onitoring o f the
crowd.




                                                             27
                                                    CHAPTER9

                        LACK OF EFFECTIVE M O N ITO R IN G OF T H E TERRACES

   160. M onitoring the spectators on the terraces so as to avoid overcrowding involves observing the num bers
an d th eir distribution in each area, m aking decisions as to w hen an area is “full”, taking steps to close it off
an d moving spectators from one area to another, if necessary. It is a function beset by three problem s. 1) W ho
should carry it out? 2) W hen is an area “full”? 3) Fear o f hooliganism .

Who should Monitor the Terraces?
   161. Should it be the host club via its stewards? Should it be th e police? Should it be both? O r should it be by
arrangem ent, depending upon the ground o r section o f the ground in question?

   162. In principle, a football club which invites the public to a m atch on its prem ises for reward is
responsible for securing safety at th a t event. T he G reen G u id e (1986) provides:

       “ 23. T he safety o f the public inside the ground is th e responsibility o f those who stage the event an d
             ad m inister the ground in which it is held, ie the “m anag em en t”. T his responsibility applies in
             both norm al an d em ergency situations...

         195. ...there are five basic duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

              (a)    controlling o r directing m em bers o f the public who are entering or leaving the ground, to
                     help achieve an even flow o f people to the viewing areas an d safe dispersal o f spectators on
                     the terraces o r viewing slopes;

              (b)    patrolling the ground to deal w ith any emergencies, eg raising alarm s o r extinguishing
                     fires;

              (c)    m anning entrances, exits an d oth er strategic points, especially exit doors an d gates which
                     are continuously o pen whilst th e ground is in use;

               (d)   assisting police as app rop riate o r as requested w ith crowd control; an d

               (e)   undertaking specific duties in an emergency.”

The Interim Popplewell Report
   163. T here was considerable controversy in the course o f the public inquiry held by M r Justice Popplewell
in 1985 as to the responsibility o f th e club an d the police. In paragraph 3.6 o f his interim report, M r Justice
Popplewell q u oted from a report p roduced for the M inister o f H ousing an d Local G ov ernm en t in 1969 as
follows:-

  “T he responsibility for controlling crowd b eh av io u r is d iv id ed betw een the police an d the club operating the
  ground. T he b ro ad line o f division being th at police are responsible for m ovem ent o f spectators in public
  thoroughfares an d from public thoroughfares into the ground, while the club is responsible for the control o f
  spectators once they are on the club’s prem ises . . . ”

M r Justice Popplewell said he d id not quarrel w ith th a t view an d went on to observe th at in practice the police
have to take charge an d be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. H e then said (paragraph 3.8):

  “It follows, therefore, that as a m a tte r o f practice, while the physical safety o f the building an d the
  m ain ten an ce an d good housekeeping o f the g round m ust always be the responsibility o f the club, th e police
  have to take the de facto responsibility o f organising the crowd, w ith all th at entails, during the game . .

M r Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation o f the ground as a procedure in w hich only the police
could b e a r the responsibility o f supervising the organisation o f th e crowd.

The Final Popplewell Report
  164. H e harked back to this subject in ch ap ter 4 o f his Final R eport. T here, he cam e down m ore firmly in
favour o f holding the club responsible for crowd safety. At paragraph 4.13 he said “Because, as a m a tte r o f


                                                           28
practice, police officers have regularly atten d ed in large num bers at football grounds, it has somehow been
assum ed by the clubs th at the responsibility for control o f w hat goes on inside the ground has passed from
th em to the police. A police presence is there to assist in the enforcem ent o f law an d order. Those responsible
for organising a p rivate function, however, have the prim ary a n d continuing obligation an d responsibility to
ensure reasonable safety for those who are invited on to th e ir prem ises.” M r Justice Popplewell ended that
section as follows: “ It cannot be too strongly em phasised th a t it is upon the club, o r the occupier o f the ground
who is p utting on the function, th at the prim ary an d continuing obligation rests.”

    165. T here rem ains, however, the question w hether there are som e grounds o r parts o f grounds where the
club may need to rely u p on the police (w hom they pay to attend) to control filling o f pens and m onitoring them
for overcrowding. In o th er words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests upon the club, they may need,
a n d by agreem ent be entitled, to em ploy the police to act as th e ir agents in certain circum stances. This very
difficult an d grey area as to club a n d police responsibility will need to be reviewed in greater d epth at stage two
o f this Inquiry.

Arrangements at Hillsborough
  166. W hat is clear, however, is th at de facto the police at Hillsborough h ad accepted responsibility for
control of tn e pens at m e Ceppm gs Lane en d T T I i i r ^ ^
policing at H illsborough over the years was all o n e way on this point. O nly M r D uckenfield, who h ad not
policed at H illsborough for som e 10 years p rio r to 15 April, took a different view.

   167. M r Lock is now security officer at Sheffield W ednesday an d was form erly a police Superintendent at
H illsborough m atches occupying M r M urray ’s role. H e claim ed there h ad been a form al although unw ritten
agreem ent betw een the Club an d the police in about 1982, whereby the police agreed to steward the Leppings
L ane en d o f the ground. Such a form al agreem ent is denied by o th er senior officers and I do not accept that any
form al agreem ent was rparhpH-JMpYerthpWc Q                         arrano^rnent d id develop w hich was known and
accepted by b o th Club an d police. Its effect was th a t thro u g ho u t the ground the stewards were responsible tor
m a n m n g e x u s a n a entrances, tor controlling entry into the stands, for assisting spectators to th eir seats in the
stands an d for helping to control the exits after the m atch. They were also responsible at the Kop end on the
terraces for keeping gangways clear an d helping to control the crowd w hich usually consisted o f hom e
supporters. At the Leppings L ane end, however, there were no gangways on the terraces an d the crowd
consisted usually (and always since 1987) o f away supporters. M r M ole an d o th er senior officers accepted that
it w ould have been unreal and unreasonable to expect stew ards to go onto those Leppings Lane terraces. They
would not have been effective there; moreover, they could well have been in som e danger from hostile away
supporters. T he police accepted, therefore, th at the p ro per filling o f the pens an d m onitoring them for
overcrowding could an d would not be carried o u t by stewards. M any stewards have tended to be either
extrem ely young o r som ew hat elderly. They are paid only a m odest sum (£9 at H illsborough) an d they are not
suitable eith er by physique o r by training to cope on a crowded terrace w ith no gangways.

Case for the South Yorkshire Police
   168. N otw ithstanding the overwhelm ing evidence from senior police as already m entioned an d from the
Club, C ounsel for the South Yorkshire Police continued throughout the hearing to contend th a t the Club and
not the police were responsible for filling an d m onitoring the pens an d that this was well known to b oth parties.
H e m ain ta in e d th at the police were there essentially to secure an d preserve law an d order. Q uite ap art from the
police evidence to the contrary at this Inquiry, the official stance o f the South Yorkshire Police has not always
been to th at effect.

H arris-v -S h effield U nited Football Club Limited
   169. In M arch 1986, th e South Yorkshire Police A uthority obtained a ju d gem en t against Sheffield U nited
Football Club for m oney due for police services provided at Sheffield U n ite d ’s m atches. T he defence h ad been,
inter alia, th a t the police were not providing “special police services” . They were doing no m ore than
perform ing th e ir norm al police duties o f securing an d preserving law and o rd e r am ongst a crowd. T h e police
argum ent was th at they had additional duties. In his judgem ent, B oreham J sum m arised the instructions for
policing as providing for:-

 “(a) the m ainten ance o f enforcem ent o f law an d order;

  (b) the enforcem ent o f the C lub’s ground regulations, m any o f which are concerned w ith law and order;

  (c) the safety an d com fort o f the spectators, officials an d players.”
 H e referred to the argum ent o f C ounsel for the South Yorkshire Police as follows:-

    “Thirdly, here the police were not discharging th e ir own duty to the public; they were in fact discharging the
    C lub’s duties to the spectators w hom the Club invited to the ground. T he Club chose to invite large num bers
    to th eir private premises; it was the C lub’s duty to provide for th eir safety, health a n d com fort. T hey could
    have em ployed a security firm as banks an d others have to do to protect th eir interests; they chose to request
    the police to perform those duties knowing th at the police expected paym ent. Fourthly, the police w ithin the
    ground provided services which it was not w ithin the scope o f th eir public d uty to perform . For instance,
    they assisted in crowd m anagem ent an d in the enforcem ent o f such ground regulations as refused entry to
    those who tried to en ter w ithout paying o r pro h ib ited spectators encroaching on parts o f the ground which
    th e ir entry fee d id not entitle th em to enter. It m ay be, subm its M r Bentley, th a t the m aintenance o f law and
    o rd e r was the p red o m in an t aim b u t there were o th e r services perform ed.”

 T he learned Judge found:-

    “ In ad d itio n to w hat m ay be called th eir law an d o rd e r role the police were expected an d d id take part in
    crowd m anagem ent, ensuring the safety o f spectators, the enforcem ent o f the C lub’s regulations an d to be on
    h a n d to assist in the event o f som e emergencies such as fire o r accidental injury.”

 Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End
    170. At League m atches at Hillsborough, the police practice was to decide in advance how m any and which
 pens would be used. If a m odest crowd was an ticipated only one or two pens m ight be needed. It was b e tte r to
 confine the fans to lim ited spaces (a) to prevent th em running about an d (b) to reduce the n u m b e r o f police
 required. T he practice was then to fill the pens one by one. T his involved m aking a ju dg em ent as to w hen a pen
 was full. There would th en be a police decision to close th at pen an d fill another. It was regarded as im practical
 and unsafe for police officers (just like stewards) to go onto the Leppings Lane terraces with away supporters.
 T his m eant th a t m onitoring the n um bers in any pen had to be done from vantage points o utside it. H ere, the
 police were m uch b e tte r placed th a n the stew ards. There was a good view from the control box an d the
 television screens there. There were officers o n the perim eter track. N o stewards were placed there because
 having b o th police an d stewards interfered w ith the viewing. T here were also police in th e west stand who
 could look down o n the pens. Intelligence from all these sources could give the police a good appreciation o f
 the state o f the terraces. W hen it was necessary to shut off access to the pens officers on the concourse could be
 info rm ed by radio an d could take the necessary steps.

 “Find Their Own Level”
     171. At C up semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were o p en ed from the start an d the
 policy was “to let the fans find th e ir own level” . T h is phrase was repeated again an d again by police officers at
 th e Inquiry. W hat it m eant was th a t no specific direction was given to fans entering through the turnstiles.
 They were free to go w herever they w ished on the terraces. If they becam e uncom fortable o r w ished for any
 o th er reason to move th e ir position, then theoretically they could move elsewhere. In this way it was hoped that
 th e fans on the terraces would level them selves o ut and th at d istribution w ould be achieved w ithout police
 intervention. O n these occasions, the gates at the top o f the radial fences were locked in th e open position. It
 was sought to argue, therefore, th a t there was freedom o f m ovem ent from one pen to an o th e r enabling fans to
 “fin d their level”.

       172. T his argum ent                   bad botJi in t h j ^ y a n d in practice, I n theory, the whole object o f the radial f r f t f ^
2 b a d been~to ach ieve eve n o ltkti fefi on 'By dl reel Intfl ;»b Im o dcsi red positions. To say then th at they could move
  f r r r ly f i Ml I ' P r ‘ ri l - >“:i n n t h r r —n i i l i l ill I m i ll I nn^l                   from a less p o p u lar to a m ore
  p o p u lar area w ith o u t inhibition. In practice this d id not happen because the position and size o f the gates was
  such th at once a substantial n u m b e r o f spectators were in, the gates were u nnoticeable and inaccessible
  especially to those tow ards the front who might have m ost need o f them .

    173. T h e sam e argum ent was deployed to suggest th a t individual m ax im u m capacities for individual pens
  need n o t be assessed since the presence o f the open radial gates still m eant th at the terrace was one area. In
  practice this sim ply was not so. T he photograph at A ppendix 5 taken from the n o rth stand at 2.59 pm shows
  very clearly the congestion in pens 3 an d 4 contrasted w ith the sparseness in pen 6. T his gives the lie to the
  suggestion th at the fans could, if uncom fortable, “find th eir own level”.

     174. T h e effect o f th is policy was th a t whereas at League m atches the police h ad to m ake a positive decision
  w hen to close one pen an d open another, at semi-finals, where overcrowding was m uch m ore likely, the police
left it to the fans them selves to “find th e ir own level”. Effectively, they were left to m o n ito r th e ir own com fort
and safety so as to avoid overcrowding. T he police would only intervene w hen there was som e overt sign th a t an
area was “ full” .

W hen is an A rea “Full” ?
   175. O ver the years, spectators on terraces have com e to accept conditions which are often very
uncom fortable an d not infrequently dow nright dangerous. T hey are subjected to buffeting an d squeezing to
get in and o u t o f the terraces. They are packed tightly and exposed to surging an d swaying during the match.
They put up w ith these conditions because they are devoted to the gam e an d because there is little they can do
about them . T hey believe the discom fort will pass and nothing very untow ard will happen. Usually that is the
case and they are reassured by it. M ost clubs have not, until very recently, consulted their supporters as to th eir
grievances o r suggestions. T h e practice has been to pack th em in on the assum ption th at if they are prepared to
put up w ith it the conditions m ust be tolerable. A lthough crowd figures at football grounds have been reduced
in recent years, this has been due principally to the increased pro p o rtion o f seating as against standing
accom m odation. Terraces have still been packed.

   176. It is said that m any fans enjoy these features o f terrace viewing. Clearly close proximity, shared
discom fort, w eathering sways and surges together an d chanting the sam e songs and slogans en masse do evoke
good h u m o u r an d have produced a spirit o r cult o f the terraces which m any enjoy. Equally there are m any who
sim ply en d ure these things for the football, for a cheap ticket o r indeed for the chance o f getting in at all. And
before Hillsborough m ost fans on the terraces, even if they enjoy the hurly-burly, h ad not realised the narrow
m argin o f safety betw een an uncom fortable crush an d a fatal one.

    177. T he G reen G uide sought to im prove safety an d com fort by laying down criteria for m axim um
capacity, ie defining w hat is “full”. T h e stan d ard set was 54 persons per 10 square m etres in favourable
conditions b u t fewer, down to 27, in less favourable conditions. T h e tendency may have been to aim o ff too
little from the higher figure for shortcom ings in the layout. C ertainly the figures considered ap p ro p riate in
pens 3 and 4 at H illsborough were too high, as already indicated.

   178. Even taking the highest figure suggested in the G reen G uide, the problem rem ained that those                        :
supposed to be m onitoring pens visually had and have little idea o f w hat 54 persons per 10 square m etres look
like. M r D uckenfield’s o pinion was th a t w hen a pen was full to capacity, the spectators would be “ shoulder to
shoulder and chest to b ack ”. T h a t view may derive from seeing the sort o f density crowds regularly endure
w ithout injury resulting. But it is m uch m ore dense th an the G reen G uide m axim um .

    179. T he South Yorkshire Fire Brigade provided the Inq uiry w ith photographs o f people standing in an area
o f 10 square m etres at various densities o f packing. Together w ith my Assessors and others, I took p a rt in a
sim ilar experim ent at the Health and Safety Executive’s Sheffield laboratory. We stood in a room o f m easured
area at densities o f 54, 80 an d 100 per 10 square metres. It was clear from the photographs and from our
experim ent th a t the m ax im u m density set out in the G reen G uide left considerably m ore room than those
m onitoring th e terraces would have left before declaring an area “full”.

   180. T he tendency has been to allow the pens to fill until the fans com nlain or show signs o f discom fort. If
the density at the front appeared less th an at the back, the ian n o y would invite the tans to move torw ard to
m ake room for more. T h e evidence before the Inquiry and m any anecdotal letters I have received clearly show
there have been frequent occasions w hen the packing on terraces, not only at Hillsborough, has caused
discom fort and som etim es, for b rie f periods, fear. Usually the surge recedes, the sway returns, the pressure
eases and th e incident passes unrecorded.

   181.    A fter the crushing at the 1981 semi-final, Hillsborough was not chosen again by the FA until 1987.
T here was evidence th a t the central pens were uncom fortably overcrowded on th at occasion and again at the
1988 C up sem i-final, although entry to th e tunnel was blocked off bv police shortly before kick-off in 1988


Fear of H ooliganism
   182. O ver the last few years, hooliganism at and associated w ith football m atches has strongly influenced
the strategy o f the police. In their plans an d m anagem ent they have concentrated on averting o r containing
threats to public order. T his is understandable and indeed com m endable. But it has led to an im balance
between the need to quell a m inority o f troublem akers and the need to secure the safety and com fort o f the
majority. In the police O perational O rder, the em phasis was u po n prevention o f disorder and in particular
prevention o f access to the field o f play. T h ere was no express requirem ent th at officers on the perim eter track
    o r in the west stand should keep w atch for any possible overcrowding on the terraces. Indeed, the view was
    expressed in evidence th a t packing fans close together on the terraces assisted in controlling the unruly since
    the less room they had the less scope there was for m isbehaviour.

    Summary
/      183. Although the police had accepted de facto responsibility for m onitoring the pens, th eir policy on the
    day was to leave fans to “find th eir own level” an d to concentrate th eir own a tten tio n on possible disorder.
    W hilst in theory the police would intervene if a pen becam e “full”, in practice they p erm itted the test of
    fullness to be w hat the fans would tolerate.

      184.     By 2.52 pm w hen gate C was opened, pens 3 an d 4 were over-full even by this test. M any were
    uncom fortable. To allow any m ore into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream was
    courting disaster.
                                                    C H A P T E R 10

                                    TH E BU ILD -U P AT TH E TUR N STILES

   185. T he decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A an d B too, was forced on to the police by the
crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. T he crush was so severe th a t injuries were being
suffered an d deaths were feared unless the pressure could be swiftly relieved. Why the crowd pressure h ad built
to such intensity was one o f the principal issues during the hearing. T h e suggested causes m ust be considered in
turn.

The Physical Layout
   186. I have already described an d illustrated the approach to the turnstiles (Appendices 1 and 2). At
Penistone R oad an d at m any other grounds, turnstiles are in a straight line, adequately spaced a n d w ith a
sufficient waiting area for queues to form. N o t so at Leppings Lane. T h e building line, the bridge over the D on
an d the b e n d in the road, left a wedge-shaped approach to perim eter gates set in an arc, an d across a short
forecourt, to turnstiles also set in an arc. T he pairs o f turnstiles were close together an d the forecourt, especially
as divided by the m etal fence, provided little space for a w aiting crowd.

The Number of Turnstiles
   187. T h e decision to fill the whole o f the n o rth stand from the Leppings Lane en d required the 23 turnstiles
there to a d m it 24,256 spectators. O f those, the seven turnstiles (A to G ) serving the terraces h ad to ad m it
10,100, ie an average o f ju st u n d er 1,450 through each turnstile. At the Penistone R oad end, 29,800 were
served by 60 turnstiles, o r ju st un d er 500 per turnstile.

   188. T he G reen G u id e recognises (paragraph 47) th a t the rate at which spectators can pass through
turnstiles d epends on a variety o f local circum stances b u t states “in general based on observation and
experience, it is unlikely th at the m ax im u m notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 per ho u r” . Since the
semi-final was an all ticket m atch requiring no cash transactions, the Club considered th a t a higher rate o f
about 1,000 per h o u r per turnstile could be expected. Even at this higher rate, which assum es the turnstiles
working at m ax im u m efficiency non-stop, it would have taken nearly 1h hours to ad m it all those w ith terrace
tickets. At 750 per hour, it would have taken nearly two hours.

   189. T he G reen G u id e provides (paragraph 44):-

  “Turnstiles should be o f such num bers as to a d m it spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
  kept w aiting for adm ission . . . ” .

   190. T he Officer W orking Party had discussed in 1985 the need, and D r Eastw ood’s various schemes, for
im provem ent o f the turnstile arrangem ents. T he m athem atics are elementary. Both the police an d the Club
should have realised th at the Leppings Lane turnstiles an d the w aiting area outside them would be under strain
to a d m it all th e Liverpool supporters in tim e. Success dep end ed o n the spectators arriving at a steady rate from
an early h o u r and u p o n the m ax im u m turnstile rate being m aintained. In fact neither o f these requirem ents,
w hich are inter-linked, was fulfilled. T h a t they m ight no t be so was in my view foreseeable.

The “Late” arrival of Liverpool Fans
   191. Between 2.30 p m a n d 2.40 p m the crowd waiting for the turnstiles swelled to over 5,000 and becam e
unm anageable. T he case m ade for the police was th a t large n um bers o f Liverpool supporters arrived late; a
high p ro p o rtio n o f th em were dru nk a n d unco-operative; a high p ro p o rtio n had no tickets; all o f them were
hell-bent on getting in on time. They say this was unforeseeable an d explains why they lost control.                 >

    192. W h eth er those who arrived between 2.30 pm an d 2.40 pm were “late” was m uch debated. T he ticket
sim ply requested its holder “to take up [his] position 15 m inutes before kick-off’. T hat m ay have been
in ten d ed to persuade those w ith stan d tickets to take th e ir seats, b u t it would not be unreasonable for a
standing spectator to arrive at the turnstiles between 2.30 p m an d 2.40 pm . W hether they were “late” or not,
however, there was certainly a large concentration o f Liverpool fans arriving at about 2.30 pm an d after.

Traffic Delays
  193. It is unlikely th a t traffic conditions had any significant effect on this. True, there were delays on the
Liverpool traffic routes. T here were roadw orks on the M 62 w hich was the recom m ended route. A t various
points the carriageway was reduced from four lanes o r three lanes to two, b u t no serious delays were reported.
     O n the M 63 there were longer delays due to a contraflow an d at its ju n c tio n w ith the A560 there was heavy
     congestion due to volum e o f traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were clear by 2.20 pm an d those witnesses
     w ho com plained o f delays en route had nevertheless m anaged to be in range o f the ground in am ple tim e.

     Fine Weather and Drinking
        194. T h e likeliest explanations for the sparse Liverpool atten d an ce in the ground before 2.30 p m were four­
     fold - th e w arm weather, drinking, d isinclination to en ter the ground early an d prolong the standing, an d a
     tendency o f Liverpool supporters to cut it fine.

        195. T h e police em phasised th a t at the 1988 semi-final there was no com parable build-up o f “late” arrivals.
     They claim , therefore, th a t they h ad no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988, although the w eather
     was fine, it was 11°F cooler th a n in 1989. 15 April was the sort o f fine spring day which tem p ted fans to sit or
     stand a b o u t in the sun w ith a drink. If you h ad a ticket it would seem m ore pleasant a n d sensible to relax in that
     way th a n to en ter the ground early an d stand on the terrace for an extra hour. Pre-m atch en te rta in m e n t in the
     ground h a d been advertised b u t d id no t take place. Even if it had, it may n o t have been an encouragem ent to
     m any fans to enter so early.

     Was D runkenness a M ajo r Factor in the C risis a t the Turnstiles?
         196. O f those who arrived at 2.30 pm o r after, very m any h ad been drinking at public houses o r had
     b rought d rink from hom e o r an off-licence. I am satisfied on the evidence, however, th a t the great m ajority
     were n ot d ru n k n o r even the worse for drink. T he police w itnesses varied on this. Som e described a high
     p ro p o rtio n as drunk, as “lager-louts” o r even as “anim als”. O thers described a generally norm al crowd w ith an
     unco-operative m inority who had d ru n k too m uch. In my view som e officers, seeking to rationalise th e ir loss
     o f control, o ^ r e s t im a t ed the d r u n ken .elem ent in th e crowd. T here Qertainlyjga s sniph ai^ elem ent T h ere were
     youngsters in flu e n c e d ^y H rm K a n d b ra v a d o pushing im patiently a t the rear o f the crowd thereby exacerbating
     the crush. But the m ore convincing police witnesses, including especially D etective S uperinten den t McKay
     an d C h ie f Inspector C reaser as well as a n u m b e r o f responsible civilian witnesses, were in my view right in
     describing this elem ent as a m inority. T hose w itnesses attrib u ted the crush to the sheer num bers o f fans all
     anxious to gain entry. T here was no criticism o f the crowd by any o f the witnesses in the period up to 2.30 pm
     o r even 2.35 pm . W hat hap p ened th en was n o t a sudden d eterio ration in the m ood o r sobriety o f those
     assem bled there. N o do u b t those com ing b e h in d would have had m ore to d rink an d would have included the
     unruly m inority. But the crisis developed because this very large crowd becam e packed into a confined
     turn stile area an d its very density ham p ered its passage through th e turnstiles.

       197. Superin tend en t Marshall an d o th er officers criticised th e crowd as unco-operative because police
    exhortations to stop pushing an d to ease back were no t heeded. How could they be? In th a t crush m ost people
v   had no control over th e ir m ovem ents at all. Two incidents involving police horses illustrate the point. One
s** horse was found afterw ards to have cigarette b urn s on its rum p. Clearly th a t was the despicable work o f a
    hooligan w hether in d rin k o r not. However, there were also eyewitness accounts o f a horse being physically
    lifted off its feet by the crowd. T h a t occurred, as the police accepted, w ith o ut m alice o r in te n t b u t as an
    involuntary consequence o f crowd pressure w hich those by the horse’s flanks could n o t resist any m ore th a n the
    horse itself.

     Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
        198. T h e labelling o f the turnstiles in the o rd e r A, C, B was confusing. A fan w ith a B ticket who w ent by
     m istake to the w rong side o f the m etal fence would have had the greatest difficulty in getting back an d ro un d to
     the correct side. T h e colour coding was inefficient because the coloured w ooden panels were affixed to the
     turnstile walls so low th a t they were n o t easily visible through a crowd. T h e inform ation on the ticket p rin ted by
     Sheffield W ednesday Football Club was m isleading and its layout unhelpful, as M r Mackrell frankly conceded.

         199. T h e result was th a t in the early stages, police officers were pestered by fans for help as to where they
     should go. Later, as the crowd becam e m ore dense, fans were presenting th e ir tickets at the w rong turnstiles.
     There were also Liverpool supporters who h a d acquired tickets for the Kop en d b u t sought entry at Leppings
     Lane. T hey caused delays in the turnstile o p eration w hen entry was refused an d after a while the police
     instructed the operators to let them through. T here was fu rth er delay because the crush m ade it difficult for
     fans to get into the turnstile entrances. Once there, the pressure from b eh in d was such as, on occasions, to jam
     th em in the doorw ay o r against the paddle o f the turnstile. Finally, there were fans w ithout tickets who sought
     to e n te r by offering paym ent, by seeking to go over o r un d er the paddle o r by sliding through w ith a ticket
     holder. All o f these activities slowed down the turnstile rate which at the worst period was only about 600 per
     h o u r p er turnstile. T he w aiting crowd therefore ex panded an d as the m inutes passed frustration grew. Visitors


                                                                    34
who had p a id for tickets an d travelled from afar realised they were m aking little forward progress. Frustration
increased pressure an d induced panic at the front. D eterm in atio n to get into the m atch was intensified by
d eterm in atio n to get out o f the crush.

Were Fans W ithout T ickets a M ajo r Factor in the Build-Up?
  200. It has becom e a fact o f football life that fans do tu rn up at all-ticket m atches w ithout tickets. It is not
possible to give an accurate figure o r even a reliable estim ate o f the n u m b e r w ithout tickets on 15 April. Police
estim ates varied from about 200 to about 2,000. T here were certainly frequent requests for tickets or “spares”
during the hours before the build-up. M any o f those w arned off by the police were seen to return to the area.
Som e were hanging about on the bridge. Again, however, the police witnesses who m ost im pressed me d id not
consider the n u m b er o f ticketless fans to be inordinately large. T his accords w ith two o th er sources o f
evidence.

   201. First, there was a w ide range o f witnesses who observed inside the ground th a t the Liverpool end was at
a late stage well below capacity save for pens 3 and 4. T h e no rth stand still had m any em pty seats an d the wing
pens were sparse. T he m atch being a sell-out, there were clearly m any ticket holders to com e an d they could
account for th e large crowd still outside the turnstiles. H ad th e Liverpool accom m odation been full by 2.40
pm , one could have inferred th at m ost or m uch o f the large crowd outside lacked tickets.

   202. Secondly, such figures as are available from the C lub’s electronic m onitoring system an d from analyses
by the HSE suggest th at no great n u m b e r entered w ithout tickets. T hey show th a t the n u m b e r who passed
through tu rnstiles A to G plus those who entered through gate C roughly equalled the terrace capacity figure o f
 10,100 for w hich tickets had been sold. T he C lub’s record showed 7,038 passed through turnstiles A to G.
However, the counting m echanism on turnstile G was defective, so the HSE did a study using the video film
and projecting figures from the o th er turnstiles. T his gave an assessm ent o f 7,494, w ith a m ax im u m o f 7,644
passing through A to G. Again, using the video, the HSE assessed the n u m b er who entered the ground whilst
gate C was open at 2,240 w ith a m ax im u m o f 2,480. Accordingly, the H SE’s best estim ate o f the total entering
through gate C an d turnstiles A to G was 9,7 34 w ith a m ax im u m o f 1 0,1 2 4 .1 recognise th at these can only be
rough checks because, for exam ple, som e w ith terrace tickets were allowed through turnstiles 1 to 16 an d there
would be o th er sim ilar factors w hich have not form ed p art o f the assessment. Nevertheless, the figures do
suggest th at there was not a very significant body o f ticketless fans in the crowd w hich built up.

T he “C onspiracy” Theory
  203. O n b eh alf o f South Yorkshire police, the theory was advanced that the “late” arrival o f so m any
Liverpool supporters was planned to buck the system. T h e suggestion was that fans w ithout tickets conspired
to arrive late an d create such trouble as would force the police to ad m it them to the m atch. T he slender
evidence upon which this theory rested cam e from two sources: overheard conversations in public houses and
the antecedent history o f Liverpool supporters at away m atches.

   204. O ne witness said he heard three Liverpool supporters saying, in effect, th a t they would m anage to get
in w ithout tickets by causing trouble so th at police would open a gate, an d that they had done this before.
A n o th er w itness heard two o f a group o f Liverpool supporters say they had no tickets, th at they would go to the
ground ju st before kick-off, th at no-one would stop th em getting in an d th at they had not been stopped yet.
S tatem ents were put in relating to two o th er small groups talking in sim ilar terms.

Liverpool Supporters at Away M atch es
   205. T h e South Yorkshire police prepared a dossier o f reports on the behaviour o f Liverpool fans at away
m atches w ith the object o f showing a p attern o f troublesom e b ehav io u r by large num bers eith er w ithout tickets
o r w ith forged tickets. W ithout setting out the whole history, it can be sum m arised as follows.

   206. O n three occasions Liverpool fans w ithout tickets were allowed into all-ticket m atches upon paym ent.
(At W atford on 13 February 1988, 1,500 were adm itted; at S o u th am p to n on 24 Septem ber 1988, 150 were
ad m itted ; at S o utham p to n again on 12 D ecem ber 1988, 750 were adm itted.) At N orw ich on 1 April 1989,
Liverpool supporters arrived w ithout tickets b ut 1,272 tickets h ad been returned and fans from b oth Liverpool
an d N orw ich were allowed to buy th em for cash. A sim ilar situation occurred at W im bledon on 13 May 1989.
T here were six o th er occasions from 1986 to date, including the C up finals o f 1986 an d 1989, w hen num bers o f
Liverpool supporters turn ed up w ithout tickets o r otherw ise behaved badly.

  207. F our points m ust be noted, however. On none o f the occasions w hen ticketless fans were ad m itted for
paym ent was the m atch a sell-out. T here was therefore room in the ground on each occasion. At a sell-out fans


                                                           35
    m ight n ot expect to be allowed in, even for paym ent. Secondly, no trouble o f the kind alleged was encountered
    at the 1988 semi-final w hen Liverpool visited Hillsborough. Thirdly, Liverpool visited Hillsborough again in
    Jan u ary 1989 w ithout any trouble. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 15 April a p art from three crude
    photocopies.

    N o Conspiracy
       208. I have already found th at there was not an abnorm ally large n u m b er o f fans w ithout tickets on this
    occasion. W ith one o r two exceptions, the police witnesses themselves did not subscribe to the “conspiracy”
    theory. I am satisfied th at the large concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 p m to 2.50 pm d id n o t arrive
    as a result o f any concerted plan. T here were, I accept, small groups w ithout tickets who were willing to exploit
    any adventitious chance o f getting into the ground. They, together w ith the m inority who had d ru n k too much,
    certainly aggravated the problem faced by the police. But th at m ain problem was simply one o f large num bers
    packed into th e small area outside the turnstiles.

    The Police Operation at Leppings Lane
      209. T h e O perational O rd er for 15 April followed closely th at laid down for the 1988 semi-final. The
    em phasis was on m ain tain in g law an d order. Side roads were to be blocked o ff to prevent dam age in residential
    areas. Pairs o f officers were to patrol streets to prevent “clash o f rival supporters”. Officers were to w atch public
    houses, shops an d superm arkets “w here looting could take place”. O utside the turnstiles, officers were to ensure
    supporters entering did not have banners, weapons, missiles o r alcohol.

       210. U nfortunately, hooligan b ehaviour has m ade all these steps necessary. But the only w ritten provision
    aim ed at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was one enjoining officers “to ensure orderly queues are
    fo rm ed ”. T h ere was no provision for controlling the entry o f the crowd into the turnstile area.

      211. As long ago as 1924, the D epartm en tal C om m ittee on Crowds stated: -

      “T h e control o f crowds should begin at a p oint som e considerable distance from the entrance to the ground.
      T he advantages o f an arrangem ent o f this kind a r e ... in preventing congestion at the entrances to grounds.”

    T his was particularly im p o rtan t at Leppings Lane where the turnstile area was so small an d awkwardly laid
    out. If a large crowd was perm itted uncontrolled entry through the p erim eter gates, the form ing o f queues at the
    tu rnstiles an d control by officers, w hether on foot o r m ounted, would becom e im practicable. T hose w aiting at
    th e turnstiles would becom e a single growing mass. Once th a t happened, it would be difficult to retrieve the
    situation.

      212. W h eth er steps were taken an d w hat steps to avoid this happening was left to oral briefing an d a d hoc
    instru ctio n s on the day.

    Previous Experience
       213. T h e senior police officers said it had never happened before so there was no reason to foresee it. In fact,
    th e only two previous occasions w hen the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole o f the north
    and west sides o f the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987 and 1988. In 1987, the m atch was on a Sunday,
    scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponed for a q u arter o f an ho u r because o f late arrivals.

    Policing in 1988
       214. As to 1988, there was a very large an d consistent body o f evidence that, on the day, the police in
    Leppings Lane conducted an efficient filtering exercise designed to keep away those w ithout tickets and
    control the flow o f fans towards the ground. I do not believe th at so m any witnesses w ithout eith er opp o rtun ity
    o r reason to p ut th e ir heads together could be m istaken about w hat they experienced on th a t occasion. Yet, the
    police m ain tain th at no filtering exercise oth er th a n on a ran d o m basis was conducted in 1988 and th at th eir
    policy an d practice th en were no different from those o f 1989.

       215. T h e answ er to this conflict m ust, I think, be th at w hilst the policy m ay have been no different, in
    practice the policing in 1988 was m ore efficient and was not p u t to the sam e test and strain as a year later. There
/   was not so large a swell in n um bers approaching the ground from 2.30 p m to 2.50 p m as in 1989.
    N evertheless, there h ad been w arning signs in 1988. D etective S u perintendent M cK ay gave the following
    evidence:



                                                               36
  “Q Were you aware o f a build-up o f num bers last year tow ards the latter stages at the turnstiles?

  A    Yes. . . T here was a huge build-up around 10 m inutes to 3 w hen many, m any Liverpool supporters
       cam e at th a t tim e. They had been drinking, the ones th at I saw an d there was quite a sizeable crush
       built-up - sizeable queue.

  Q    Q ueue o r crush?

  A    C om pacted queue, built-up in the area by the turnstiles which I believe are m arked A to G. T h a t crowd
       reached back alm ost to the gates. It never got any bigger th an th at an d the turnstiles operated relatively
       freely an d they dealt w ith th at crowd. Fans were still arriving at about 10 past 3 b u t by th en t h e . . .

  Q    T his crowd th at you have described o f the late arrivals at about 10 to - was it an orderly crowd?

  A    O h no. N o. T h e orderly crowd had gone in, an d w hen I say they were not an orderly crowd, obviously
       m ixed am ongst those people w e re . . .

  Q    O f course, but taking it generally?

  A    But by an d large they had taken a lot o f drink on b o ard and they were in such num bers th at excluding
       th em from the ground was completely out o f the question.

  Q    Were they standing in an orderly queue o r was there som e pushing and shoving?

  A    T here was a lot o f pushing an d shoving. T here was an urgency to get into the ground.

  Q    But fortunately it does not appear to have been in nearly such num bers as this year.

  A    It wasn’t.”

Police Intelligence in Advance
  216. A part from th a t experience in 1988, the tendency o f Liverpool supporters to arrive late was not
unknow n. W itnesses said th a t they get through the turnstiles at their hom e ground, Anfield, quite quickly and
ten d therefore not to arrive early. Indeed, a general recent tendency to postpone arrival was noted by the
Sheffield City Council Advisory G roup, w ith police present, on 23 M arch 1988. T he m in u te read s:-

  “As far as the turnstile question was concerned, a pattern has developed o f people arriving som e 15 m inutes
  before the start o f the gam e hoping to gain adm ission. T his trend m ay be due to the banning o f alcohol at
  sports grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshm ent p rio r to th e football match. As
  the available turnstiles operated quite effectively for the m ajority o f the tim e, and that the late arrival
  problem could perhaps only be dealt w ith by education o f the spectators” (sic).

  217. In so far as Liverpool supporters’ b ehaviour at away m atches may have been indicative o f w hat police
problem s m ight arise on 15 April, m ost o f the facts should have been available at the planning stage. As in other
forces, South Yorkshire Police had a liaison officer w hose jo b was to seek, receive and collate relevant
inform ation as to the visiting supporters. T h e A ssociation o f C hief Police Officers’ G u id e to Policing Football
highlights the im po rtan ce o f such liaison:-

  “It is im p o rta n t th a t the officer responsible for policing the m atch determ ines the pre-m atch planning in the
  light o f the intelligence at hand. W hilst th a t intelligence can be obtained from a variety o f sources, the prim e
  source for football intelligence is the Police N ational Intelligence System which is based on th e network of
  police liaison officers. Sum m aries com pleted by police officers o f the hom e club force are forw arded to the
  visiting club’s liaison officer m aking available intelligence about fans’ behaviour at both hom e an d away
  fixtures. T his inform ation will be collated and m ad e available for future m atches involving th at club” .

  218. T he FA had also laid down in a m e m o ran d u m issued in the 1985/6 season m easures to be adopted by
the away club which included the following:-

  “ It is the responsibility o f the away club to advise the h om e club o f the recent behaviour o f th eir supporters
  at away m atches, irrespective o f w hether the behaviour has resulted In d is a p lin a r y a c tio n by the Football
  A ssociation or n o t” .

  219. It does not seem th a t inform ation o f this kind was passed to the Sheffield W ednesday Club or played


                                                           37
any part in the South Yorkshire Police plans. H ad the latter been inform ed o f the history contained in the
dossier and sum m arised above it m ay well have influenced police strategy in Leppings Lane.

  220. T here is presently a proposal th at a national com puter-based police football intelligence system should
be set up to m ake the necessary inform ation readily available.

Police Intelligence on the Day
   221. T he unfilled space in the Liverpool areas inside the ground, the figures for entry available from the
C lub’s com puter an d observations on the video screen should have enabled those in the control room to
m o n ito r the num bers arriving and still to arrive at Leppings Lane. R adio contact w ith m obile (Tango) patrols
detailed to m on ito r licensed prem ises in the district could have indicated the num bers still to come. But at 2.30
pm w hen M r M urray told M r D uckenfield they would “get them all in by 3 o ’clock” he seems not to have
appreciated th at in a d d itio n to those visible at the turnstiles there were m any m ore still to come. Certainly, M r
M arshall outside the turnstiles was not told and could not otherw ise have known th at there were still many
Liverpool ticket holders to arrive.

M r M arshall and Mr Greenwood
   22 2. T he division o f co m m an d between these two officers did not help . M r M arshall was in charge o f the
serials outside the perim eter gates in the Leppings Lane area an d in the roads beyond. In practice he operated
inside and ju st outside the turnstile area. M r G reenw ood’s area as G ro u n d C o m m an d e r extended from the
pitch to the p erim eter gates. He in fact stationed h im self near the players’ tunnel. H e was wholly unaware o f the
growing problem s at the turnstiles and was in no position to exercise control over his officers w ho were u n d er
pressure there. N o-one in the control room thought to tell him .

Control Lost
  223. In the result, the large concentration o f arrivals from 2.30 pm to 2.40 pm pressed u nrestrained into
the turnstile area through the p erim eter gates which were fully open. W hen th at area was full, later arrivals
swelled the crowd o ut to the forecourt and even into the road. As already recounted, the foot officers at the
turnstiles becam e trap ped and endangered and retired through the turnstiles. T he m o unted officers could not
operate am idst such a dense crowd in a confined space. T hey cam e out o f the turnstile area. T here were then
the belated attem p ts to close the perim eter gates and prevent m ore fans jo inin g the m ass u ntil it had a chance to
dim inish through the turnstiles; still later the a ttem p t to pu t a cordon o f horses across the entrance.

  224. D espite knowledge o f the difficult layout, the very large n u m ber o f fans to be got through so few
turnstiles and the tendency o f fans to arrive in the last half hour, no contingency plans were m ade to avoid a
crush such as occurred, ^v en on the day, the need to close Leppings Lane to traffic before 2.30 pm and th e
oth er available intelligence already sum m arised, should have pro m p ted those in co m m an d to take precautions
against such a crush. If som e o f the p erim eter gates had been closed and cordons o f m ounted and toot otticers
had been placed a little distance from those gates, the tlow ot tans into the turnstile area could have been
controlled before th a t area becam e engulfed. It was the crush itselt which produced the frustration and the
panic an d brought o u t the worst in those who had dru n k too m uch. Earlier control o f entry would h ave
prevented the crush an d m aintain ed the good m ood which had prevailed until 2.30 pm .

  225. It should m oreover have been obvious by 2.40 pm , if no t earlier, th at a large part o f the crowd could
not be adm itted until well after 3 pm . H ad a decision to po stpone kick-off been m ade a n d announced m uch o f
the frustration and with it the im petus cm 1ThTng tfie~crowB"woin^
controlled filtering and a postponed kick-otYwould probably have obviated the need to open the gates.

Postponement of Kick-off
    226. At various stages in his evidence, M r D uckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
po stpone kick-off. O nce it was th at one o f the team s had already com e on to the pitch. T hen it was th at a group
o f photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to th in k th at the team s were com ing out. Finally, he did not
know why he thought the team s were com ing out. T hey did not in fact com e onto the pitch until 2.54 pm , two
m inutes after gate C was opened. Police C onstable Buxton had asked for a p ostpon em en t o f kick-off before
gate C was opened. It should not, however, have needed a Police C ° nstaJMe_jrithe^hickj>fthecrowdjrajid there
were others o f like m ind) to think o f postponing the kiclcK)ft T he need should have heen clear in the control
room.

   227. T he tru th was th at M r D uckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed w ith M r Murray.
K ick-off would not be postponed unless there were some m ajo r cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the


                                                           38
m otorw ay o r fog. I accept th a t the thinking b ehind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is
postponed w henever a proportion o f fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off tim es would becom e meaningless. But, a co m m an d er m ust deal w ith the problem o f the day. Faced
w ith a situatio n which was becom ing dangerous, crowd safety should have been his p aram ou nt consideration.
K ick-off should have been delayed.

Summary
   228.       T he layout o f the turnstiles and the n um b er they were required to serve left no m argin o f safety against
an uneven flow o f fans. Because police strategy in advance an d on the day did not cater for it, th e arrival o f a
large n u m b er o f supporters between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm created an unm anageable crush. T he presence o f
a substantial m ino rity o f fans who had dru n k too m uch aggravated th at problem . H aving lost control and
rejected the o ption o f postponing kick-off, the police were faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries.
They were left therefore with no alternative b ut to open the gates. S uperintendent M arshall was right at that
stage to ask for it and M r D uckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects o f so d ram atic a step required
o th e r action.




                                                             39
                                                                                 / • 'V * — 3




                                                                     CHAPTER 11

                                                 TH E BLU N D ER O N O PE N IN G TH E GATES
                                                  ^               —   »«— I—      I"*"'— ........1" '■■■ '1 ■"



                   229. T he decision to o rd e r the opening o f the gates was not accom panied or followed by any o th er o rd e r to
                deal with the consequences. W hen gate C was opened, a steady stream o f about 2,000 fans poured through it
                over som e five m inutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground som ew here an d unless they were diverted
                th e ir likeliest ro ute was through the tunnel for reasons already given. N o w arning was issued from the control
                room that th e gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. N e ith er the Club control room
                n o r the C h ief Steward at the Leppings Lane end was w arned. N ot even M r G reenw ood, the G roun d
                C om m ander, was inform ed. From 2.47 pm w hen M r M arshall m ade his first request until 2.52 pm when M r
                D uckenfield acceded to it, there were five m inutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx
                was to be absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, M r D uckenfield began by saying th at no officer m ade any
                wrong decision bu t he later conceded he had erred in this regard. H e said he d id not consider where the people !*•
                w ould go when the gate opened. Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screen, no
                o rd er was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. M r D uckenfield said it d id not cross his m in d to detail
             V^'fffficers on the concourse to shut o ff the tunnel. T hose officers could not have known from th eir position how
                full pens 3 an d 4 were. T h a t was a m atter for the control room to m o n ito r from its own observations an d using ✓
                intelligence from a ro u n d the ground.                   « "

                  230. Since pens 3 a n d 4 were full by 2.50 pm , the tunnel should have been closed o ff w hether gate C was to
                be opened o r not. T he exercise was a sim ple one an d h ad been carried ou t in 1988. All th a t was necessary was
                for a few officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. U nfortunately, the
                1988 closure seem s to have been unknow n to the senior officers on du ty at the tim e. It d id not figure in the
                debriefing notes. It therefore h ad no influence on the planning for 1989.

                  231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room w here there was a view o f th e
^ 4T -*s*P      pens and o f the crowd at the turn st iles t hat t he tunn el nad to be closed. If orders h ad been given to th a t effect
                w hen gate t : w^ np Q" 0/i tl™ f'nr" nrti' 1i hrv r         directed to the em pty areas oi tn e wings a n a this aisa ste r
                £Ould still havgbeen avoided. Failure to give th a t o rd e r was a blu n d er o f theTTrsTmagrritpde^-         _      ^      L_
                                                                                                m
                  232.       Significantly, w hen perm ission was given to open gate A, M r D uckenfield did ord er serials to go to th a t
                part o f th e concourse to m o n ito r the influx tow ards the no rth stand. H e d id this because he feared th a t if fans
A + * r-*       w ent to the n orth stan d w ithout tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no p erim eter fences at the
                no rth side, they m ight invade the pitch. T his illustrates again the preoccupation w ith avoiding pitch invasion
J- * > w        as against safety an d the risks o f overcrowding. Because those entering through gate C could not get onto the
                pitch, it was n o t th o u g h t necessary to alert officers to m o n ito r them . T he possibility o f overcrowding sim ply
                was not considered.


 f*U




                                                                               40
                                                     C H A P T E R 12

                                             TH E BARRIERS IN PE N 3

Barrier 144
   233. T he removal o f b a rrie r 144 in 1986 should have reduced the notional capacity o f pen 3 as already
m entioned. But it d id more. In the absence o f b a rrier 144, the influx o f fans after 2.52 pm m et no retarding
structure as it cam e into pen 3. T he pressure created was free to push fans straight down by the radial fence to
the lowest line o f barriers. T he pressure diagonally from the tun nel m o uth down to barrier nu m b er 124a which
collapsed was unbroken by any intervening barrier. 124a was also vulnerable to pressure straight down the pen
through the gap in the b a rrie r above it created in 1985.

  234. Inspecto r Bullas, positioned in th e west stand, described w hat he saw looking down on the pens
aro u n d 3 pm .

      I saw from the direction o f the tun nel a kind o f m ovem ent dow n the te rra c in g ... the type o f thing th at you
  see on the n atu re program m es, the m olten lead flowing down the side o f th e m ountainside, the m olten la v a ...
  a “river o f people” ... going directly towards the pitch b u t there again sp re a d in g ... out.”

   235. D r Eastw ood conceded in evidence th a t the removal o f b a rrie r 144 was likely to have contributed to
the collapse o f 124a. Later, he sought to resile from th a t answer, b u t I think his earlier adm ission was correct. It
was argued th a t if b a rrie r 144 h ad rem ained, the influx from gate C would have bu ilt up fu rth er back and the
tragedy m ight have occurred in the tu nnel o r m ight have b roken b a rrie r 144 itself. This is speculative a n d I
th in k unlikely. W hat rem ained o f b a rrie r 144 in p en 4 did no t cause a build-up; no r d id it collapse. But its
rem aining in position m ay well have accounted for no b arrier fu rth er down pen 4 collapsing a n d for the lesser
carnage in th a t pen.

When did Barrier 124a Fail?
  236. Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police sought to argue th a t this barrier collapsed o r may have
collapsed at ab o u t 2.47 pm . H is purpose was to suggest th at the opening o f gate C was not causally linked with
the crushing a n d fatalities resulting from th a t collapse. I have already found th a t w hilst the evidence does not
perm it the tim e o f collapse to be fixed w ith certainty, it was after 2.52 pm . I now give my reasons:

  (a) I have several tim es w atched the BBC video tape on which Counsel relied. I do no t find the incident he
      identifies at 2.47 pm suggestive o f a collapse at th a t tim e;

  (b) the evidence o f fans who were n ear o r at the b a rrie r was overwhelmingly to the effect th a t th e collapse
      occurred at o r after 3 pm;

  (c) the biggest group o f witnesses was th a t which related the collapse to the surge following Beardsley’s
      “near-m iss” at th e Kop en d at 3.04 pm;

  (d) the appearance on video an d photographs o f fans in the area o f b a rrie r 124a a fte rth e incident at 2.47 pm
      a n d before the final crush is no t consistent w ith it having collapsed so early;

  (e) it is highly unlikely th a t if so catastrophic an event had occurred as early as 2.47 pm , the police on the
      track a n d elsewhere would have taken until nearly 3 o’clock to realise som ething was seriously wrong.
      Indeed, if Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police were correct in his tim ing o f the collapse, the failure o f
      th e police to respond for so long would expose them to even graver criticism th a n th a t m ade in this
      R eport.

Dr Eastwood’s Testing of the Barriers
   237. Two sections o f barrier 124a in pen 3 collapsed as a result o f the overcrowding. T h at collapse caused a
n u m b er o f deaths. D r Eastw ood an d his staff h ad undertaken the periodical testing o f crush barriers required
by the G reen G u id e and by the Safety Certificate. B arrier 124a h ad been tested in July 1988 an d passed.

   238. T he test had been carried o u t in accordance w ith D r Eastw ood’s in terpretation o f Annex C to the
G reen G uide. T h a t requires an evenly distrib uted force o f 6.0kN /m etre w idth to be applied for 3 five m inute



                                                            41
    periods, the interval betw een applications to be as short as possible. A record has to be kept o f the am o u n t of
    deform atio n durin g each loading an d o f the percentage o f recovery. If the recovery is less th a n 50% after the
    th ird application o f force, the b a rrie r has failed the test. If recovery is betw een 50% an d 75%, there m ust be a
    re-test. T he question is: 50% o r 75% o f w hat? Is the recovery to be in relation to the position o f the b arrier
    before the first application o f force or before the th ird? If the former, a span o f 124a recorded 53% at th e 1988
    test an d should have been re-tested. I f the latter, it recorded 100% an d passed. U nfortunately the G reen G uide
    is unclear as to the correct interpretation. D r Eastw ood took the latter view an d so passed the barrier. H e
    justified his in terpretation in evidence. H e said failure to recover to the original position could be d ue to a
    “shake-dow n” effect related to som e giving in the ashes u n d e r the concrete or to som e o th er extraneous factor
    rath er th a n to any defect in the m aterial o f the b a rrie r itself.

      239. I think, after consulting Professor M aunder, th a t safety ought to have dictated recovery should be by
    reference to the position o f the b arrie r before the first application o f force. I accept, however, th a t the G reen
    G u ide is am biguous an d D r E astw ood’s in terp retatio n is tenable. It has som e su pport from the British
    Standards tests on steel structures. Clearly, however, for the future, the G reen G u id e should be clarified on this
    point.

    Corrosion
       240. Inspection o f b a rrie r 124a, and in d eed o th er barriers at H illsborough, by th e HSE showed
    considerable corrosion o f the m etal at vulnerable points w here w ater could accum ulate. D r Eastw ood agreed
    th a t if a significant degree o f corrosion was observed o n visual inspection, a b a rrie r should be condem ned.

      241. T h e G re e n G u id e does n ot specifically re fe rto corrosion. Paragraph 39 provides, inter alia:

      “ Crush barriers a n d balustrades should be exam ined for deform ation o r any o th er overt signs o f w eakness”.

    Paragraph 6 o f Annex C provides:

      “ If during any test, even though the b a r r ie r ... satisfies th e above loading requirem ents, doubt should arise
      for any reason (including such m atters as cracking o f the terracing o r d istortio n o f connections) as to the
      safety o f the b a r r ie r ... a detailed investigation should be carried out. U nless the results o f this investigation
      remove the d ou bt as to safety o f the b a r r ie r ... (it) should be deem ed to have failed the test”.

      242. Since corrosion is a likely cause o f deterioration , a revision o f the G reen G u id e should m ake specific
    reference to it.

    Causation
      243. Tests done by the HSE suggest th a t although barrier 124a passed the loading test in 1988 an d probably
    w ould have been able to sustain a force which did not exceed the test load, it was unable to resist the load
    im posed up on it by reason o f the num bers in pen 3, the excessive gap in th e barrier higher up the pen an d the
7   absence o f b arrier 144. C orrosion probably played a part, bu t the effective cause o f the collapse was the
    excessive an d u nanticipated pressure to w hich th e barrier was exposed.
                                                   C H A P T E R 13

                                    TH E C R U SH IN G N O T RECOGNISED

Observation from Control Room
   244. As th e stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control room could be expected
to keep a close w atch on pens 3 a n d 4. They h ad a direct view o f them from an elevated position through their
window. A lthough they had no field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the T V cam era. T he radio was by
th en w orking again a n d although reception was difficult due to crowd noise an d possibly excessive a ir traffic
on channel 25, attem p ts could have been m ade to alert officers on the p erim eter track to w atch for
overcrowding and report th eir observations. In th e event, pens 3 an d 4 becam e m ore an d m ore crowded, surges
took place, fans were showing and signalling distress. N one o f this was seen o r recognised in th e control room .

Officers on the Track
  245. T he 20 officers detailed to the perim eter track were distrib uted roun d the pitch so th at som e five
officers were at the west end. T h eir w ritten instructions m ade no reference to the avoidance o r detection o f
overcrowding. T h e sam e applied to the officers in th e west stand. M r G reenw ood ad m itted th at his oral
briefings also co ntained no m ention o f m onitoring the pens for overcrowding.

   246. T he O peration al O rd er for 1988 h ad instructed officers to forbid anyone “access to the track from the
terraces w ith out the consent o f a senior officer (except to receive m edical attentio n)” . At the end o f the 1988
sem i-final, there was a m ino r pitch invasion. Accordingly, th at pro h ib itio n was em phasised in the 1989
O perational O rd e r by being put into capital letters. T h e com bination o f no instructions as to overcrowdifts-and
a strong pro h ib itio n on opening th e gates was likely to m ake police recognition ol crushing slow an d their
ic-ipunsitreluctant. Small w onder t n a t l u e giuwuiu Dlessure a n d congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 prrT
w ent u n heed ed or certainly unrem edied. Even w hen officers recognised there was a problem , the rule required
consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

  247. “Senior officer” m eant an officer o f Inspector rank o r higher. T he Inspector in charge o f the 20 officers
on the track was M r Darling. H e stationed h im self by the players’ tunnel, the m ost central position for
supervising his m en. In evidence he said:

  “ I w ould only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage th at the fans were in danger. I’d then
  inform g round control an d I w ould expect som eone deployed to th e back o f the stand.”

   T h at underlin es the inh ibition against opening perim eter gates. So did the evidence o f one C onstable who
said it had been so d ru m m ed into officers not to open the gates th a t w hen he saw distress in pen 4, he “deb ated”
w ith h im self before opening the gate, thinking: “ If I’m wrong, I’m going to get a right bollocking for this.”
Naturally, one w ould hope th at com m on sense and h um anity would m ake som e officers cut through th e rules
and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

  248. T his is w hat happened, but not until officers recognised th e distress and even then not immediately.
H ence, gates 3 an d 4, having been opened, were shut again before they were finally opened and at u rst tnose
seeking to clim b out over the fence were pushed back. T his reaction o f the police did not go on for as long as
som e witnesses believed. They probably m isinterpreted the han d m ovem ents from M r G reenw ood and others
aim ed at persuading fans to move back an d relieve the pressure as attem pts to stop those clim bing out at the
front.

  249. N evertheless, there was a period during w h ich the failure to recognise the proble Ifand the inhibitio:
against tackling'it cause(^vitaftim e to belost"** "     ~ *■ -                          —



                            A
                                                        C H A P T E R 14

                                          T H E R E SPO N SE OF TH E POLICE

The Officers in Command
   250.     Even w hen realisation o f the problem cam e to officers on the track, it was som e m inutes before it
reached th e control room . W hen spectators first appeared on the track, the im m ed iate assum ptio n in the
control room was th a t a pitch invasion was threatened. T his was unlikely at the beginning o f a m atch. It
becam e still less likely w hen those on the track m ade no move tow ards the pitch. M r M otson, the BBC
com m entator, recognised an d said, well before the m atch was stopped, th at the trouble seem ed to be
overcrowding an d n ot m isbehaviour. Still, the assum ption to the contrary persisted in the control room . U ntil
M r M urray radioed for a fleet o f am bulances, about 3.06 pm , M r D uckenfield continued to treat the incident
as a th reat to the pitch an d to public order. T h e message calling up all available officers m entio ned a pitch
invasion. O peratio n Support was in itiated an d dog handlers were requested.
    251 • ^ U n t U ^ i e f ^ p e r m t e n d e n t ^ e s t o arnvedjJhej^w asjlQ ^Q gclive leadership either frqnLCQntrol o r on
the m tcn to harness anTTorganise resn ie efforts. N o orders were given for otiicers to enter the tnnnel and relieve
pressure. Som e officers did this on th eir own initiative. A part from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no
a ttem p t was m ad e to clear an d m ark o ff a casualty area where first-aid could be given w ithout hin dran ce by
fans a n d photographers m illing abo ut betw een the bodies. T here was no co-ordination o f the early provision o f
first-aid or o f stretcher parties o r o f the rescue effort through gates 3 an d 4. N o request for help was broadcast to
doctors a n d nurses in the crowd until ab o u t 3.29 pm w hen it was too late. Probably, there was little th a t could
have been achieved in m ost cases however soon doctors had been sum m oned, b u t there were m arginal cases
where earlier a tte n tio n m ight have m ad e a difference.
  252. T h e plight o f those b eh in d the fencing an d the existence o f injuries were known to officers at the scene
from 3 pm . But the M ajor D isaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest w hen the am bulance service
was called. N o request for cutting gear o r for the fire brigade was m ade until 3.13 p.m . Again, it is unlikely th at
these services could have saved lives if they h ad been called prom ptly, b u t it is possible.
Police on the Pitch
    253. D espite the initial lack o f leadership, m any officers d id all they hum anly could to rescue an d revive the
victim s. M any supporters who gave evidence paid tribute to these efforts. It is also fair to say th a t the n u m ber
o f officers w ho could at first be usefully involved at the two open gates was necessarily lim ited.
   254. C h ie f Sup erin tendent N esbit’s action in deploying a line o f officers across the m iddle o f the pitch has
already been m entioned. I can well u n d erstan d the resentm ent it caused. However, the police assertion th a t a
rush by som e fans towards the Kop end raised fears o f conflict are well b orn e ou t by the video tape. In my
ju dgem ent, C h ie f S up erin tendent N esbit was well ju stified in using som e o f the m any officers called up
p u rsu an t to O peration Support to prevent possible violence. To have h a d open fighting in a ground where
som e 90 spectators already lay dead w ould have been an unthinkable an d obscene developm ent.
Fans on the Pitch
   255. M any fans who escaped on to the pitch alive were in a state o f collapse o r close to it. M ost o f those who
retained th e ir strength strove m agnificently to assist the victims. They helped pull them clear; they helped w ith
first-aid; they helped carry the im provised stretchers.
   256. T here were fans, however, who were distraught, angry, drunk, o r all three. T h eir conduct in abusing,
assaulting an d spitting at the police was disgraceful, the m ore so since earlier police failures had little to do
w ith those officers now doing th eir best for th e injured. In addition , there were abuse an d assaults on
am bulance m en an d firem en in the course o f th e ir rescue work. T his was probably because th e ir sim ilar
uniform s caused them to be m istaken for police. However, although the abuse was w idespread, the n u m b e r o f
assaults a n d spittings was on the evidence com paratively small. In deploring them , one m u st recognise the
uniquely horrifying experience which those responsible had ju st suffered an d were still suffering.
False Reports
   257. Before this Inquiry began, there were stories reported in the press, an d said to have em anated from
police officers present at the m atch, o f “m ass drunkenness” . It was said th a t d runken fans u rin ated on the
police w hile they were pulling the dead an d injured out, th a t others h a d even u rin a te d on the bodies o f th e dead
an d stolen th e ir belongings. N ot a single w itness was called before th e Inquiry to support any o f those
allegations although every o p portu nity was afforded for any o f the represented parties to have any witness
called w hom they wished. As soon as the allegations I have m ention ed were m ade in the press, M r Peter
W right, C h ie f C onstable o f South Yorkshire, m ade a dignified statem ent dissociating him self from such grave
an d em otive calum nies. T hose who m ade them , and those who dissem inated them , would have done b e tter to
hold th e ir peace.

                                                              44
                                                     C H A P T E R 15

                                T H E PERIM ETER GATES WERE TO O SM ALL

   258. T he p erim eter gates in the pens were no t designed as exits. T hey were intended to afford access by the
police to cope w ith any local disord er o r w ith an emergency. T he k in d o f emergency contem plated was not
massive crushing but, for exam ple, the collapse o r illness o f an individual. Emergency evacuation o f the pens
h a d been considered by the O fficer W orking Party. A lthough fire risk was m inim al since the terraces, west
stan d an d tunnel were o f concrete construction, the fire brigade were the principal arbiters o f evacuation
procedure. T hey aim ed to be able to em pty the pens in six m inutes. T he plan was to evacuate spectators via the
tunnel. I f for any reason th a t o ptio n becam e im practicable, eg due to a b o m b threat, then the alternative route
w ould be along th e back o f the terraces, through the gates in the radial fences a n d rou nd the sides o f the west
stand. T he fire brigade were satisfied th a t each o f these routes w ould enable the pens to be evacuated in less
th a n six m inutes, w itho ut relying on the gates to the pitch. T hose gates would also be available, b u t th e ir use
was excluded from the calculation o f evacuation tim e.

  259. T he need to provide for speedy and large scale evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was
no t anticipated. T h e G reen G u id e (1986) provides as follows:

  “209. Access to the pitch m u st be m ade as difficult as possible in norm al circum stances while at the same
  tim e ensuring th at the police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose o f crowd control and
  enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the event o f serious emergency . . .

  214. . . . a t som e m ajor soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd m ovem ent form s a necessary p art o f the
  safety m easures, it m ay be necessary to have a fence which prevents access to the p itch in norm al
  circum stances . . . b u t allows for access in emergency.

  215. For m ost m ajor stadia, w hether used for association football o r o th er sports, the pitch perim eter fence
  will be requ ired either to prevent access to th e pitch as m entioned above, o r at least to discourage attem pts
  by spectators to enter th e playing area. G ates o r other access points (m inim um w idth 1.1 m etres) should
  nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency . . . Provision o f such gates o r access points is particularly
  im p o rta n t to allow full access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place o f safety in
  an emergency.            Such gates o r access points should be properly stewarded an d                           clearly
  m arked so th a t im m ediate access to the playing area o r p erim eter track can be ensured” .

  260. G a te 3 was .82 m etres in w idth; gate 4 was .79 m etres in w idth. T here were therefore clear departures
from the G reen G u id e standard.

   261. T h e Safety C ertificate provided (by Schedule 2 Paragraph 24) as follows:

   T he (club) shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified C hartered Engineer . . . at
   least once each period o f 12 m o nths . . . an d . . . shall as soon as possible after each inspection supply to
   the . . . C ouncil a C ertificate by the said C hartered Engineer as to th e current com pliance o r non-com pliance
   w ith . . . the app ropriate provisions an d reco m m en datio ns o f the (G reen) G uide o f all structural parts o f the
   S tadium . . .

    262. It was argued th a t there was no breach o f the Safety C ertificate since the G reen G uide specifically
 provides for flexibility. However, in my view the Safety C ertificate cann ot and certainly should not be
 in terp reted so liberally as in effect to leave such basic requirem ents as the size o f exit gates to the total
 discretion o f the club and its advisers. O ne o f the m atters for consideration at stage two o f this inquiry will be
 w hether, an d in w hat respects, th e G reen G u id e needs to be clarified a n d toughened.

    263. D r Eastw ood explained the small w idth o f th e gates by reference to the dilem m a facing the police. They
 w anted a gate sufficient for its in ten d ed purpose ie police access an d sm all scale emergencies. O n the other
 hand , they d id n ot w ant a flood gate o f such size as to endanger the prim e principle o f preventing pitch
 invasions. In the light o f H illsborough, this is perhaps the m ost poignant exam ple o f the difficulty o f achieving
 a balance betw een stopping hooliganism and ensuring crowd safety.

    264. Even if the w idth o f gates 3 and 4 had com plied w ith the present G reen G uide standard, they would
 have been wholly in adequate to relieve pressure an d release spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the
 G reen G u id e says nothing ab o u t th e n u m b er o f gates required for a pen o f given size. W hilst the Club,


                                                              45
D r Eastw ood, the Officer W orking Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to conform
to the G uide, th e real failure was c om m o n to all those who have been responsible for considering safety on the
terraces. T h e anxiety to protect the sanctity o f the pitch has caused insufficient atten tio n to be paid to the risk
o f a crush due to overcrowding. C ertain it was, th a t once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4 were
wholly inadequ ate for rescue purposes.




                                                            46
                                       PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                                    CHAPTER 16

                                         BRIEF SU M M A R Y OF CAUSES

  265. T h e im m ediate cause o f the gross overcrowding an d hence the disaster was the failure, w hen gate C was *>"'*
opened, to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  266. T hey were already overfull because no safe m axim u m capacities had been laid down, no attem pt was
m ad e to control entry to ind ividual pens num erically an d there was no effective visual m onitoring o f crowd
density.

   267. W hen the influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout o f the barriers there afforded less protection
th a n it should an d a barrier collapsed. Again, the lack o f vigilant m o n ito rin g caused a sluggish reaction and
response w hen the crush occurred. T h e small size and n u m b e r o f gates to the track retarded rescue efforts." So,
in the initial stages, d id lack o f leadership.

   268. T he need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. T h at occurred because, as
bo th C lub and police should have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope w ith the large num bers
d em an d ed o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. T h e O perational O rd er an d police tactics on
the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival o f large num bers should th a t occur in a short
period. T h a t it m ight so occur was foreseeable an d it did. T h e presence o f an unruly m inority w ho had dru n k
too m uch aggravated the problem . So d id the C lub’s confused and in adequate signs a n d ticketing.




                                                           47
                                                     C H A P T E R 17

                                         TH E FA’s CHOICE OF G RO UND

    269. T he FA were strongly criticised by the Football Supporters’ A ssociation an d others for having
im posed the H illsborough venue o n L iverpool for a second year running. T he Liverpool supporters had to
travel m uch further to Sheffield th a n th eir N ottingham rivals. T h e police required th a t if the m atch was to be at
H illsborough at all, Liverpool w ould have to have the west an d north side accom m odation. T he disadvantages
o f th a t an d the disparate num bers o f hom e supporters o f the two clubs have already been set out. Liverpool had
had to knuckle u n d er to the arrangem ent in 1988. They resented having it im posed in 1989. To hold the m atch
at O ld Trafford w ould have been a perfectly good an d acceptable alternative. Indeed, th e FA n o m in ated O ld
Trafford as th e venue for the replay should there be a draw at Hillsborough.

   270. M r Kelly, the FA’s C h ief Executive, sought to give reasons for preferring Hillsborough, bu t the only one
w hich seem ed to have any validity was th a t the 1988 m atch had been considered a successfully m anaged event.
H e a d m itte d th a t a telephone call from the C h ie f Executive o f the Liverpool Club protesting an d putting
L iverpool’s case had no t been m en tio n ed to the FA com m ittee w hich finally decided the venue. M r Kelly
frankly conceded th a t “there was an elem ent o f unfairness” to Liverpool in choosing H illsborough for a second
tim e. I th in k the decision was ill-considered. N o d o u b t in fu ture the FA will be m ore sensitive an d responsive
to reasonable representations.

  271. However, it was n o t suggested th a t the choice o f venue was causative o f this disaster. T h e only basis on
w hich th a t could be said w ould be th at, because o f its layout, the Leppings Lane end was incapable o f being
successfully policed for this sem i-final. I do n o t believe th at to be so.




                                                            48
                                                   C H A P T E R 18

                                                      POLICE

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. T here was m uch bitterness am ongst Liverpool supporters th at they had to m ake do again for the
second year w ith the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as th e ir com plaints were, they am o unted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. G iven Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
allocate the sections o f the ground as they did. T he direction o f arrival an d the need for segregation m ade it
sensible an d to reverse the 1988 arrangem ents would have m ade for confusion. As with choice o f venue, I do
no t consider choice o f ends was causative o f the disaster. H ad it been reversed, the disaster could well have
occurred in a sim ilar m a n n e r bu t to N o tting ham supporters.

Police Planning
   273. T he O perational O rd e r for 1989 left m uch unsaid. A part from the lack o f any provision for late or
congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a num b er o f
o th e r om issions. For exam ple, there was no specific deploym ent o f officers to m an the perim eter gates. The
O rd e r did no t detail the duties o f the m ou nted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, w ho included
Liverpool officers to assist in m arshalling th e ir own fans. T he duties o f Superintendents (especially M r
G reenw ood and M r M arshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity an d efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring m obile ( lango) patrols to assist th e emergency services was o m itted from the text.

   274. T h e 1988 O rd e r was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the n u m b er o f officers deployed in
shopping areas an d to em phasise in capital letters the em bargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
\vjj]Uhe 1988 event led to complacency. T h at(som e thought the pens overfull in 1988 a n d th a t the tunnel was
closed off on th a t occasion d id no t figure in or influence the plan for 1989.

   275. M r D uckenfield was p rom oted and put in charge o f F D ivision only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress u n d er M r M ole who had been in co m m and both in 1987 and in 1988. It
m ight have been w iser to have left M r M ole in charge o f this operation. O n the o th er hand, it is quite
u n derstandable th at M r D uckenfield should have been expected to take co m m an d o f events in his D ivision
from the date o f his prom otion. In view o f his lack o f experience at H illsborough and o f a semi-final m atch,
however, it was im perative th a t he be fully briefed an d th a t he should also b rief himself.

   276. H e was not inform ed o f the crushing incident in 1981 n o r did he m ake inquiries which would have
revealed it. H e d id not know the arrangem ent as between Club and police for m onitoring th e Leppings Lane
terraces. H e d id not visit an d to u r the ground before approving the O perational O rder. A lthough he atten d ed a
m atch on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present an d he left control o f the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
  277. O ne o f the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enorm ous expenditure o f
money, tim e an d effort in em ploying large num bers o f police all over the country to guard against the sort o f
disord er an d m isbehaviour which have becom e endem ic. Police m anagem ent o f a game o f football has becom e
a m ilitary operation. T he problem s faced and the responses received m ust be disheartening an d m ay have
tend ed to h ard en police attitudes to supporters in general.

   278. It is fair to state th a t over m any years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problem s sensitively and successfully at a large nu m ber o f football games
including m ajo r m atches, during strikes in the coal industry an d the steel industry, an d in o th er contexts.
U nfortunately, th eir policing on 15 April broke down in the ways already described and, although there were
o th er causes, the m ain reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control.

   279. In all som e 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I m ust repo rt th a t for the m ost
p art the quality o f th e ir evidence was in inverse p ro po rtio n to th eir rank. T here were m any young Constables
w ho as w itnesses were alert, intelligent an d open. O n the day, they an d m any others strove heroically in ghastly
circum stances aggravated by hostility to rescue an d succour victim s. They inspired confidence a n d hope.

   2    80. By contrast, with som e notable exceptions, the senior officers in com m an d were defensive and evasive
w itnesses. T h e ir feelings o f grief and sorrow were obvious a n a genuine. N o d o u b t those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge th at such a disaster had occurred u n d e r th eir m anagem ent. But, n either th eir
handling o f problem s on the day n o r th e ir account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be
expected o f th e ir rank.


                                                          49
                                     .     .


    I
                               ■ :

                             enfield leant heavily on M r M u rray ’s experience. Between them they m isjudged the build-up
                           a n d did little abo ut it until they received M r M arshall’s request to o p e n t he.~gate"TFiey Hi<j not'
                        check the turnstile figures available from Club control o r check w ith Tango units as to the
                        to come. They did not alert M r G reenw ood to the situatio n at the fringe o f his area o f com m and.
                                 ctions as to the m anagem ent o f the crowd at Leppings L a n ^ Inflexibly they declined to


                     eh M r M arshall’s request cam e, M r D uckenfleld’s capacity to take decisions and give orders
                  to collapse. H aving sanctioned, at last, "Ithe opening o f the ^ tesV he^Taiied to give necessary
         onsequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. H e m isinterpreted the emergence o f
              from pens 3 and 4. W hen he was unsure o f the problem , he sent others down to “assess the situ atio n ”
        rath er than descend to see for himself. H e gave no inform ation to the crowd.

           283. M ost surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly and others to th in k th a t there h ad been an inrush due to Liverpool
        fans forcing open a gate. T his was not only untruthful. It set o ff a widely reported allegation against the
        supporters which caused grave offence a n d distress. It revived against football fans, an d especially those from
        Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism w hich caused reaction not only nationw ide b ut from Europe too. I can
        only assum e that M r D uckenfleld’s lack o f c a ndo ur on this occasion was out o f character. H e said his reason for
        not telling the tru th was th a t if the crowd becam e aware o f it there m ight be a very hostile reaction and this
        m ight im pede rescue work. H e d id not wish to divulge w hat had happened until he had spoken to a senior
        officer. However, reluctance to tell M r Kelly the tru th did not require th at he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
        although A ssistant C h ief C onstable Jackson was at hand, M r D uckenfield did not disclose the tru th to him
        until m uch later.

          284. T he likeliest explanation o f M r D uckenfleld’s con d u ct is th a t he sim ply could no t face the e n o rm ity o f
        the decision to open the gates an d all th a t flowed therefrom T h a t wonlrl eyniam what he said to M r Rellv. w hat

        disaster situ atio n. H e froze.                                                                                  '

        T he Police Case a t the Inquiry
          285. It is a m a tter o f regret th a t at the hearing, and in th eir subm issions, the South Yorkshire Police were n ot
        prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in w hat occurred. M r D uckenfleld, u n d er pressure o f
        cross-exam ination, apologised for blam ing the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, th a t apart, the police
        case was to b lam e the fans for being late a n d drunk, an d to blam e the Club for failing to m o n ito r the pens. It was
        argued th a t the fatal crush was no t caused by the influx through gate C b u t was due to b a rrie r 124a being
        defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to w hether lessons have been learnt. It would
        have been m ore seemly an d encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.




!



                                                                      50
                                                          C H A P T E R 19

                             TH E CITY COUNCIL A N D TH E SAFETY CERTIFICATE

  286. T he p erform ance by the City C ouncil o f its duties in regard to th e Safety C e r t i f i c a t e i n e f f i c i e n t an d
dilatory T he failure to revise or am end the certificate over the period o f three years preceding this disaster
despite im p o rta n t changes in the layout o f the ground, was a serious breach o f duty. T here were, as a result no
fixed capacities for the pens. T he certificate took no account o f the 1981 and 198 5 alterations to the groun .

  287 A n u m b e r o f breaches o f G reen G uide standards were perm itted an d persisted       the s p a c in g o fth e
crush barriers, the w idth o f perim eter gates an d the gradient in the tunnel (1 in 6 as against the G reen G u
m axim u m o f 1 in 10).

  288 T he A dvisory G ro u p lacked a p roper structure; its procedure was casual and un b usinesslike. Its
accountability to the G eneral Purposes Panel was ill-defined. D ecisions were taken inform ally and too m uch
was left to M r Bownes. In particular, th e decision to rem ove b a rrie r 144 was n o t referred to the Pane an oug
no t to have been m ade.




                                                                       51
                                                               C H A P T E R 20

                                                 TH E CLU B A N D DR EASTW OOD




  ^ ife Q ^ u b a t^ re ta in e d ^ M rL ^ d c 110^ 0^ ^ 10 aCt•e^ 1Cient^ 1^ ^ lp^0^e^ 0^ ^ y ^ ^ ^ 1
                                                                                                     ^ c^ n d 1pra,c f ic ^ w o r k ,


  C lub h a d s p e n ts o m e                                                   "" ^        "     8° ° d ' ° V' r ,h ' t o f° “ r * * " • « “




  S S S S ^ ssssa :
  aw are o f these problem s an d d is c u ie d soTvin J t h . T
  there rem ained the
                                                                    ’ f o r [easons already sPelt out. T h e Club was
                                  discussed solving them in various ways between 1981 an d 1986. In the result




 £EH£S
                                                                          f?r mo" i!nrinf " ” •F n" ,he a " b had a du,» “ “
terraces The Club onerateH nnH r . J lu ^ ^             the P °llce to tht-' grossly uneven distribution o f fans on the
Club a“ d p S S o n t h e d » , ? , S  , „C       C'rCU,t Lelevisi0" and ,he                tmaliser. Liaison between
onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.61" *                 ° f LlVerp°o1 supporters sti11 to com e. T he




r e m e d i e d ! ^ 156’ ^   bfeacheS o f the G reen G uide were m a tters which the Club should have appreciated and


th e wing^ens^and 6ver^H ine^of tfen ^             T / S‘gnpostinS ° n the concourse tend ed to produce under-filling o f
o f th e tickets also led to confusion ^ g r ^ ^ tin g ^ h e ^ u iM ^ u p in ^ h e tu r m tile a r e a 51^65     ^    u n 'ie ^ ^ u ^^o rm at
                                                   C H A P T E R 21

                                 FIRST A ID A N D EM ERGENCY SERVICES

No Fault by the Emergency Services
   296 I say at the outset o f this ch ap ter th a t no valid criticism can be m ad e o f the response by the St John
A m bulance Brigade, by SYM AS o r by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventu red any
criticism o f them . T h e only attack on SYM AS cam e from two Liverpool doctors. O ne claim ed th at am bulances
did n ot arrive swiftly or w ith sufficient eq uipm en t an d th a t there was a lack o f triage. H e was proved to be
wrong in all three respects. U nfortunately he h ad seen fit to go on television on 15 April w hen he said m ore
lives could have been saved if staff a n d eq u ip m en t h ad arrived earlier. A part from being proved w rong in fact
as to the tim es o f arrival o f am bulances, he conceded in evidence th a t it was not possible to say w hether lives
could have been saved. His com m ents on television were irresponsible. T he o th er d octor com plained ot the
absence o f defibrillators. I am satisfied on overw helm ing evidence th a t to attem p t to use a defibrillator on the
pitch w ith people m illing abo ut w ould have been highly dangerous owing to the risk o f injury from the electric
charge.

  297. I fin d th a t all three o f the em ergency services nam ed above responded prom ptly w hen alerted, th at
they brou ght a ppro priate eq uip m ent an d th a t th eir personnel operated efficiently.

  298. It w ould be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium , m edical facilities capable o f dealing w ith a
m a jo r disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, o th er
eq u ip m en t an d m edical staff sufficient to deal w ith over 100 casualties is n ot practicable.

   299 W h at is required is a basic level o f provision for first aid, for professional m edical atten tio n and for
 am bulance attendance, together w ith a system o f co-ordination w ith the emergency services w hich will bring
 them to the scene swiftly in w hatever num bers are required. W hat will am o u n t to an approp riate basic
 provision for th e future eg the eq u ip m en t in a first aid room , requires expert evaluation and advice.

    300. O n th e day, there was no clear un derstan ding betw een the Club an d D r Purcell as to his role. He
 believed he was p rim arily there to atten d to th e players. T h e Club regarded him also as the “physician available
 to a tten d at the first aid room if req u ired ”, as laid down in the Safety C ertificate.

    301. T here was insufficiently close co-operation betw een the police an d the emergency services. It is clear
 th a t SYM AS an d the fire brigade should have been called earlier th an they were. However, in view o f the nature
 and extent o f the crushing, the tim e w hen police rescue began an d the pathetically short period for w hich those
 unable to b reathe could survive, it is im probable th a t quicker recourse to th e emergency services would have
 saved m ore lives.

    302. Finally, there was evidence th a t an advertising b o ard had to be knocked down at the north-east corner
 o f th e ground to allow an am bulance onto the pitch an d th at at the top o f the ram p leading to the pitch the
 access for am bulances was inadequate. T here was also evidence th a t the pre-m atch arrangem ent tor
 am bulances to use the two gates from Penistone R oad at the north-east end o f the ground as in an d o ut routes
 was frustrated by the presence o f vehicles ju st inside the ground. In th e event, none o f these m atters attectea
 operations. T h e hoarding was quickly knocked down. T he difficult access to the ram p was negotiated and
 am bulances used one entrance satisfactorily by backing ou t w hen loaded.




                                                             53
                                                        C H A P T E R 22

                                                  CO M M U NIC ATIO NS

fa ih ? ^ ? nC problem whl<?h im Peded police control an d the gathering o f intelligence was the interm itten t
ou o f r f H ? r m tUmtCaptIOn V                ? ' ThCre W3S the perio d o f two o r three “ “ utes when t h T c S ^ m ^
^ e a n t th a t c o n t r o l c ^ d ^ o ^ o v e H       reT d ied ’ il was only ^ usin8 a h and      in the control room . This
reached cont?n fm m t i , " o to v e tr n d e a " y ° th e r m essages. N o effective radio com m unication seems to have
«trmn h         ^                      p erim eter track at the relevant tim e. M r G reenw ood’s request for the m atch to be
c lm m im        i v a r*ous messages from C onstables reporting the distress in the pens did n o t ,
d |J       "         n           Leppings Lane to control was unreliable. U ndoubtedly these breakdow ns m ade it m ore
difficult for those in co m m an d to m ake pro p er assessm ents and exercise effective com m and.




                                                            54
                        PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
                                       CHAPTER 23 - IN TR O D U C TIO N

Lim ited Objectives
   304. It is im p o rta n t to stress the lim ited objectives o f the interim recom m endations I can m ake in this
R eport. My p urpose is to propose in stant m easures capable o f being im plem ented forthw ith and where
possible before the com m encem ent o f the 1989/1990 season. They are designed to prevent overcrowding and
crushing on terraces in the short term and to im prove safety procedures. They do not an d cann ot m eet all the
problem s o r address all the issues o f post-H illsborough football. W ider issues such as m em bership schemes,
id en tity cards, all-seater stadia, super-stadia an d long term recom m endations fall to be considered in my Final
R eport. So do a n u m b e r o f o th er specific m atters such as a com prehensive review o f the G reen G uide, the
problem o f excessive pre-m atch drinking, fans w ithout tickets and ticket touts. I m ention these m atters lest it
be thou ght I have decided no recom m endations need be m ade concerning them . I have not. But before
deciding w hat if any recom m endations to m ake abou t these an d o th er m atters, m ore evidence and study is
required.

   305. Accordingly, the m ain th ru st o f these interim recom m endations, as a holding exercise, is to reduce
n um bers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and to achieve a p rop er balance in crowd control between
prevention o f d iso rd er an d m aintenance o f safety.


P erim eter Fences
   306. It would be im practical an d unwise to recom m end works o f construction or radical structural changes
now, before com pleting the extensive study and consultation w hich will form stage two o f this Inquiry. H asty
interim reco m m en datio ns o f th a t kind m ight well prove to b e ill-judged after further study an d require to be
changed in a m a tter o f m onths.

   307. In particular, I do n ot at this stage m ake any recom m end ation as to rem oving perim eter fences o r
replacing th em w ith structures o f different design. U nderstandably, there was a wave o f po pular feeling against
such fences in th e im m ed iate afterm ath o f Hillsborough. T he horrifying spectacle o f people being crushed
against the fencing focussed blam e for the disaster on the fences them selves. T here were pleas to dism antle
them an d em otive references to the fans being treated like “ caged anim als” . Some clubs rem oved th eir fencing
straightaway. It was therefore very tem pting to consider at an early stage m aking a recom m endation th a t the
fences should be removed. I confess to being so tem pted.

   308. Regrettably, only a m o n th after H illsborough, there were incidents which showed th at violence and
 hooliganism are still liable to erup t at football grounds. O n 13 M ay at Selhurst Park, B irm ingham City
 supporters invaded the pitch and fought w ith supporters o f the hom e club, Crystal Palace. Five police officers
 and 16 supporters were injured an d required treatm en t at a local hospital. O n the sam e day at a m atch between
 Bristol City an d Sheffield U n ited, spectators spilt onto the pitch and there was fighting on the terraces. At the
 C up Final betw een Liverpool an d Everton on 20 May, there was a pitch invasion, albeit a com paratively
 benign one.

   309. Even the Football Supporters’ A ssociation (FSA) felt it necessary to say in th eir final subm ission,

        “ W ith som e reservations, the FSA accept th a t p erim eter fences are necessary for crowd control.”

    310. Bearing in m in d those m atters, an d the need to consider fu rth er expert evidence, I have decided th at it
 w ould be unwise and p rem ature for m e to m ake any recom m endations now either to remove o r to preserve or
 to alter the stru cture o f perim eter fences. I shall m ake recom m endations abou t them in my Final Report.

    311. For the present, 1 w ould em phasise that, although the fencing prevented escape,
 H illsborough disaster was overcrowding and it is against th a t danger th a t my interim recom m endations are
 prim arily directed. W hilst declining to recom m end the removal o f the fences, I do consider th a t the gates to the
 pitch should be kept open whilst the terraces are occupied. T h is will have, 1 hope, three beneficial effects.
 Obviously, an open gate is a m ore ready escape route th a n one w hich has to be locked. Secondly, the sight of
 open gates will be reassuring to spectators on the terraces. Thirdly, the existence o f gaps in the fencing by
 reason o f the open gates will concentrate the m inds o f police officers o r stewards on the track to the need for
 careful m onitorin g o f those on the terraces.


                                                           55
  312. It will o f course be necessary to have a police presence sufficient to p revent pitch invasion for im proper
reasons through the open gates. However, I am encouraged to th in k th a t this is n o t an insuperable problem by
the fact that, fo r exam ple at Anfield, L iverpool’s ground, there were no gates in the p erim eter fencing before it
was taken down. T here were instead gaps o r “ access points” as they are called in the G reen G u id e (paragraph
215). T h eir existence did not, so far as I am aware, prevent the au thorities from m aintaining order. Also, the
gates were open throughout the replay o f this ill-fated semi-final at O ld Trafford on 7 May 1989.


Reduced Numbers
   313. In the assessm ent o f figures for capacity, the criteria in C h ap ter 16 o f the G reen G u id e were not at
H illsborough, an d m ay no t elsewhere, have been applied w ith sufficient rigour. Therefore, in a d d itio n to
rem inding and enjoining local authorities an d clubs to m ake all necessary deductions w hen assessing the
figure for m axim um capacity in accordance w ith the G reen G uide, I recom m end reducing th a t figure by a
fu rth er 15% as an interim measure.


Safety Certificate
   314. T he Safety C ertificate procedure should, if it is properly ad m in istered and enforced, go far towards
achieving crowd safety. W hether it succeeds d epends upon the vigilance and c o m m itm en t o f the local
au th ority issuing the Certificate. I do no t know w hether the p o o r perform ance o f the local authority at
H illsborough was typical. A rgum ents have been p u t to m e suggesting the need for som e national oversight o r
inspection o f local authority certification procedures. T his raises com plex issues w hich I shall w ant to consider
fu rth er at stage two o f the Inquiry. For the present, I m ake recom m endations as to the con ten t o f Safety
Certificates an d arrangem ents for issuing, m onitoring, enforcing, reviewing, am ending and renewing them .




                                                           56
                                   C H A P T E R 24 - T H E R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S

  315. T he recom m endation s which follow are the m in im u m necessary to ensure th a t existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based u pon the evidence w hich I have heard at Sheffield an d other
inform ation I have received. They com plem ent the recom m en dations which M r Justice Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

  316. T hose which are asterisked should be carried ou t before the 1989/90 season starts. T he rest should be
started forthw ith an d com pleted as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Terraces
★         1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
        should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

        A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
        another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

★        2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
        Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

        (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
            which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
            in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

        (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
            margin.

★         3. Arrangements should be made:-

        (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
            figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
            ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

        (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
★         4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
        responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
        other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
        variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★         5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
        area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
        sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
        period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
        or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
        below, and by radio to the control room.


    Fences and Gates
          6.    All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
        duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
        crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
        demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
        different crowd densities.

    ★     7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
        different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.



                                                             57
         8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
        when spectators are on the terrace.

           9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
        a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
        The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
        stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
        either him self or via an officer close at hand.

          10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
        are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
        necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
        brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
        nominated senior police officer at the ground.


    Crush Barriers
    ★      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
        to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★          12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
        complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the
        maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
        reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
          13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
        which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report.

          14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
        which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
        Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


           16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
        amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
        accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
        effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
        with the local authority’s rules.

           17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
        of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
        the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group’s terms of
        reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
        ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
        and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
        written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Duties of each Football Club
★       ^ 18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
        inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
        anticipated.



                                                            58
★         19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
        as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
        turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
        accordingly.

★         20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
        reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
        operators for this purpose.

          21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
        concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★         22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
        reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
        and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
        area.

★        23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
        the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
        should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★        24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
        by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
        admitting spectators to the ground.

          25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
        entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
★        26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
        should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
        concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

    ★     27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
        officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any
        is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

    ★    28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
        any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
        sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

    ★    29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
        Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

           30.     There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
        monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
        at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
        in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Communications
           31.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
         received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
         priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
         used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
         sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                             59
           32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
         with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

           33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
         areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
         announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
         noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for everv
         match.                                                                          J

           34. U se should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
         Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
         the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


    Co-ordination of Emergency Services
    ★     35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
        liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

    ★    36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
        ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
        spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
        concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
        rooms of each of the emergency services.

★         37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        within the ground itself.

★         38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
        they are required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★         39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
        club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

          40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
        equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
        medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★         41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
        any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
        present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
        match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
        contactable.

★         42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
        attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

          43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
        be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
        requirement o f the Safety Certificate.




                                                            60
APPENDICES
Appendix 1:
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
Hillsborough Ground.
Appendix 2:

Leppings Lane: the perimeter gates and turnstiles.




           Hi
          H sA. m <
          SB-     V■.s
A ppendix 3   The west stand and terraces.
                                                                                                                                                                          A ppendix 4




                             WEST STAND




                                                                                      BARRIER    N o .1 4 4



                                                                                                »!

                                                          BARRIER        No.124a
                                                           ¥   ^ ••••1       h... .




SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                                          NORTH STAND




                  Barriers... Pre 1979                         1981 - 2 radial fences                • • • • 1985 - Removal of some   1986 - Rem oval of B a rrier
                                                                                                                    posts and rails          No. 144 and som e on
                   1979....Additional barriers —               1985 - 2 more radial fences                                                   S W est T errace



              Arrangement of Barriers at West Terrace
              Prepared by The Health & Safety Executive
A p p e n d ix 5:   The west terraces at 2.59 p.m.
                                                     A P P E N D IX 6

                                               SPECIFIC IN C ID EN TS

M r H icks’ Evidence
   1. M r and Mrs H icks’ tw o daughters died in the disaster. They h ad arrived early en famille b u t had tickets
for different sections. T he tw o daughters had standing tickets; they w ent into pen 3. M rs Hicks h a d a seat in the
north stand. M r H icks to ok up a standing position in pen 1 ju s t below and to the west o f the police box at about
2.15 pm From there, he h a d a view o f th e centre pens. H e kept an eye on th em as they filled up since he knew his
daughters to be there.

   2. H is evidence was th a t by 2.50 p m he could see people were in distress. At abou t 2.55 pm he an d others
called to a senior police officer at the to p o f the steps to the control box to draw his atten tio n to th e crushing. M r
H icks was only about 10 feet from the officer. H e described h im as w earing a flat cap w ith gold or silver braid
an d a light coloured anorak. M r H icks believed he was the officer w ho stopped the m atch. M r G reenw ood, w ho
did stop the m atch, was certainly not wearing a light coloured anorak, as can clearly be seen o n the video.

  3. M r H icks says th a t he an d others shouted several tim es to this officer in attem pts to alert h im to the
distress in th e pens. T here was no reaction although M r H icks believes the officer m ust have been in earshot.

   4. T hat officer descended from the steps and two cam eram en w hom M r H icks believed were from
television cam e an d appeared to direct th eir cam eras tow ards the pens. A nother senior officer appeared two
steps down from the platform . H e was a stocky figure; he also wore a flat cap b u t w ith black braid. M r Hicks
says th a t he an d two or three others tried several tim es to cap ture this officer’s attention w ithout success. T hen
M r H icks says he shouted “For C hrist’s sake! C an’t you see w hat’s going on? We can, and you have cam eras . The
officer is said to have replied dism issively “Shut your fucking p rattle” .

   5. W hen th e disaster occurred th e two H icks girls were crushed. V ictoria was put in an am bulance and M r
 Hicks accom panied h er to hospital where she was found to be dead. Sarah died at the ground.

   6. M r Hicks was an im pressive w itness and, despite his grievous loss, rem arkably stoical. H e gave his
 evidence clearly an d w ithout rancour. H e was certainly m istaken about M r G reenw ood being one o f those on
 the steps an d it has not been possible to identify either officer from M r Hicks’ descriptions. H e m ay well also
 have been im precise as to tim ings. N evertheless, I see no reason to doubt th a t w hat he described did occur in
 relation to two officers. As M r H icks generously said him self, the dism issive abuse from the second officer
 (although reprehensible) m ay have been due to his being preoccupied w ith trying to see w hat was happening at
 pens 3 and 4 arou nd kick-off tim e.

 The Goalkeeper and Gate 4
    7. M r Barnbrock, a Liverpool supporter, said he w ent through the tunnel. H e would have liked to have
 tu rn ed back w hen he saw how crow ded the pens were. H e w ent w ith his father an d 13 year old b ro th er Stephen
 tow ards the front o f pen 4. H e saw th e team s com e onto th e pitch. C onditions at th e front were, he said, alright
 un til abou t 2 m inutes to 3. T hen th e pressure in th e pen increased and he and his father becam e separated. H is
 feet cam e off the ground. H e shouted to police officers through the fence to get th e m o ut and help them . The
 police did no t react. T he Liverpool goalkeeper, Bruce G robbelaar, spoke to a policem an on th e track. T he gate
 was th en opened by a blonde policewom an and about 25 to 30 people w ent through it. They included the
 witness’s father an d his b ro th er Stephen w ho h ad a broken arm . A police Constable shut th e gate. It was then
  reopened by the sam e policew om an, the w itness thought, and he got out.

    8. M r Eccleston, a m ale nurse an d an im pressive witness, was sitting in the north stand. H e noticed pens 3
  an d 4 were full an d realised som ething was w rong w hen fans started com ing over the perim eter fence b u t did
  not invade the pitch. H e said th e Liverpool goalkeeper appeared to notice this too.

    9. M r G robb elaar was out o f th e country during the Inquiry and was therefore n o t called. However, he
  m ade a statem ent w hich was put in as his evidence. In th e course o f it he said :-

     “ Kick-off happ ened an d we got into o u r stride pretty quickly - we forced a c o m er pretty early on and the ball
     cam e down to my en d - 1 rolled it out to the full back once and play went on until Peter Beardsley h it the
     crossbar o f the N ottin gham Forest goal from a corner and cam e back into play. I rem em ber ju s t alte r that
     there were shouts and scream s from the crowd ju st b eh in d me, it was different; not the ordinary crowd noise
     a n d 1 tu rn ed arou nd to look. W hat am azed m e first was th e concentration and squash o f fans in the centre



                                                               63
 section, the en d areas still h ad plenty o f space. It was only th e n I becam e conscious th a t the crowd was
 squashing forw ard an d wasn’t able to go sideways an d th a t’s w hen I noticed the fencing alongside them
 holding th em in. I saw fans being pulled u p in to the stan d above the terraces, I saw fans clim bing over into the
em pty areas at th e side an d I saw fans clim bing p u t over the front on to the pitch w hich was particularly
difficult because o f the spikes on the top o f the fencing b u t they were getting out.
    “ Play was still going on a n d I was in a terrible p o sitio n trying to concentrate on play an d having my
atte n tio n taken by w hat was happening b e h in d me. T he ball cam e dow n to o u r end an d N o ttin g h am Forest
won a corner, it was taken an d we cleared o u r box area an d as play was going forw ard over the centre line I
h eard a shout, ‘Bruce - please help’ - a desperate shout from a fan squashed up against the fencing to the
right o f my goal as I looked at L eppings L ane terraces. H e scream ed, ‘Please get the fucking gate o pen - H elp,
help . All the people who could speak were pleading for help. T here were two policem en n e a r the gate right
alongside the fan w ho had shouted to m e a n d so I shouted to th em , ‘G et the gate open’. I was still trying to
concentrate o n play an d was still having my atten tio n taken by w hat was happening b ehin d m e - there were
lots o f fans on th e pitch b eh in d the goal area by th em too. I called again to the policem en, ‘O pen the fucking
gate an d one ju s t tu rn e d away from m e a n d looked back at th e crowd b u t the o th er went to the gate and
opened it an d it was like taking the to p o ff a shaken coke b o ttle - people were everywhere on the play area
aro u n d my goal. Play was still going on an d it cam e dow n tow ards m e again for the left h a n d corner. It was
a N o ttin g h am Forest throw-in, away to my left, the ball was o u t o f play an d a fan cam e u p to m e on the
p itch an d said, ‘Bruce, they’re killing us’. I said ‘W ho’s killing you?’, a n d he said ‘T hey’re crushing us-our
fans’. I said ‘G o an d get som e help’, an d th e n a policem an cam e o n an d spoke to this fan. I don’t know
w ho the fan was, an d th en he led him off. It was ab o u t this tim e I saw a policem an run nin g o n to th e pitch
from my right across my box an d to the referee who blew up, recovered the ball an d told all players to clear
th e p itch .”

    10. It is clear from the video th a t M r G ro b b elaar’s recollection o f the sequence o f events, even w ith regard
to the game, is inaccurate in a n u m b er o f respects. For exam ple, the two N o ttin g h am Forest c o m e r kicks
occurred m in u tes before Beardsley struck the bar. Further, it seem s highly probable from o th e r evidence that
gates 3 a n d 4 were open continuously well before M r G robbelaar says the fan asked him to get the gate open. It
seem s surprising to o th a t w ith all the noise M r G ro b b elaar w ould hear the precise w ords o f an in d iv id u al fan,
let alone respond twice to them , w hilst the gam e was in progress.
    11. As to M r B am b ro ck ’s account, the evidence o f PC F iona R ichardson was th a t she was the only
policew om an on the track in th e early stages although others cam e from the seated area as the incident
developed. PC R ichardson began at gate 1 and, although she d id go an d help people o ut through gate 3, she
d id n o t go to gate 4, an d d id n o t open it tw ice o r even once. T h e tw o officers w ho spoke o f opening gate 4 were
b o th male.

    12. I th in k M r G robbelaar d id becom e conscious o f distress in the crowd b eh ind him an d d id speak to a
police officer at som e stage, probably earlier th a n he now thinks. N o t to reach th a t b ro ad conclusion would
involve attrib u tin g his whole account to in v en tio n o r fantasy an d I see no grounds for doing so. However, his
detailed account was n o t tested in cross-exam ination a n d its inconsistencies and errors w hen com pared with
o th e r incontrovertible evidence w ould m ake it unsafe to derive m ore th a n the b ro a d conclusion stated above.
T he in cid ent shows how honest w itnesses can becom e confused an d th e ir evidence flawed w hen recollecting
events experienced u n d er tension o r em otion.

   13. As to the opening o f gate 4 there was an ap p aren t conflict o f evidence. PC Illingw orth said th a t about
five m in u tes to 3 he opened it a n d guided fans emerging through it to gate 5. PC H ooson said th a t it was he
w ho o p en ed gate 4 ju s t before kick-off. I am satisfied from th e evidence o f a n u m b er o f fans that, like gate 3,
gate 4 was o pened m ore th a n once. T he probability is, therefore, th a t w hilst PC Illingw orth was shepherding
fans to gate 5, gate 4 had been closed again u n til it was re-opened by PC H ooson two o r three m inutes later.
Oxygen
    14. It was alleged by a docto r th a t an oxygen cylinder p rovided to him on the pitch was empty. D r Phillips, a
L iverpool supporter, h ad been in pen 3 w ith his b ro th e r an d others. H e cam e u n d er pressure an d clim bed into
p en 2. W hen the disaster occurred an d gate 2 was opened, he w ent through it, injuring his head as he d id so. H e
cam e on to the pitch som etim e after 3.10 p m an d started resuscitation procedures. H e was given an oxygen
cylinder. H e believes th is was from St Jo h n A m bulance. It was, he thought, too early to be the fire service. T he
cylinder was sw itched on b u t D r Phillips says it gave n o oxygen since it was empty. T here was one oxygen
cylinder on the St Jo h n ’s am bulance w hich cam e to the scene. M r Wells, the D ivisional S u p erinten d en t o f St
J o h n , took th a t cylinder on to the pitch. H e said it was effective. In particular, he recalls going to a p atie n t being
tre a te d by D r Phillips an d says th a t oxygen was flowing into th a t patient. M oreover, M r Wells tested the
cy linder afterw ards an d found it was still h a lf full. It has a capacity th a t will last for 5 hours 40 m inutes on a
high setting.


                                                              64
   15. T here was evidence from A ssistant C h ief Fire O fficer H ornsby th a t a M axam an resuscitator h ad failed
to w ork properly. It was delivering an oxygen flow ap p ro p riate to a “child” setting rath er th a n a full “a d u lt”
flow. O n ex am in atio n, it was fo un d th a t a retaining n u t in th e control knob had w orked loose, possibly due to
v ib ratio n in tran sit, a n d th is h ad affected the flow o f oxygen. T h e device h a d last been tested on 10 A pril 1989.
   16. I accept the evidence o f M r Wells th a t the St Jo h n A m bulance cylinder was charged w ith oxygen and
w orking properly. In m y view, D r Phillips m ay have been m istaken as to the cylinder o f w hich he com plains
being empty. H e agreed he was u n d er great pressure, in an aw kw ard situation; his head was injured an d he
becam e very angry at w hat he regarded th en as wholly the fault o f the police. H e conceded th a t if the cylinder
was n o t em pty there was a possible alternative - th a t the m aster tan k to p valve was shut. It seem s unlikely th at
he could have been referring to the fire service resuscitator as he was clear th a t the b ottle he received was a
sim ple piece o f eq u ip m en t n ot designed to b reath e for th e p atie n t b u t m erely to supply oxygen.
  17. I conclude th a t o n a balance o f p robabilities the evidence does n o t justify a finding th a t an em pty
cylinder was brought to the scene.
Calling the Fire Service
    18. PC B ichard’s call to police H ead q u arters at 3.13 p m for the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
e q u ip m en t to cut m etal fences (see p aragraph 101 supra) was heard by C h ief Inspector E dm undson. H e w ent
into the adjacen t o p eratio n s room to give in stru ctio n s for th e message to be passed to the fire service. T here, a
tem po rary control room assistant was already speaking to the fire service ab ou t a house fire. M r E dm undson
in terru p ted the call an d asked the assistant to tell the fire service th a t cutting eq uip m en t was w anted at
H illsborough. T here followed a conversation betw een th e assistant a n d M iss D avies a t the fire service in the
following te rm s :-
   Police            C an we have cutting gear for H illsborough, please - straight away?
   Fire C ontrol     Ju st a m inute. R ight - w hat’s the address?
   Police            C uttin g e q uip m ent for H illsborough football ground - straight away.

   Fire C ontrol     H illsborough football ground?
   Police            Yes, H illsborough football ground.
   Fire C ontrol     W hat ro ad is th a t on? D o you know?
    Police           T here has been a m ajo r accident, all th e am bulances are u p there.

    Fire C ontrol    W h at road is it on?
    Police           I have n o idea; H illsborough football ground.
    Fire C ontrol    W hat road is it on? D o you know?
    Police           “H illsborough football ground - w hat ro ad is it o n ?” (this was said to som eone in Police
                      Force C ontrol) - “Penistone R o ad ” (to Fire Control).

    Fire C ontrol P enistone R oad.
    Police           P enistone R oad, O K.
    Fire C ontrol Penistone R oad, ju s t a m in u te - w hat’s exactly involved?
    Police           It’s football, a big m atch, L iverpool v N o tts Forest.
    Fire C ontrol    Yes, b u t why do you w ant us; you said it was an RTA [R oad Traffic Accident].
    Police           N o, no, no; m ajo r incident inside the ground.
    Fire C ontrol    M ajo r incident inside - do you know exactly w hat it is?
     Pol ice         N o, I don’t; they w ant all the cutting gear.
     Fire C ontrol F or w hat - do you know?
     Police          H ang o n a sec.
     At th a t p o in t C h ie f Inspector E d m u nd so n intervened and spoke for the police. T he conversation
  c o n clu ded :-
     Police          (M ale voice) - Hello!


                                                                65
   Fire C ontrol    Hello! Now you w nt som e cutting gear - w hat exactly is it for?

   Police           T here has been a m ajo r accident at H illsborough football ground w here the sem i-final is;
                    the crowds have forced th e ir way in, they have broken fences an d gates down. I don’t know
                    exactly w hat it is b u t there are people trapped.

   Fire C ontrol    Right! O K - leave it w ith us.

   T h a t conversation to o k 1 m inute 13 seconds. It was published in a n u m b e r o f new spapers w ith strong
critical co m m en t m ostly against the fire service. T he th ru st o f the criticism was th a t valuable tim e was wasted
by the fire service asking unnecessary questions as to w here an d why cutting e q u ip m en t was required.

    19. T here was a m eeting o f the em ergency services in August 1988 to discuss procedure in th e event o f a
m ajo r disaster at Sheffield W ednesday’s ground. It was p o in ted o u t a n d m inu ted th a t “It was im perative th a t
th e Police C ontrol give the exact location o f any fire o r incident a n d as m uch detail as possible. N o senior fire
officer is on d u ty at the m atch. . . Fire service will a tte n d via P enistone R oad o r Leppings Lane as directed by
th e police.”

   20. T he message from PC B ichard con tain ed all the necessary inform ation - Leppings L ane end, hydraulic
cutting eq u ip m en t, to cut m etal fences. Regrettably, it was n o t passed on by H ead q u arters in those term s. M iss
D avies h ad rightly been train ed to require a precise location and needed to know the problem w hich w ould face
th e fire service so th a t the ap p rop riate response could be m ade. In fact, there are several football grounds in the
H illsborough d istrict although clearly Sheffield W ednesday’s ground is the principal one. In the result,
although C h ief Inspector E dm u n d so n clarified, to an extent, th e n atu re o f the problem , the locus which
em erged in the course o f the conversation (Penistone R oad) was n o t th a t con tain ed in th e original message
from ground control (ie “Leppings Lane e n d .”) W hilst on the face o f the conversation the fire service m ay seem
to have been slow in the uptake o r perhaps pedantic, in my view the police ought to have been m ore specific.
They h ad the necessary info rm atio n to be so.

  21.1 am satisfied, however, th a t the delay o f 1 m in u te 13 seconds over the call, a n d even the delay
occasioned by the cutting e q u ip m en t going to Penistone R oad ra th e r th a n Leppings Lane, d id n o t affect the
outcom e. Even h a d those w ith cutting e q u ip m en t gone directly after a briefer ’p hone call they w ould n o t have
arriv ed at a stage early enough to m ake cutting the fencing a helpful exercise.

Mr Kenny Dalglish
   22. W hen the Liverpool m anager w ent to the control room an d agreed to m ake the ann o u n cem en t
b ro ad cast at 3.56 pm , he says in a statem en t th a t he could n o t get the Tannoy to work. Spectators could see
h im trying to address th em an d indicated to him m anually th a t n oth in g could be heard. An officer pressed
b u tto n s o n the m achine an d M r Dalglish says he trie d again w ith sim ilar lack o f success. H e was then taken
u n d e r the police box to the room used by th e disc jockey to broadcast pre-m atch m usic. T here, the m icrophone
w orked an d he broadcast his message.

   23. M r D alglish was n o t called. T here was n o o th er evidence ab o u t this incident. I accept it o ccurred as he
described. W hy th e Tannoy could n o t at th a t tim e be successfully operated from the police box is, however,
strange an d unexplained. U nlike the radio, it had o p erated satisfactorily from the police box at the critical
tim es save th a t its messages m ay n o t always have been heard above the prevailing noise. It h a d w orked at about
3.30 p m w hen it called for m edical staff. I can see n o grounds for criticising the police in regard to th is incident
a n d certain it is th a t the b rie f delay in relaying M r D alglish’s message can have h ad n o significant effect.




                                                            66
                                                   A PPE N D IX 7

                            LIST O F PARTIES A N D TH EIR REPRESENTATION

1.   M r A ndrew C ollins Q C , M r Alan G oldsack an d M r B ernard Phillips o f Counsel, instructed by the
     Treasury Solicitor, appeared on b eh alf o f the Inquiry.

2.   M r B enet H y tn er Q C an d M r T im othy K ing o f Counsel, in stru cted by the H illsborough Steering
     C om m ittee, appeared o n b eh alf o f the bereaved an d injured.

3.   M r Jo h n Jackson o f Counsel, instructed by M essrs Hill D ickinson, appeared on b eh alf o f the Football
     Supporters’ A ssociation.

4.   M r Jo h n D yson Q C an d M r D avid G ibson-W att o f Counsel, instru cted by M essrs Freshfields, appeared
     on b e h a lf o f the Football A ssociation.

5.   M r R ich ard Maxwell Q C an d M r M ichael M urphy o f Counsel, instructed by M essrs Keeble Hawsons,
     appeared on b e h a lf o f Sheffield City Council.

6.   M r E dw in Glasgow Q C an d M r S tu art C atchpole o f Counsel, instru cted by M essrs D avies A rnold Cooper,
     appeared on b eh alf o f Sheffield W ednesday Football Club.

7.   M r W illiam W oodw ard Q C a n d M r P atrick L im b o f Counsel, in structed by M essrs H am m o n d S uddards,
     appeared on b e h a lf o f the South Yorkshire Police.

8.   M r Franz M uller Q C an d M r Andrew R obertson o f Counsel, instru cted by M essrs Crutes, appeared on
     b e h a lf o f th e South Yorkshire Fire an d Civil D efence Authority.

9.   M r M ichel K allipetis Q C, in structed by M essrs D ib b L upton B room head, appeared on b e h a lf o f Trent
     Regional H ealth Authority.

10. M r Roger Toulson Q C , instructed by M essrs Reynolds P orter C ham berlain, appeared on b eh alf o f D r W.
    Eastw ood.




                                                           67
                                  A P P E N D IX 8

LIST O F TH O SE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO TH E INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                           Stephen M artin FO STER
                           M ichael Joseph BRA D LEY
                           P eter W illiam JA CK SO N
                           Alison Jan e B EN N E T T
                           D an iel Joseph H EN N ESSEY
                           K eith G O L D IN G
                           Ian Jo h n C LA R K E
                           D av id PE R R Y
                           D av id A nthony C R U IC E
                           P atrick C U N N IN G H A M
                           K eith L EO N A R D
                           W ayne D av id W IN D E V E R
                           G ary GAINS
                           M ark Ian H U G H E S
                           D av id H U G H E S
                           A nthony B A R N B R O C K
                           D av id C U N N IN G H A M
                           P eter DARCY
                           Ian K enneth D E V IN E
                           P eter Joseph G A R R E T T
                           D av id P eter LOW E
                           G eoffrey Nigel M O O D Y
                           C h risto p her M O R A N
                           Roy PARRY
                           Jo h n Stew art P H IM E ST E R
                           D av id PO STLETH W A ITE
                           T h o m as K enneth H ILTO N
                           N icholas BELL
                           Stephen M ark W E ST E R G R E E N
                           Trevor H IC K S
                           Ian W illiam B U R K E
                           W illiam H am ilto n C O M E R F O R D
                           D iane Susan CO N N O LLY
                           P eter Jeffrey G A R R E T T
                           D av id H A R TLEY
                           T h o m as Bentley M ATTHEW S
                           D av id T h o m as JO N ES
                           Paul M cC A FFR E Y
                           D av id Stephen M O O R E
                           M axwell ROSS
                           A nthony C h risto p her S M IT H
                           Steven A LLEN
                           P. M A H E R
                           M ichael G e rra rd H IL L
                           N eil F IT Z M A U R IC E
                           Angela H O C K E N H U L L
                           Lee E dw ard O X LEY
                           C onstance SW EET
                           J a n e t A nn ELLIS
                           Frederick Jam es ECCLESTO N
                           A dam Jam es P E M B E R T O N
                           Jo h n R an d o lp h Tom B A RTH O LO M EW
                           J u d ith W ATSON
                           D uncan S T U R R O C K
                           Susan DAWES
                           A lbert L IN D L E Y
                           PC Ian B R O W N


                                        68
                                    A P P E N D IX 8

LIST O F TH O SE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO TH E INQ U IR Y IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                            C h ief S up erin ten d en t B rian L eonard M O LE
                            C h ie f S up erinten d en t D av id G odfrey D U C K E N F IE L D
                            A ssistant C h ief C onstable W alter J ACKSON
                            S uperintendent R oger M A R SH A LL
                            S up erin tend ent B ernard D ean M URRAY
                            S up erin tend ent R oger G R E E N W O O D
                            Bruce D av id GROBBELAAR*
                            C h ie f S u p erin ten d en t Jo h n A rth u r NESBIT
                            S up erin ten den t Jo h n H arris B R O U G H A M
                            D etective S u p erin ten d en t G rah am McKAY
                            Inspector Paul HAND-DAVIS
                            C h ie f Inspector R obert W allace CREA SER
                            Inspector P eter C olin D A R L IN G
                            Inspector D avid BULLAS
                            Inspector G o rd o n SYKES
                            In sp ecto r R obert P U R D Y
                            Inspector Stephen ELLIS
                            Inspector Jo h n Joseph BEN N E T T
                            Sergeant Stephen Jo h n PAYNE
                            PC G rah am D U F F Y
                            PC D. EVANS
                            P C A ndrew BEST
                            PC B rian R obert H U C K S T E P P
                            PC A listair Jo h n TAYLOR
                             Sergeant Jo h n M O R G A N
                            W PC A lison TAGG
                             Sergeant Lionel P R O C T O R
                             W P C Jan e Borthw ick B U RN LEES
                             Sergeant P hilip Sidney SM IT H
                             PC Stephen Frank FRY
                             PC F. N. G R U N N IL L
                             W P C E lizabeth Jayne W ILSO N
                             Sergeant W illiam C am eron CRA W FO RD
                             PC Paul B RA N STO N
                             W PC Jacqueline B U R T O N
                             Sergeant R obert B U R N S
                             W P C H elen Kay PE A R SO N
                             PC A lexander A IT K IN
                             Sergeant Paul B U R M A N
                             PC S tephen A ndrew SH EA R W O O D
                             Sergeant E dw ard H IG G IN S
                             Sergeant P eter C H A PM A N
                             P C P eter E dw ard SM IT H
                             PC G e rra rd St C lare F IN N E G A N
                              PC D av id A lfred IL L IN G W O R T H
                             W P C F iona R IC H A R D SO N
                              PC Jam es O scar PACKER
                              PC M ichael B U X T O N
                              D etective Sergeant Paul M O R T O N
                              D etective Sergeant D av id G U T C H E R
                              P C M ichael V incent RYAN
                              Sergeant M ichael G O D D A R D
                              P eter W ELLS
                              P C Trevor B IC H A R D
                              Jo h n E d m u n d TO W LER
                              Frank G O D L E Y
                              P hilip M artin SA X TO N


                                             69
 PC H aro ld G U E ST
 In sp ecto r Ian T U R N E R
 C h ie f Inspector M cROBBIE
 P C K enneth R O O K
 FC O P Susan E lizabeth DAVIES
 Station O fficer J SWAIN
 S tatio n O fficer F L E T C H E R
 A.C.O . A. D. H O R N SB Y
 L eading F irem an H O U SLEY
 G eorge LLOYD
 R ay m o n d Jo h n LLOYD
 B rian SAYLES
 R an d o lp h SAYNOR
 Stephen M ichael C O PE L A N D
A lbert R H O D E S
Steven C harles R H O D E S
W ayne A ustin H A LL
A llan Jo h n H A SK IN S
Stu art R o lan d T H O R P E
K en n eth CASTLEY
Jo h n P hilip CASTLEY
A lbert R onald M A R SH
R obert W illiam COBB
B rian R ID G E
R ich ard W illiam BEADSLEY
M alcolm BAIN
Stephen C raig CA R D W ELL
G ary VAUX
A lan K eith SEAM AN
Frederick M A D D O X
D r W illiam PU R C E L L
Station O fficer Patrick H IG G IN S
Station O fficer Paul A nthony Jam es EASON
C o n tro l S u p erin ten d en t R ay m o n d C LA R K E
D ep u ty C h ie f M etropolitan A m bulance O fficer A lan H O P K IN S
C h ie f M etro p o litan A m bulance O fficer A lbert PAGE
Law rence YOXALL
D av id Jo h n W ALKER
M aurice KAY QC
D r A ndrew Jolyon BY RN E
G ra h a m KELLY
D r Jo h n A SH T O N
D r N aderassen C arpoosam y C U R P E N
K enneth EVANS
G len K IR T O N
D r W ilfred EA STW O O D
D rG ly n P H IL L IPS
Ferenc M O R A T H
A ndrew SA N D E R SO N
PC P hilip H O O SO N
PC G a ry C A M M O C K
D av id BOW NES
Inspector Clive W illiam CALVERT
G ra h a m H enry M A CK RELL
Inspector Steven R obert SEW ELL
D ouglas Jo h n LO CK
G a rry TAYLOR
D avid G eorge Lawrence WATTS
S u p erin ten d en t Terence W illis STU A RT
PC B rian W A U G H



              70
   In addition, statem ents of evidence from many others w ere adm itted to the Inquiry. Som e 80 letters w ere
received from M em bers of the H ouse of C om m ons and three from M em bers o f the H ouse of Lords. Some
1,470 letters from the general public w ere received. O rganisations w ho have subm itted evidence addressed to
P a rt II of the Inquiry will be specifically listed in the Final R eport.

* Statem ent read to the Inquiry




                                                                   71



                                    Pnntcd in the United Kingdom for H er M ajesty’s Stationery Office
                                        D d 0503228 8/89 C50 O /N o. 8406270 (3840) 4450
HMSO
BOOKS
HMSO publications are available from:

HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
TelephoneordersOl-873 9090
General enquiries 01-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)

HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holborn, London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (Counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B 1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061 -834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181

HMSO’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

And through good booksellers




 ISBN 0 10 1076525
                     HOME OFFICE


            THE HILLSBOROUGH
             STADIUM DISASTER
                       15 APRIL 1989


                   INQUIRY BY
         THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


                     FINAL REPORT

                            Presented to Parliament
               by the Secretary ofState for the Home Department
                          by Command o f Her M ajesty
                                 January 1990




                             LONDON: HMSO
                                 £10.50 net

Cm 962
                     HOME OFFICE


            THE HILLSBOROUGH
             STADIUM DISASTER
                       15 APRIL 1989


                   INQUIRY BY
         THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


                     FINAL REPORT

                            Presented to Parliament
               by the Secretary ofState for the Home Department
                          by Command o f Her Majesty
                                  January 1990




                             LONDON: HMSO



Cm 962
                                                  CONTENTS
                                                                                Paragraph      Page
INTRODUCTION                                                                                      l
PART I - FOOTBALL: PRESENT AND FUTURE
C H A P T E R 1 - T H R E E SO M BR E LESSONS A F T E R H IL L SB O R O U G H                     4
             i.     P revious R eports U n h eed ed                                      19
             ii.    “It C ouldn’t H ap p en H ere”                                       24
             iii.   A Blight on Football                                                 26
                      O ld G ro u n d s                                                  27
                    Poor Facilities                                                      29
                    H ooliganism                                                         34
                    Segregation                                                          37
                    W hat does Segregation Achieve?                                      45
                    W ho are the Hooligans?                                              46
                    Alcohol                                                              49
                    Po o r Leadership                                                    51
C H A P T E R 2 - A B E T T E R F U T U R E F O R FO O TBA LL                                    12
             All-Seating                                                                61
            T h e T rend in the U K                                                     73
            Sir N o rm a n C hester C entre Research                                    77
            E urope                                                                78
            T h e Football Spectators Act 1989                                          84
            A ssociation Football only o r D esignated G rounds?                        85
            Phasing                                                                91
            Planning G ro u n d Im provem ents                                       95
            An A dvisory D esign Council                                             96
            R esearch                                                               97
            Finance                                                                99
            T h e Football T rust (FT) an d th e Football G ro u nd s
            Im provem ent T rust (FG IT )                                               100
            Fiscal C onsiderations                                                      103
            (a)    VAT on the Spot th e Ball C o m p etitio n                            104
            (b) Pool B etting Tax                                                        105
            (c)    C apital Allowances                                                 109
            T ransfer Fees                                                            112
            A Levy on Transfer Fees?                                                  114
            Tax “A nom aly”                                                           115
            C lub Financing                                                           116
            U pgraded Stadia o r N ew Stadia                                          119
            St Jo h nsto n e                                                          121
            U trech t                                                              122
            N im es                                                               123
            Local A uthority A ssistance                                                124
            G ro u n d Sharing                                                          126
            Super-Stadia                                                                129
            L eadership a n d E xam ple                                                 131
             Fam ily an d M em bership Areas                                            13 5
             T h e D isabled                                                            137
             C onclusion                                                                138
                                                            HI
                                                                             Paragraph     Page

PART II - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
C H A P T E R 3 - T H E FR A M E W O R K                                                    24
             M in im u m S tan d ard s o f Safety                                   139
             Legislation for Safety                                                 141
             G reen G u ide                                                         146
             (i)    T h e Advisory Group                                            152
             (ii)   A Review B ody                                                  154
C H A P T E R 4 - SUBSTANTIVE PR O V ISIO N S                                               28
             C apacity                                                          j    59
             C ounting T h e m In                                                   173
             G angways                                                              175
             Fencing                                                                179
                    i.     H igh Spiked Fences                                      185
                    ii.    A dequate M easures to Prevent P itch Invasions          18 6
                           Safety C orridors                                        193
                           M oats                                                   194
                    iii.   Em ergency Escape                                        196
                           T h e G ates at N im es                                  200
                        G ates U nlocked                                            201
                        A uthorising Access to the P itch                           203
                        M on ito rin g Crow d D ensity                              204
                        C uttin g E qu ip m en t                                    205
            F unctions o f Police a n d Stewards                                    206
                    C osts o f Police an d Stewards                                 2 10
                   D ivision o f F u nctio n s                                      211
                  W ritten S tatem ent o f In ten t                                 213
            Police C o m m an d ers                                                 2 15
            R ate o f A dm ission                                                   216
            C o m m u n icatio n s                                                  219
            O th e r Topics in the G reen G u id e                                  225
            C o -o rd in atio n o f Emergency Services                              228
            F irst A id, M edical Facilities an d A m bulances                      229
            Status o f th e G reen G u id e                                         233
            R evision o f the G reen G u id e                                       234
            Sports G ro u n d s W ithin P a rt III o f the Fire Safety
            a n d Safety o fP laces o f Sport Act 1987                              235
            Sports G ro u n d s W ithin P a rt IV o f the Fire Safety
            a n d Safety o fP laces o f S port Act 1987                             240

PART III - CROWD CONTROL AND HOOLIGANISM
C H A P T E R 5 - PO L IC E P L A N N IN G A N D C O N T R O L                              42
             Police C ontrol R oom                                                  249
                                                                                Paragraph          Page


CH A PTER 6-A L C O H O L                                                                     43
         Legislation                                                                    251
            Alcohol Sales in G rounds?                                                  255
            A rrests                                                              261
            C losing Bars                                                               262
            Early Kick-Offs                                                             263
            Sunday M atches                                                             265

C H A P T E R 7 - T IC K E T S A N D T O U T S                                                      46
             In fo rm atio n on Tickets an d Signs                                      266
             C o m p u ter Record o f Tickets                                           268
             Fans W ithout Tickets                                                      269
             Police Policy                                                              270
             A ll-ticket M atches                                                       272
             T outs                                                              273

C H A P T E R 8 - PO L IC E STRA TEG IES A GAINST H O O L IG A N S                                  48
             C autious O p tim ism                                                      280
             CCTV                                                                 282
            N atio n al Football Intelligence U n it                                    287

C H A P T E R 9 -O F F E N C E S IN T H E G R O U N D                                                50

C H A P T E R 10 - CLU B STRA TEG IES A GAINST H O O L IG A N S                                      52
             L uton                                                              303
             B enefits o f the Schem e                                                  308
             Ban All Away Supporters?                                                   312
             Away M em bers O nly                                                       316

C H A P T E R 11 - O T H E R POSSIBLE M EA SU R ES A G AINST H O O L IG A N S                        55
             Exclusion O rders                                                          320
             E nforcing Exclusion by A ttendance C entre O rd e r                     323
             Is it Practicable?                                                       325
             A ttendance C entres                                                     326
             R esource Im plications                                                  331
             Fairness                                                              332
             Tagging                                                               335


PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989
C H A P T E R 1 2 - O B J E C T A N D PR O V ISIO N S O F T H E ACT                                  58
             Provisions o f P art I                                                     339
             C o n tents o f the Schem e                                                344
             Provisions o f P art II                                                    347




                                                          v
                                                                                        Paragraph   Page
C H A P T E R 13 - T H E N A TIO N A L M E M B E R S H IP SC H EM E                                   61
            G eneral R equirem ents o f th e IT T an d SO R                                  353
            G ro u n d M odifications                                                        355
            A pplications for M em bership                                                   356
            V alidation Procedures                                                           359
            Provision a n d U p d atin g o f In form atio n to Clubs                         361
            E xploitation o f the System                                                     363
            M em bership C ards                                                              364
            E ntry Checking Procedures                                                       367
            T urnstile A larm                                                                368
            D etection                                                                       370
            System Contingency                                                               372
            Perform ance a n d E nviro n m en tal C onditions                                373
            S um m ary                                                                       376

C H A P T E R 14 - A R G U M E N T S R A ISE D BY C R IT IC S O F T H E SC H EM E                    65
            (i)     D ispro p o rtion ate?                                                   377
            (ii)    U nfair?
            (iii)   C asual S pectators
            (iv)    D im in ish ed C lub R evenue
            (v)     D anger o f Congestion a n d D iso rd er
            (vi)    Will th e Schem e D efeat H ooligans?
            (vii) Police R esources
            A rgum ents R elevant to th is Inquiry                                           378

C H A P T E R 15 - D A N G E R O F C O N G E S T IO N O R D IS O R D E R                             67
            P resent R isk o f Congestion                                                    380
            A dditional T im e to Check C ards                                               382
            (i)     Procedures at the T urnstiles                                            386
            (ii)    T h e Technology                                                         392
            D em o n stratio n                                                               395
            Police A pprehensions                                                            397
            C o m p u ter R eliability                                                       398
            R elaxation in an Em ergency                                                     400
            Tests                                                                            401
            H u m a n G uinea-pigs                                                           407
            D isru p tio n a n d Sabotage                                                    408

C H A P T E R 16 - W IL L T H E SC H E M E W E E D O U T H O O LIG A N S?                            72
            (i)     Exclusion from the G ro u n d                                            411
            (ii)    E lim inatio n from th e A rea a n d R outes N ear the G ro u n d        415

C H A P T E R 17 - PO L IC E R ESO U RC ES                                                           74

C H A P T E R 18 - STRA TEG IES A G AINST H O O L IG A N ISM - C O N C L U SIO N S                   75
             Suggested Strategy                                                              425
                                                                                        Paragraph
           - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS
            All-Seated A ccom m odation                                                         1
            A dvisory D esign C ouncil                                                          5
            N atio n al Inspectorate an d Review Body                                           6
            M ax im um C apacities for Terraces                                                 7
            Filling a n d M onitoring Terraces                                                 11
            Gangways                                                                           13
            Fences a n d G ates                                                                14
            C rush B arriers                                                                   22
            Safety C ertificates                                                               24
            D uties o f Each Football C lub                                                    32
            Police Planning                                                                    44
            C om m unications                                                                  54
            C o -ordination o f Emergency Services                                             59
            F irst Aid, M edical F acilities an d A m bulances                                 64
            Offences a n d Penalties                                                           70
            G reen G uide                                                                      74
A PPE N D IC E S                                                                        83
            1.     O rganisations S ubm itting E vidence to th e Inquiry.                             85
            2.     Sports G ro u n d s Visited.                                                       88
            3.     R eport o f the Technical W orking Party.                                          89
            4.     F inal R eport o f M r Justice Popplewell’s Inquiry: C h ap ter 2.                 97
            5.     Stadion G algenw aard, U trecht.                                                  105
            6.     Perim eter fences at Liverpool (Anfield) an d E verton
                     (G oodison Park).                                                              106/7
            7.     T h e m o at at U trecht.                                                         108
            8.     T h e perim eter gates at N im es (Stade des Costieres).                          109


Photographs are reproduced by courtesy o f:-
B allast N e d a m      (A ppendices 5 an d 7)
M r N o rm a n Bush     (A ppendix 6)
BBT G argini            (A ppendix 8)
T h e R t H o n D av id W addington Q C, M P
Secretary o f State for the H om e D e p a rtm e n t


                          THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                      15 APRIL 1989

                                            FIN AL REPORT O F INQ U IRY

                                                       IN TR O D U C TIO N

  1. O n 17 A pril 19891 was a p p o in ted by your predecessor, th e R t H on D ouglas H u rd CBE, M P to carry out
an In q u iry w ith th e following term s o f reference:

  “To in q u ire into th e events at Sheffield W ednesday Football G ro u n d on 15 A pril 1989 an d to m ake
  reco m m en d atio n s ab o u t the needs o f crowd control a n d safety at sports events.”

   2. Two Assessors were ap p o inted to assist me: M r B rian Jo h n so n CBE, Q P M , D L, C h ief C onstable o f
L ancashire, an d Professor L eonard M au n d er OBE, BSc, P h D , ScD, FEng, F I M ech E, Professor o f M echanical
E ngineering a t the U niversity o f N ew castle u p o n Tyne.

   3. T h e first stage o f th e Inquiry was prim arily concerned w ith the investigation o f events at H illsborough
S tadiu m on 15 A pril 1989 w hen 95 people were crushed to d eath at a Cup semi-final m atch betw een Liverpool
a n d N o ttin g h am Forest.

   4. O ver 31 days betw een 15 M ay a n d 29 June, I h eard oral evidence from 174 w itnesses at a public hearing
in Sheffield. I also received m uch w ritten evidence by way o f subm issions an d letters.

  5. O n 1 A ugust 1 9 8 9 1 presented an In terim R eport setting o u t m y findings as to how and why th e disaster
occurred. Also, in accordance w ith your predecessor’s wishes, I m ad e in terim recom m endations aim ed at
preventing any fu rth er d isaster an d im proving safety in th e short term .

   6. T h e In te rim R eport an d its reco m m en d atio n s h a d o f necessity to be m ad e quickly so th a t action could be
taken before th e start o f th e new football season due to open in m id August. D espite all th e speed I could
m uster, th e recom m en d atio n s left very little tim e for pre-season action, especially in Scotland w here the
fixture list started earlier th a n in E ngland a n d Wales. I m u st pay trib u te to the clubs, local authorities, police
an d o th e r services for responding so prom ptly an d for im plem enting the reco m m en datio n s so wholeheartedly.

   7. In m y In te rim R ep o rt I in d icated th a t it w ould be necessary to conduct w ider a n d deeper investigations
before delivering a F inal R ep o rt on th e needs o f crowd control and safety for the future. Accordingly, I invited
an d have considered a large n u m b e r o f w ritten subm issions describing present practices an d problem s and
suggesting fu tu re changes. T hose w ho have co n trib u ted are listed at A ppendix 1 .1 a m extrem ely grateful to all
o f th e m for th e ir tim e an d th e ir views. I expect there are a n u m b e r o f contributors an d correspondents w ho
m ay look in vain for co m m en t on each an d every p o in t they have raised. I hope they will u n d erstan d th a t tim e
an d space m ake it necessary to be selective a n d to have regard to the m ain issues.

  8. I have also h ad n um ero u s inform al m eetings w ith those representing relevant public bodies, clubs and
spectator interests. T hese have been conducted as private discussion sessions rath er th an hearings o f oral
evidence thereby enabling controversial issues to be explored a n d theories tested.

  9. In all o f this I have co ntin u ed to be assisted by the tw o Assessors. Each holds a professional a p p o in tm en t
carrying heavy responsibility a n d I am deeply grateful to b o th for devoting so m uch tim e to assisting me. T h eir
co n trib u tio n s have been o f the highest value. W hile the sole responsibility for this rep ort is m ine, I am
com forted in the knowledge th a t b o th Assessors agree w ith it.

    10. A t m y request, Professor M au n d er chaired a Technical W orking Party to review the technical aspects o f
 the H om e Office G uide to Safety a t Sports G ro u n d s (1986 edition), “T h e G reen G u id e” . Each m em b er o f his
 team has m uch relevant experience an d the team was well qualified for its task. I am m ost grateful for the
 co-operation a n d efforts o f each m em ber. T he R eport o f the Technical W orking Party is at A ppendix 3.

    11. In the course o f the Inquiry, th e two Assessors an d I have betw een us visited 31 sports grounds. T hey are
 listed at A ppendix 2. O f those, 24 were soccer grounds, b u t we also atten d ed at grounds featuring Rugby
 U n io n , Rugby League, cricket, ten n is an d golf. I wish to reco rd ou r thanks to the club officials w ho so readily


                                                                 1
an d hospitably facilitated o u r visits; also to the officers o f local governm ent, the police an d the emergency
services w ho together w ith club officials co n d ucted us ro u n d the grounds, ex plained th e ir operations and
answ ered o u r q uestions fully an d frankly. Seeing crowd control and behav io u r before, d uring an d after a m atch
from various sections o f the viewing areas was an essential source o f first h a n d knowledge. It brought alive the
w ritten a n d oral reports we received.

   12. I should like to express my thanks to the H o m e Office team w ho have staffed this Inquiry so well. M r
R obert W halley was ap p o in ted as its Secretary. H e has h an d led all the ad m inistrativ e arrangem ents
im peccably a n d has given m uch invaluable advice an d assistance on every aspect o f the Inquiry. H e was ably
an d diligently assisted by M r J o n a th a n Sweet, M rs M argaret W ither, M r Tony M oore, M rs K ate H um ph ries
from the H om e Office a n d m y own C lerk M r E rnest Pott. I also renew my thanks to the W est M idlands Police,
and, in particular, to M r Geoffrey D ear Q PM , D L, LLB, the C h ief C onstable, an d M r M ervyn Jones MSc,
A ssistant C h ie f C onstable in full-tim e charge o f the investigation, w ho have c o n tin u ed to provide m e w ith
helpful inform ation at th is second stage o f the Inquiry.

   13. H aving m ade m y findings as to the events at H illsborough, I d o n o t in th is repo rt say any m ore ab o u t
th em save by way o f illustration. I am aware th a t inquests are still to be held, civil proceedings are in m o tio n
an d the possibility o f crim inal charges is u n d e r consideration. However, those are n o t m atters for m e. I
therefore tu rn now to b ro a d e r issues as prom ised in p aragraph 304 o f my In terim R eport.

   14. My term s o f reference are extrem ely wide. T hey em brace crowd control a n d safety at sports events o f all
kinds. However, crowd problem s are directly related to the n atu re o f the event an d the n u m b ers attending it.
Realistically, this m ean s th a t atte n tio n needs to be concen trated on events w ith in the scope o f the Safety o f
Sports G ro u n d Act 1975 and the F ire Safety an d Safety o fP laces o f Sport A ct 1987. Even m ore specifically, the
em phasis in this R eport is especially upon football. T he H illsborough d isaster an d in d eed o th er disasters
before it occurred in crow ded football stadia. T h e n um bers an d the atm osphere at a football m atch have
created special problem s such as overcrow ding an d m isb eh avio u r not, so far, to be fo u n d to a like degree
elsewhere.

    15. T h a t football is a special case has been expressly recognised by the G o v ern m en t in p rom oting the
Football Spectators A ct 1989. T he Bill received the Royal A ssent on 16 N ovem ber 1989. It h a d com m enced its
course through P arliam en t before the H illsborough disaster. Expressly because o f th a t disaster an d the setting
up o f this Inquiry it reached the statu te book u n d e r unusual conditions. It was always to be an enabling Act
whose im p lem en tatio n w ould require a S tatutory In stru m en t. In o rd er to have the provisions o f the Act in
place as soon as possible, the G ov ern m ent d ecided to proceed w ith it forthw ith, n o tw ithstan d ing H illsborough
a n d this Inquiry. T h a t decision was subject to an undertak in g to bring the m a tte r back before P arliam ent on
two separate occasions. First, before the ap p o in tm e n t o f the Football M em bership A uth o rity u n d e r the Act;
secondly, to debate the schem e w hich the Act provides should be draw n u p by th a t A uthority.

   16. I was expressly told by your predecessor up o n my a p p o in tm en t th a t m y term s o f reference included
consideration o f the n ational m em b ersh ip schem e pro v id ed for in the Bill. T h a t was confirm ed on n um erous
occasions by M inisters in the course o f the Bill’s passage through Parliam ent. It was m ad e clear th a t although
the Act w ould be on the statute book before m y Final R eport, P arliam en t w ould have the o p p o rtu n ity to
consider any observations I m ight m ake, including any ab o u t the n atio nal m em b ersh ip schem e. T hus, to take
only two exam ples, M r N icholas Ridley, then Secretary o f State for the E n v iro n m en t, said on the Second
R eading o f the Bill on 27 Jun e 1989:

  “ I began by referring to Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry. I will em phasise again now w hat I said at the
  beginning. P arliam en t will have n o t one b u t two o p p o rtu n ities to d eb ate a n d vote on the n ational
  m em bership schem e after we have received the rep o rt and in the light o f any com m ents th a t Justice Taylor
  m ay m ake on the scheme. By proceeding w ith the Bill now, we can p u t the fram ew ork for th e schem e in place
  an d m ake it possible to move on rapidly w ith the schem e, if Parliam en t agrees th a t we should d o so w hen it
  has seen w hat L ord Justice Taylor has to say.”
  (O fficial R eport, colum n 850).

Secondly, a t the C o m m ittee stage on 6 July 1989, M r C olin M oynihan, th e M inister for Sport, said:

  “ I am certain th a t L ord Justice Taylor will feel in n o way in h ibited by con sid eratio n o f the Bill in ou r
  suggested form at, because we specifically a m en d ed the Bill to provide for the Secretary o f State’s approval o f
  the schem e after the final re p o rt    the Bill is am en ded to enable the H ouse to consider in detail the
  reco m m end atio n s before we establish the Football M em bership A uthority to draw up th e schem e           To
  hypothesise on w hether Lord Justice Taylor is in favour o f a national m em bership schem e o r w hether he


                                                            2
  m ay n o t even co m m en t on it, is totally irrelevant because the Bill provides for the H ouse o f C om m ons and
  H ouse o f Lords to consider the rep o rt before setting up a Football M em bership A uthority.”
  (Official R eport, colum n 56).

    17. It m ust be a rare if n ot unique situ atio n for a judge, ap p o in ted to conduct an Inquiry, to have w ithin his
rem it con sid eratio n o f the m erits an d provisions o f an Act o f Parliam ent already i.. place. It can n o t be for a
ju d ge to op in e u p o n th e w isdom o r term s o f an Act expressing the established will o f P arliam ent. But, where
Parliam en t h as passed an Act in such term s an d u p on such undertakings as expressly to provide th a t the
Inquiry ju dg e be u n in h ib ited in com m enting up o n it an d th a t P arliam ent should have the o p p o rtu n ity to
consider h is com m ents in fu rth er debate, th e n I conceive it to be his du ty to express his views. M y doing so
should n o t be interp reted as showing any lack o f the respect an d deference du e to Parliam ent. N o t to do so,
against the background I have described, w ould surely be thought surprising if n ot pusillanim ous.

   18. In P art I o f this R eport I state som e lessons to be learnt from H illsborough, exam ine the state o f football
today an d propose a range o f m easures to give it a b etter future. In P art I I I consider, in detail, m easures to
im prove safety at sports grounds. P art III is concerned w ith crowd control at sports grounds an d various
strategies for dealing w ith hooligans. In P art IV I consider the provisions o f the 1989 Act regarding the national
m em bership scheme. Finally, at the end o f the text, I set o u t my R ecom m endations. So as to avoid confusion, I
have n o t set o ut my Interim R ecom m endations for th e purpose o f com parison. H ardly any excisions have been
m ade. W here I have decided to repeat o r am en d the In terim R ecom m endations, they are included in the single
list o f Final R ecom m endations. I h ope this R eport an d th e Final R ecom m endations m ay be instru m en tal in
p ro m o tin g b e tte r an d safer conditions at sports grounds in the future.




18 Jan u ary 1990                                                                                      PE T E R TAYLOR
                        PART I - FOOTBALL: PRESENT AND FUTURE

                                                     CHAPTER 1


                          THREE SO M BR E L E SSO N S AFTER H ILLSBO RO U G H

i. Previous Reports Unheeded
   19. It is a depressing an d chastening fact th a t m ine is the nin th official rep o rt covering crowd safety and
control at football grounds. A fter eight previous reports an d three ed ition s o f the G reen G uide, it seems
astounding th a t 95 people could die from overcrow ding before the very eyes o f those controlling the event. In
Jan u ary 1986, M r Justice Popplewell, w hose rep o rt following the B radford D isaster was the eighth in the
series, sum m arised those o f his seven predecessors. T he S hortt R eport o f 1924 followed d iso rd er a t the C up
Final o f 1923. T he M oelw yn H ughes R eport o f 1946 followed the d isaster at Bolton W anderers ground w hen
overcrow ding caused 33 deaths. In 1966 the G ov ern m en t com m issioned the C hester R eport on “T h e State o f
A ssociation Football”. T he H arrington R eport o f 1968 drew a tten tio n to problem s o f crowd b eh av io u r an d led
to the Lang R eport o f 1969 on the sam e subject. In 1972, L ord W heatley’s R eport o n Crowd Safety at Sports
G ro u n d s followed the disaster at Ibrox Park w here 66 spectators died. T h e M cE lhone R eport o f 1977 on
Football C row d B ehaviour o f Scottish supporters was com m issioned by the Secretary o f State for Scotland. In
1984 an Official W orking G rou p on Football Spectator Violence set u p by the D e p a rtm e n t o f E nvironm ent
p resented a fu rth er report.

  20. As a result o f the W heatley R eport, th e first edition o f th e G reen G u id e was issued in 1973, and
Parliam en t passed the Safety o f Sports G ro u n d s Act 1975. A second editio n o f th e G reen G u id e was issued in
1976 a n d a th ird edition in 1986 in co rp o rated recom m endations m ade by M r Justice Popplewell.

  21. Introducing his excellent an d concise su m m ary o f the previous reports, M r Justice Popplewell said:

  “ alm ost all the m atters into w hich I have been asked to inquire an d alm o st all the solutions I have proposed,
  have been previously considered in detail by m any distinguished Inquiries over a perio d o f 60 years”.

  Because his citations from those earlier reports are still highly relevant, I ap p en d his sum m ary o f th em at
A ppendix 4.

   22. In my In terim R eport I set o u t w hat h app ened at H illsborough an d why. T h a t it was allowed to happen,
despite all the accum ulated w isdom o f so m any previous reports an d guidelines m u st indicate th a t the lessons
o f p ast disasters a n d the recom m en d atio n s following them h a d n o t been taken sufficiently to h eart. I
appreciate how easy it is to criticise w ith hindsight a n d th a t a new situ atio n can always arise in h u m an affairs
w hich has n ot previously been envisaged. B ut m any o f the deficiencies a t H illsborough had been envisaged.

  23. T h e M oelwyn H ughes R eport in 1924 h ad stressed the need to start controlling th e crowd well back
from the en trance to the ground. T h e G reen G u id e required th a t “Turnstiles should be o f such num bers as to
ad m it spectators at a rate w hereby no unduly large crowds are kept w aiting for ad m issio n ” (paragraph 44).
C h ap ter 8 o f the G u id e required “A rrangem ents should be m ade ... to contain pressures before they reach
dangerous p ro p o rtio n s”. C hapter 16 laid dow n m axim um capacity w hich was grossly exceeded in the fatal
pens at H illsborough. Both the G reen G u id e (C h ap ter 15) an d M r Justice Popplewell h a d stated the need for
gates in th e p erim eter fencing to be ad eq u ate to p e rm it escape on to the p itch in an emergency. W hy were these
reco m m en d atio n s an d others n o t followed? I suggest two m ain reasons. First, insufficient concern an d
vigilance for the safety an d well-being o f spectators. T his was c o m p o u n d ed by a preoccupation w ith m easures
to control hooliganism . Secondly, com placency w hich led all parties to th in k th a t since d isaster h a d not
occurred on previous occasions it w ould n o t h ap p en this tim e. B ut there is no p o in t in holding inquiries or
publishing guidance unless the reco m m end atio n s are followed diligently. T h a t m ust be the first lesson.

ii. “It Couldn’t Happen Here”
  24. Amazingly, com placency was still to be found even after H illsborough. It was chilling to h ear th e sam e
refrain from directors at several clubs I v isite d :-

      “H illsborough was h orrible - bu t, o f course, it couldn’t have hap p en ed here.”

   C ouldn’t it? T h e H illsborough g round was regarded by m any as one o f the best in the country. It was selected


                                                            4
by the FA for the C up sem i-final a n d thought by th em to be entirely suitable. T he identical fixture h a d passed
o ff uneventfully the previous year. I have little d o u b t th a t if th e d isaster scenario h ad been described to the
m anagem ent a t H illsborough p rio r to 15 April, they too w ould have said “O f course, it couldn’t h appen here”.
Yet som ething like it h ad hap p en ed at H illsborough in 1981, albeit w ith less dire results. M oreover, I am
satisfied from eyewitness accounts I have received th a t there have been m any o th er occasions when
overcrow ding has led, at various grounds ro u n d the country, to a genuine apprehension o f im pending disaster
through crushing, averted only by good fortune. I have heard from Police C om m anders at a n u m b er o f the
grounds I have visited how relieved they are th a t capacities have been reduced in the interests o f safety.

  25. So, although th e operational errors on 15 A pril were special to one ground an d one day, the lack o f
precau tio n s against overcrowding was not unique. I do n o t believe th a t sufficient safety m easures were being
applied at all o th er grounds. T h e lesson here is th a t H illsborough should not be regarded as a freak occurrence,
incapable o f happening elsewhere. All those responsible for certifying, using and supervising sports grounds
should take a h ard look at th e ir arrangem ents an d keep doing so. C om placency is the enem y o f safety.

iii. A B light on Football
   26. Football is o u r national game. We gave it to the world. But its im age in o u r country has been m uch
tarnished. In m y Interim R eport I concen trated on overcrow ding because it was the cause o f the H illsborough
disaster. B ut w ider an d deeper inqu iry shows th a t overcrow ding is only one feature am ongst a n u m b er causing
danger o r m arrin g football as a spectator sport. T h e picture revealed is o f a general m alaise o r blight over the
gam e due to a n u m b er o f factors. Principally these are: old grounds, p o o r facilities, hooliganism , excessive
drinking an d p o o r leadership. Crow d safety a n d crowd b eh av io ur w ith which I am concerned are closely
related to th e quality o f the accom m odation an d facilities offered an d to th e standards w hich are encouraged
an d enforced. So I th in k it necessary to consider all these aspects.

O ld G rounds
   27. Because we were first into the field, m ost o f o u r football grounds are now elderly. Between 1889 and
1910, 58 o f th e clubs belonging to the cu rren t League m oved into th e grounds they now occupy.* M any o f
th em are ill-placed on cram ped sites boxed into residential areas. W hen they were built, they were not intended
to cater for th e stream o f coaches, vans a n d cars w hich now arrive an d require parking space. Inside the
grounds decay an d d ilap id atio n are often extensive. T h e terrace accom m odation, in particular, is often
uncovered an d little has been done to im prove th e layout in accordance w ith m o d e m expectations. T h is is
chiefly because the safety an d com fort o f those on th e terraces has not been regarded as a priority. In fairness,
lim itatio n s o f space at som e grounds m ake it very difficult to achieve a layout app ro p riate to present day
needs. By contrast, clubs in E urope an d South A m erica have the advantage o f grounds bu ilt m ore recently on
m ore spacious sites an d p lanned to m eet m o d ern conditions. W here im provem ents have been m ade to
o u r grounds they have often been patchy an d piecem eal. T his ap proach is itself a th reat to safety. To b u ild a
seated stan d over a standing area, to enlarge o r divide a terrace, to rearrange exits a n d entrances o r to m odify
tu rn stile areas - any o f these m easures is fraught w ith safety im plications. Yet often such changes have been
m ade to achieve one purpose w ith o u t sufficient thought ab o u t the adverse side-effects w hich could result.

  28. T h is was exem plified by th e sequence o f alterations at th e Leppings Lane en d at Hillsborough. R adial
fences were installed to d ivide up the terraces; this led to a red u ctio n in the system o f crush barriers. T h e area
inside th e tu rn stiles was altered for purposes o f segregation. O ld signs were not rem oved; new signs were
inadequate. T h e result was a bew ildering com plex w hich c o n trib u ted to th e delivery o f excessive num bers
dow n the tu n n el into pens 3 a n d 4.

Poor Facilities
   29. Football spectators are invited by the clubs for en tertain m en t an d enjoym ent. O ften, however, the
facilities provided for them have been lam entable. A part from the d iscom fort o f standing on a terrace exposed
to th e elem ents, the o rd in ary provisions to be expected at a place o f en tertain m en t are som etim es not merely
basic b u t squalid. A t som e grounds th e lavatories are prim itive in design, poorly m ain tain ed an d inadequate in
num ber. T h is not only denies th e spectator an essential facility he is entitled to expect. It directly lowers
stan dard s o f conduct. T h e practice o f urinatin g against walls o r even on the terraces has becom e endem ic an d
is followed by m en w ho w ould not behave th a t way elsewhere. T h e police, w ho w ould charge a m an for
u rin atin g in the street, eith er tolerate it in football grounds o r do no m ore th an give a verbal rebuke. T hus
crowd co n du ct becom es degraded an d o th e r m isbehaviour seem s less out o f place.

   30. T h e refreshm ents available to supporters are often lim ited an d o f indifferent quality. They are sold in
*Inglis: Football G rounds o f Great Britain p 10



                                                            5
surrounding streets from m obile carts an d inside m any grounds from o th er carts o r from shoddy sheds. Fans
eat th e ir ham burgers o r chips standing outside in all weathers. T here is a prevailing stench o f stewed onions.
A dequate num bers o f bins for rubbish are often not available; so w rappings, co ntainers an d d etritu s are simply
dropped. T h is inhospitable scene ten d s to breed b a d m anners an d p o o r behaviour. T he atm osphere does not
encourage pride in the ground o r consideration for others. I accept th a t m any fans are q uite co nten t to eat on
th e h o o f w hen visiting a m atch, b u t there is no reason why the fare available should n o t be w holesom e, varied
an d decently served from clean an d attractive outlets. Fast food establishm ents m eeting these requirem ents
are readily to be fou n d at railway statio n s an d on high streets; why n ot at football grounds?

    31. A t m ost grounds little a tte m p t has been m ad e to provide pre-m atch entertain m en t. To d o so could have
a double advantage. It w ould give the spectators m ore value for th e ir money. It could also bring them in earlier
thereby avoiding congestion at the turnstiles in the last few m inu tes before kick-off. Such en tertain m en t as has
been trie d has m ostly failed to appeal to the spectators. They do n ot seem draw n by th e m usical offerings o f the
disc jockey o r by m arching bands. T h e football supporters’ organisations com plain th a t supporters have not
h ith erto been m uch consulted ab o u t th is o r ab o u t anything else affecting th e ir well-being an d enjoym ent.

  32. In giving this dism al account o f the football scene, I have taken care to use the w ords “o ften ”, “at m ost
grounds” o r “at m any grounds”. I acknowledge th a t there are notable exceptions w here great im provem ents
have been effected an d I do n o t suggest th a t every disagreeable feature I have described is to be found at every
ground. Nevertheless, the overall picture o f co nd itio ns an d facilities to be expected by a standing spectator is
depressing. It is in stark co ntrast to th e different world, only yards away, in th e B oard R oom a n d th e lucrative
executive boxes. I ap preciate th a t they cater for an affluent clientele a n d bring in m uch-needed revenue. N o
one w ould expect o r indeed w ant th e ir plush carpeting o r h au te cuisine w hen visiting th e terraces; b u t
accom m odation an d facilities have often been below the basic d ecent stan d ard necessary to give spectators
dignity let alone com fort.

   33. It is sm all w onder th a t attendances at m atches gradually fell o ff from a peak o f 77 m illion in the season
1949/50 to about 20 m illion in th e late 1980s. N o d o u b t o th e r reasons played th e ir part; for exam ple, the
em ergence o f o ther spectator sports a n d television. U n til the 1960s m ost m en w orked on a S aturday m orning
a n d m any w ent straight to the m atch in the afternoon. But the 5 day week together w ith increased car
ow nership m ade Saturday outings for the fam ily a p o p u lar activity. O n to p o f these factors, however, the
prospect o f attending football in the con d ition s I have described clearly becam e u n attractiv e to m any erstwhile
supporters. A dded to th is was the fear o f disorder. So far, I have n o t m en tion ed the fu rth e r indignities endured
by supporters as a result o f hooliganism an d th e m easures taken to contain it.

H ooliganism
   34. D uring the 1970s, hooligan beh av io u r becam e a scourge at an d aro u n d football grounds. Rival fans
abused an d fought w ith each o th e r on the terraces. T h e pitch was invaded, som etim es to facilitate the fighting,
som etim es in an a tte m p t to abo rt a m atch by those w hose team was losing a n d on occasions to display anger
an d seek to assault a referee o r a player who h ad incurred displeasure. Throw ing missiles, e ith er at a player o r a
policem an o r at rival fans, becam e an o th er violent feature. W hen th e police responded by searching fans for
m issiles on entry, th e practice grew o f throw ing coins (which could not be confiscated). Som etim es the coins
were sh arpened in advance to m ake th em m ore dam aging.

  35. M ass singing o f trad itio n al songs, som e o f nation-w ide appeal, som e local to the area o r the club, had
becom e a p a rt o f th e terrace culture. But the repertoire becam e augm ented an d degraded by abusive and
obscene chants aim ed at the referee o r the opposing fans. A fu rth e r nasty a d d itio n was racist chanting aim ed at
any black player o f eith er team .

   36. H ooliganism outside the ground also becam e rife. Supporters o f rival team s abused a n d attacked each
other. H ooligan gangs caused dam age to trains, to buses, an d to property on th e ir route. Som e deliberately
w ent o u t o f th e ir way to ram page through local shops, stealing, w recking an d in tim id atin g as they w ent - an
activity known as “steam ing” . A fter a m atch, rival supporters w ould attack each o th e r on th e way hom e in the
street, in public transport or in public houses.

Segregation
   37. To contain and control these m anifold form s o f anti-social an d crim inal b eh av io u r there is now an
elaborate com plex o f m easures. T he policy o f segregation was b o rn in the 1970s. G radually, it has called for
m ore a n d m ore extrem e an d expensive strategies by th e clubs an d th e police. As each m easure taken has been
circum vented by d eterm in ed hooligans, fu rth e r m easures have h ad to be grafted o n to th e system. W itnessing
th e full florid exercise taking place every S aturday afternoon nowadays m akes one w onder how anyone could
have co n tem p lated going to such lengths to facilitate the w atching o f football. But nobody did; it ju s t grew.


                                                             6
   38. C lubs have sub-divided th e ir grounds to keep rival fans a p a rt by putting fencing an d sterile areas
betw een th em , by screening them from inciting each other, by separate entrances a n d exits an d by perim eter
fences ro u n d th e pitch. M any o f the fences are very high an d are crow ned w ith elaborate spikes an d barbed
wire, th e to p sections being inclined inw ards to prevent th e ir being scaled. A t som e grounds a telescopic tunnel
is extended o n to th e pitch to p rotect the team s from m issiles as they com e on o r go off.

    39. T he police start a n d finish th e ir segregation exercise well away from the ground. Typically, special trains
o r coaches carrying the away supporters are m o nito red en route. T he police m eet them an d escort the fans with
m o u n ted officers, dog h andlers an d foot officers, ensuring they go only to th eir allotted section o f the ground.
T hey are searched at the en tran ce for d rin k o r w eapons (as are the hom e fans). They are then confined in an
area caged by fencing for the d u ratio n o f the m atch. W hen it ends, the away supporters are often held back for a
q u a rte r to h a lf an h o u r w hilst the hom e supporters are dispersed. They are th en escorted away in the sam e
m a n n e r as they arriv ed an d p u t back on to th e ir tra in s o r buses. A lthough the m ain body o f away supporters
can th u s be policed as a group, those who arrive independently in cars o r vans have freedom o f m anoeuvre.
O ccasionally trouble m akers get into the w rong area an d a violent episode occurs. Again, th e fu rth er away from
the ground the spectators spread, the less th e police can do to prevent sporadic confrontations. By and large
however, th e police m easures have w orked to prevent violent o u tbursts in an d aro u n d th e ground.

   40. But at w hat a price! In a d d itio n to the p oor facilities I described earlier (which are often worse for away
th a n for hom e fans) th e ord inary law -abiding football su p p o rter travelling away is caught up in a police
o p eratio n rem iniscent o f a colum n o f prisoners o f w ar being m arched a n d d etained u n d er guard. I w atched the
escort o f A rsenal fans after a m atch at Stam ford Bridge. T hey were held in th e ground for thirty-five m inutes
while the C helsea supporters left. They were th en escorted by a substantial body o f police to Fulham Broadway
un d erground station. T here, to avoid overcrowding o n the platform , they were a d m itted to the station only in
m easured groups. Special trains were ru n to take th em non-stop into th e centre o f th e city to avoid clashes at
nearby stations.

   41. Clearly, th e police w ith th e ir great experience o f controlling crowds at th e ground considered this
strategy was necessary in th e present clim ate. T h e ir views were confirm ed in th a t despite th eir efficient and
good h u m o u red m anagem ent o f the m atch an d its afterm ath , scuffles to o k place w hen som e fans got into the
w rong section o f the ground. M oreover such police practice is not u niq u e to o u r country. T here are sim ilar
hooligan problem s for exam ple in H olland. I w itnessed a very sim ilar o peration carried out by the D utch
police at U trecht to control a tra in load o f supporters from Eindhoven.

  42. N ecessary though such operations m ay presently be, they do n othing to enhance th e image o f football as
a spectator sport followed for en tertain m en t an d pleasure. I know o f no o th er sport o r en tertain m en t in a
civilised country in w hich it is necessary to keep those atten din g from attacking each other.

   43. A part from th e ir im p act on the spectator, operations to control football crowds have o th er serious
repercussions. T h e cost in money, m anpow er an d d isru p tio n is enorm ous. Last year, the cost o f policing
football in L ondon was som e £10 m illion o f w hich only £1 m illion could be recovered from the clubs.
A ccording to th e Football T rust, w ho m eet one th ird o f th e costs o f police charges in cu rred by clubs at m atches
for the Football League, Scottish Football League an d G M Vauxhall Conference, the cost to clubs during
1988/89 was £4.79 m illion. Since th is relates only to costs inside grounds w hich can be recovered by th e police,
th e total cost to th e police service is substantially m ore. H er M ajesty’s C h ief Inspector o f C onstabulary for
E ngland a n d Wales said, in his annual rep o rt for 1988, that:-

  “Football con tin u es to be a focus for h o o lig an ism ... d em an d s on the police service co n tin ued at a high level.
  Typically, 5000 officers m ay be engaged on football d uties on S aturdays during the football season.”

   T h e H om e O ffice estim ate th a t the total cost o f deploying these officers is perhaps £200,000 to £300,000
each football Saturday. At m any League m atches, policing requires som e 300 officers in the ground w ith many
m o re outside a n d o thers p erform ing related traffic duties. A t high risk m atches, C up sem i-finals and the like,
even greater n u m b ers are deployed. At H illsborough there were 800 officers in an d arou n d the ground.
O bviously officers deployed to football can no t be perform ing police duties elsewhere. A lthough m any are
b rought in on an overtim e basis (at a consequently heavier cost) police co m m itm en ts to the com m unity
elsewhere m ust be affected by the concentration o f such n um bers in one place.

  44. W hen upw ards o f 40,000 converge on a ground in a residential area the effect on the local com m unity is
very disagreeable. Large n u m b ers o f fans c h an t in the streets, often offensively. They invade gardens to urinate.
E m pty cans an d o th e r garbage are dro p p ed in gardens, yards an d in the street. Shops m ay be pillaged. Traffic is


                                                               7
congested o r diverted. Streets are filled w ith p ark ed coaches an d cars. Side-streets are co rdoned o ff by police to
protect residents. Recently, a police cordon was thought necessary a t a h a lf m ile radius ro u n d H ighbury w hen
Liverpool visited A rsenal. R esidents had to establish th eir identity. T h e o p eratio n was successful in preventing
disorder b u t the need to conduct such op eratio n s a n d the resultant d isru p tio n contributes to the p oor im age o f
football in the com m unity a t large.

W hat does Segregation Achieve?
   45. Segregation, w hich is the m ain feature o f present crowd control policy, aim s only to contain an d control
b a d behaviour, n o t to elim inate it. Indeed, the very fact th a t rival fans are separated ten d s to increase an d
polarise th e ir hostility to each other. Segregation breeds an “us an d th e m ” attitu d e. T h e opposing supporters
can be seen as a physically distin ct group upon w hom anim osity can be focussed. Again, the knowledge th a t the
“enem y” is physically restrain ed from violent riposte may encourage b aitin g a n d abuse w hich caution w ould
otherw ise deter. T here is force too in the view th a t if people are h erd ed a n d confined as potential offenders,
th a t concept m ay in som e cases becom e self-fulfilling. So, although segregation m ay have appeared the only
way to m ain tain the excitem ent o f the adversarial atm osphere a t football g rounds w hilst keeping the peace, it
m erely controlled the sym ptom s o f hooliganism . T h e disease rem ained an d m ay even have been intensified by
the segregation. O th er gam es have not resorted to it. For exam ple, there is no segregation at rugby league
m atches although the catch m en t sections o f popu latio n , from w hich sup p o rt is draw n b o th to football an d
rugby league, seem similar.

Who are the Hooligans?
   46. In ch ap ter 5 o f his Final R eport, M r Justice Popplewell exploded three p o p u la r fallacies ab ou t
hooliganism . First th a t it is som ething new; secondly, th a t it is only found at soccer m atches an d thirdly, th a t it
is a specifically English disease. H e w ent on to consider the n atu re o f football hooliganism , the characteristics
o f the hooligan, possible causes o f hooligan b eh av io u r an d experience in o th er countries. I do n o t propose to
repeat his analysis. N o th in g h as throw n any d o u b t on it in the four years since he rep orted although m uch has
been w ritten by jo u rn alists, academ ics a n d others. I agree w ith him th a t there is no sim ple explanation fo r all
the m isbehaviour attach ed to football a n d there is n o single remedy. It is im p o rta n t, however, to recognise the
clear d istin ctio n betw een quite different groups o f hooligans.

   47. T here are those w ho m isbehave spontaneously in o r aro u n d the grou n d in response to som e perceived
grievance - a goal against th eir team , a d oubtful decision o f a referee o r tau n tin g from others. B ut there are
o th e r groups w ho go o u t b e n t on causing trouble for its own sake. T h e la tte r w ere described by M r Justice
Popplewell as “th e new hooligans” . O ften they ho ld dow n good jo b s during the week, dress stylishly an d detach
them selves from those fans w ith club scarves w ho travel on official coaches o r trains. They plan th e ir violence
as a recreation in itself to w hich the football is secondary o r a m ere background. U nfortunately, these groups
can fom ent trouble a n d galvanise support from fans w ho w ould n o t otherw ise m isbehave. T h u s the effect o f
the “new hooligans” can grow o u t o f p ro p o rtio n to th eir num bers.

     48. M r Justice Popplewell sum m arised his conclusions as to the n atu re a n d m o tiv atio n o f hooligan groups
 a t p aragraph 5.90 o f his Final R eport as follows:-

       “ I (a) T h a t there has always been a group, albeit a sm all group w ho fin d violence attractive; who
           currently fin d the football gro u nd a convenient th eatre for th eir violence an d the football m atch the
           occasion for the display o f th eir aggressive tendencies w hich on o th er days an d at o th e r tim es they will
           be exhibiting in public houses, the city centre o r elsewhere. T h eir m ain target at football grounds is
           opposing fans. They choose to exercise th a t violence at a football m atch for a n u m b er o f sim ple
           reasons. T h e date a n d place o f a m atch are fixed; the n atu re o f the o p p o sitio n is known; its presence is
           certain, so is th a t o f the police. T h e ir own sup p o rt is known. Its presence too is certain. T he ba ttle lines
           can be draw n. T h u s plans can be m ad e well in advance for the p articu lar acts o f violence th a t they
           in ten d to create.

           (b) A n d w hile there is a good deal o f academ ic supp o rt for the view th a t violence was at one tim e the
           prerogative o f the so called “rough” w orking class th a t is n o longer the com plete picture today. A
           m ajority o f to d ay ’s hooligans no d o u b t d o fit into th a t category, b u t som e d o not. T hey com e from a
           variety o f backgrounds, m any have reasonable jo b s an d earn a p ro p er living.

           (c) W h eth er they are m o tiv ated by the sam e reasons as th e ir predecessors can only be a m a tte r o f
           conjecture; there seem s little reason how ever to believe otherwise.

        II (a) A second group im itates the first elem ent I have identified. T h us those n o t particularly given to
           violence w itness violence in others a n d see it being exercised, w itho u t let o r hindrance. People expect
          the spectators on the terraces to behave in an aggressive way an d to use foul language. It then
          becom es accepted as the n o rm a n d th u s becom es a p art o f the p attern o f life which w ould n o t be
          to lerated elsewhere. T his knock-on effect can be seen in violence in the streets o f o u r cities,
          u n co n n ected w ith football.

          (b) T he feeling o f anonym ity in th e crowd gives rise to a loss o f inhibition a n d self-discipline. T he
          association w ith those o f sim ilar disposition, the enthusiasm a n d the partisan support for the team ,
          w hich itself causes an atm osphere, all create a situ atio n w hich can readily give rise to violence.

     III T h en there is a th ird group (n o t always separate from the o th e r two groups) w ho cause violence for a
         reason, eith er real o r supposed. It m ay be an inability quickly to get into the ground; it m ay be the
         presence o f rival spectators in a p art o f the ground to which the fans thin k they have a claim.

     IV Finally there are those, the vast m ajority o f spectators, w ho a b h o r violence an d wish only for an
        afternoon o f pleasure at a football m atch .”

  T h e oral a n d w ritten evidence I have received, the studies an d repo rts I have read on the subject a n d my
own observations lead me to agree entirely w ith th a t sum m ary. I w ould ad d only one fu rth e r elem ent -
alcohol.

Alcohol
   49. T h ere can be no d o u b t th a t an excited an d volatile crowd is m ore difficult to control a n d m ore p rone to
d iso rd er if it includes num bers w ho have been drinking. D rin k is n o t a m ajor factor affecting M r Justice
PopplewelFs group I. T h e ir violence ten d s to be planned coldly an d soberly. But group II is often rendered
disorderly a n d m ore readily im itates the violence o f o thers because inhibitions are rem oved by drink.
Likewise, group III responds to a grievance, is readier to take offence an d reacts m ore im pulsively and
violently because o f drink.

   50. D rinking before m atches increased in parallel w ith the growth o f hooliganism . Before the 5 day week,
those com ing straight from w ork to the football ground o n a S aturday h ad little tim e to d rin k excessively.
D uring the 1960s an d 1970s young m en in th e ir tw enties acquired a new affluence an d spending on d rin k
increased. T h e ad v en t o f the su p erm ark et w ith an off-licence provided num erous outlets for the sale o f
cann ed beer; so it becam e easy to have alcohol at the m atch a n d on the way to it, w hether the local pubs were
open o r not. Finally, apart from tim e an d liq u o r being available, there has developed an attitu d e to drinking
in the U K n o t fo u n d to the sam e extent elsewhere - a cult o f d rin k in g to excess. T he spectacle o f young fans,
tan k ed up w ith beer, w hether n ear o u r own football grounds o r (m ore dam agingly to o u r rep u tatio n abroad)
at foreign football stadia is all too fam iliar. Yet, for exam ple in Italy, the largest wine producing country in
Europe, football fans an d indeed people generally d o not d rin k to get drunk. Although they have th eir own
b ra n d o f hooliganism (from the “U ltras” as they are known) alcohol is n o t a m ajor factor. H ere it certainly is
an d it rem ain s so despite legislation b anning sales o r possession o f alcohol in football grounds an d the
carrying o f alcohol on public service a n d h ired vehicles b o u n d for such grounds.

Poor Leadership
   51. T he hierarchy inside football h as a n u m b er o f levels over an d above the spectators. A t the top is the
n atio n al m anagem ent o f the game. In E ngland the Football A ssociation is responsible for the ad m in istratio n
an d welfare o f all football dow n to the lowliest a m ateu r club a n d football in schools. T he Football League is a
separate body w ith responsibility for the 92 professional League clubs. In Scotland an d Wales there are
equivalent bodies. Below th a t top m anagem ent, each o f the League clubs has its own B oard o f D irectors.
T h en there are the referees, the m anagers a n d the players. Finally there are organisations representing the
supporters - the Football S upporters’ A ssociation a n d the N ational Federation o f Football Supporters’ Clubs.
O ne w ould have hoped th a t the u p p e r echelons in this hierarchy w ould have taken a lead in securing
reasonable safety a n d com fort for the spectators an d in enforcing good behaviour by precept a n d exam ple.
U nfortunately, these hopes have n o t generally been realised and indeed at tim es p o o r exam ples have been set.

   52. T he FA a n d the FL have not seen it as th e ir duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety m atters. In th eir
w ritten subm ission they s a id :-

  “O f course, bo th T h e FA an d T he Football League are concerned to ensure th a t crowd safety stand ard s are
  the highest reasonably practicable. It is felt, however, th a t n eith er o f these authorities should be charged
  w ith the responsibility o f setting d etailed safety stan d ards o r enforcing th em .”


                                                             9
They have been m uch concerned to avoid pitch invasions because they interfere w ith the sm ooth progress
o f the fixture list an d in cu r criticism an d penalties from the E uropean football authorities. But advice, for
exam ple, as to tu rn stile lay outs, th e division o f viewing areas and, until recently, on ratios o f seating to
standing areas h as n o t been forthcom ing. As a n o th er specific exam ple, in selecting H illsborough as the venue
for the C u p sem i-final, the FA d id n o t consider in any depth w hether it was suitable for a high risk m atch w ith
an atten d an ce o f 54,000 requiring to be segregated, all o f w hom were, in effect, away supporters lacking week
in week o u t knowledge o f the ground. N o special inspection was m ade; no co nsultation w ith Sheffield
W ednesday o r the local auth o rity too k place.

   53. As for the clubs, in som e instances it is legitim ate to w onder w hether the directors are genuinely
interested in the welfare o f th eir grass-roots supporters. B oardroom struggles for power, w heeler-dealing in
the buying a n d selling o f shares a n d indeed o f w hole clubs som etim es suggest th a t those involved are m ore
interested in the personal financial benefits o r social status o f being a d irecto r th an o f directing the club in the
interests o f its su p p o rter custom ers. In m ost com m ercial enterprises, including the en tertain m en t industry,
knowledge o f th e custom er’s needs, his tastes an d his dislikes is essential in fo rm atio n in deciding policy and
planning. But, u n til recently, very few clubs consulted to any significant extent w ith th e supporters o r th eir
organisations.

   54. E ncouragem ent an d indeed req u irem en t o f good b eh av io u r by th e fans should b e a p rim e aim o f club
m anagem ent. H ere again positive leadership h as often been lacking a n d o n occasions counter-productive. It
can n o t help to p ro m o te good b eh av io u r if a club chairm an has h is photograph in th e program m e presenting a
cheque for £750 by way o f reco u pm en t to a club player fined th a t sum by the FA for m isb eh av io u r o n the
pitch. T h e sam e applies to a n o th e r ch airm an w ho extended a V IP w elcom e to h o m e com ing “ supporters
convicted o f m isbehaviour w hilst atten d in g a m atch in G reece, even if he was sceptical as to th e fairness o f
th e crim in al process.

   55. T h en there is w hat h ap p en s on th e pitch itself. Long d ep arted are C o rin th ian C asual standards;
accepting decisions o f th e referee w ithout d em u r; affecting a m odest diffidence on scoring a sensational goal.
For m any years now referees’ decisions have been regularly challenged by spread arm s an d entreaties; even an
unsensational goal has caused th e scorer to b e hugged an d em braced all th e way back to th e centre spot. T he
cool self-control o f C o rinth ian C asuals will never return. Perhaps we should not lam ent its d e p a rtu re since
th ere is no h arm in a reasonable show o f jo y in success. But, m ore recently, things have gone further. O n
scoring a goal a player nowadays often rushes straight tow ards the p erim eter fencing an d eith er affects to
clim b it or, w ith fists raised an d shaking, goes on his knees to excite response from supporters. Little has been
d o n e to stop such d e m o n stratio ns w hich are calculated to hype up th e fans in to hysteria.

   56. A t th e o th e r extrem e from d em o n stratio n s o f jo y an d triu m p h , violence on the field o f play by tackles
aim ed at op p on ents’ legs, stam ping, elbowing a n d holding is com m only to be seen. U n til lately, the FA’s
response to such violence am ongst players has been weak. Negligible fines on offenders, w ithout penalty to
the clubs e ith er in fines o r loss o f points, have tend ed to discredit the FA’s discharge o f its disciplinary role. In
the last couple o f m onths, p ro m p te d by a series o f m uch publicised incidents an d by m edia criticism , a firm er
line h as at last been adopted. T hese incidents have involved violent conduct by players o ff the ball. At the end
o f the m atch betw een N orw ich C ity an d A rsenal on 4 N ovem ber 1989, a n u m b er o f players o n b o th sides
were involved in an incident w hen punches were exchanged. T h e referee said he was n o t going to m ake any
rep o rt on the m atter. T he FA initially an n o u n ced th a t if there was no rep o rt from the referee there was
n o th in g they could do. However, w iser counsels prevailed; officials o f the FA saw the incident o n video and
d ecided to take action. In the result N orw ich C ity were fined £50,000 an d A rsenal £20,000. O th e r incidents
occurred w ith in days at three o th e r grounds involving violence o n the field betw een players and, in one
instance, m anagers.

    57. To com plete th is survey o f the p resen t football m alaise, it is necessary to m ention the m edia. Football
 is highly newsworthy. For the W orld C up, provision is being m ade at the San Siro stadium , M ilan for no fewer
 th a n 5,000 journalists. In the dom estic U K scene, the long haul th ro u g h o u t the season to becom e League
 c h am p io n s o r C up w inners is followed n o t only by the m illions w ho actually a tten d m atches b u t by m any
 m illions m ore via the m edia. T hey w atch gam es an d listen to the p u n d its endlessly discussing th em on
 television; they read ab ou t th em in the new spapers an d they fill in the football pool coupons. So players and
 spectators are exposed to co n stan t scrutiny. W hen scuffles o r fights occur, w hether on the field o r on the
 terraces, they are inevitably w itnessed by m illions an d such incidents o f b a d b ehav io u r are aggregated into a
 rep u tatio n tarnishing the national gam e as a whole. W hen o u r supporters go to Europe, they are preceded by
 th is rep u tatio n . It is expected they will behave badly, so w h eth er they do so initially o r n o t they are likely to
 m eet a hostile reception from th e ir co unterparts. T hus incidents are provoked an d the syndrom e continues.


                                                               10
   58.     I have sought in the b roadest term s to identify those features w hich disfigure football today. But
despite th em , a n d despite the decline in attendances from the peak years, the gam e still co m m and s massive
public su p p o rt an d interest. Indeed, in the last couple o f years there has been som e increase in attendances
for reasons to be explored later. A fter the h o rro r o f H illsborough an d the analysis o f football’s troubles w hich
it has p ro m p ted , the lesson is surely th a t now is the m o m en t for the fullest reassessm ent o f policy for the
game. Accordingly, before considering detailed reco m m end atio n s for securing a basic level o f safety a n d for
im proving crowd control, I th in k it app ro p riate to consider how the low standards described in th is chapter
could be raised.




                                                          11
                                                        CHAPTER2

                                       A BETTER FUTURE FOR FOOTBALL

   59. It is n ot enough to aim only at the m in im u m m easures necessary for safety. T h a t h as been, at best, the
ap proach in the p ast an d too often not even th a t stan d ard has been achieved. W h at is required is the vision
an d im agination to achieve a new ethos for football. G ro u n d s should be upgraded. A ttitu d es should be m ore
welcom ing. T he aim should be to provide m ore m odern an d com fortable accom m odation, b e tte r an d m ore
v aried facilities, m ore consultation w ith the supporters an d m ore positive leadership. I f such a policy is
im plem ented it will n o t only im prove safety. T here will also be an im provem ent in behaviour, m aking crowd
control easier.

   60. At som e clubs changes have already been m ade tow ards realising th is new concept o f how football
should be. For exam ple, at Ibrox Park, scene o f the appalling disaster in 1971, th ere has been a total
tran sfo rm atio n . T he old m ain stan d rem ains an d still h as som e standing areas in fro n t o f it. But three new
stands have been b u ilt ro u n d the rest o f the ground. T hey are colourful, convenient an d are all-seating. They
are constructed so as to provide a covered concourse at first floor level runn in g the length o f the stand. A t the
rear o f th a t concourse th ro ug h o u t its length are m o d e m lavatories for bo th sexes. At the fron t are attractive
fast food service p o in ts offering a good range o f food an d drinks (but no alcohol). T h e walls are clean; the
flooring is o f stu d ded rubber. M o u n ted overhead, at regular intervals o f a few yards along the whole
concourse, are television sets tu n e d to a sports program m e giving inform ation on th e day’s fixtures, excerpts
from previous m atches an d general sports coverage. T hese arrangem ents encourage fans to arrive in good
tim e, to have w holesom e refreshm ents in a clean an d p leasant setting, to enjoy on the television the kin d o f
pre-m atch en tertain m en t w hich genuinely interests them , to visit a decent toilet, an d th en to walk up a few
steps to take th eir seats for the m atch. All o f th is is u n d e r cover an d it is enjoyed not ju s t by the affluent b u t by
the o rd in ary supporter. Significantly, the facilities are n o t abused. O ccasional graffiti do app ear b u t are
w iped away prom ptly an d the overall im pression is th a t if spectators are offered civilised conditions they
com e to respect them .

A ll-Seating
   61. T here is n o p anacea w hich will achieve total safety an d cure all problem s o f b eh av io u r an d crowd
control. But I am satisfied th a t seating does m ore to achieve those objectives th a n any o th e r single m easure.

  62. It is obvious th a t sitting for the d u ratio n o f the m atch is m ore com fortable th a n standing. It is also
safer. W hen a sp ectator is seated he has his own sm all piece o f territory in w hich he can feel reasonably
secure. H e will n o t be in close physical contact w ith those aro u n d him . H e will n o t be jo stled o r m oved about
by swaying o r surging. Sm all o r in firm o r elderly m en an d w om en as well as young children are not buffeted,
sm o th ered o r unsighted by larger an d m ore robust people as on the terraces. T h e seated spectator is not
subject to pressure o f num bers b e h in d o r aro u n d h im d uring the m atch. H e will n o t be painfully b en t double
over a crush barrier. T hose m o n ito ring num bers will know exactly how m any are there w ith ou t having to
co un t th em in o r assess the density by visual im pression. T here will still, o f course, be scope for crowd
pressure on stairways w hilst entering an d especially w hen leaving, b u t involuntary an d u ncontrolled crowd
m ovem ents occasioned by incid ents in the gam e are effectively elim inated.

   63. It is true th a t at m om ents o f excitem ent seated spectators do, and m ay b e expected to, rise from th eir
 seats. But the m o m en t passes an d they sit dow n again. I also recognise th a t seating is only regarded as m ore
 com fortable th a n standing if cover is provided. T he consensus is that, although stan d ing on an exposed
 terrace on a wet day is disagreeable, sitting in the rain is worse. So, increased seating does require th a t cover
 be provided.

   64. A part from com fort a n d safety, seating has distin ct advantages in achieving crowd control. It is
 possible to have disturbances in a seated area an d they have occurred, b u t w ith the assistance o f C CTV the
 police can im m ediately zoom in w ith a cam era a n d p in p o in t the seats occupied by the trouble-m akers as well
 as the trouble-m akers them selves. M oreover, if n um bered tickets are issued to n am ed p urchasers, the police
 have a fu rth e r aid to identifying m iscreants.

   65. N u m b ered tickets m atching n u m bered seats also help to identify forgeries. Forged tickets for standing
 areas may not be discovered. In the past, they sim ply led to inflated num bers on the terraces at all-ticket
 m atches. But there can only be one valid ticket for each n um bered seat an d the existence o f a forgery is
 im m ediately exposed.


                                                                 12
   66. T h e evidence I have received has been overwhelm ingly in favour o f m ore seating accom m odation. At
present, the ratio thro u g ho u t the 92 League clubs in E ngland an d Wales is ab o u t two th ird s standing to one
th ird seated. B ut w hilst m ost are in favour o f reversing th a t ratio, there are those w ho wish to retain a
p ro p o rtio n o f standing room . A m ongst them are the FA an d the football supporters’ organisations.
Essentially they deploy three argum ents.

   67. T he first is an em otio n al one based on a d esire to retain the trad itio n al culture d erived from the close
contact o f the terraces. “ My g randfather stood here; my fath er stood here w ith me; why shouldn’t I stan d here
w ith my son?” is a com m only expressed view. M oreover, to m any young m en the cam araderie o f singing
together, ju m p in g up an d down, responding in unison to the nam ing o f the players, th eir em ergence on to the
pitch, the scoring o f a goal, an u n p o p u lar decision - all o f these are an integral p art o f enjoying the m atch.
They like being p art o f an am o rp h o u s seething crowd an d d o n o t w ish to have each his own place in a seat.

   68. T h e second argum ent is th a t conversion to all-seating will reduce the num bers o f fans w ho can be
ad m itted to the ground; so, m any w ould-be spectators will be disappointed. T h is assum es a significantly
greater density being p erm itted for standing places th an for seating. It also assum es th a t the size o f present
crowds regularly exceeds projected all-seated capacity. B ut the FA’s own evidence showed th a t during the
1988/89 season the n u m b er o f occasions w hen atten d an ces at League clubs exceeded projected all-seater
capacity ranged from nil to 16. T he 16 atten d an ces were at Liverpool, w ho have accepted the need for
all-seating. For only three clubs in the first an d second divisions d id the attendance exceed the projected
all-seated capacity on m ore th a n 10 occasions, an d for 21 o u t o f 44 clubs in these two divisions the
attendance never exceeded the projected all-seated capacity. In only one case (Liverpool) was th e average
attendance d u rin g the season in excess o f the projected all-seated capacity.

  69. Finally, cost. Spectators d o n o t w ant to pay and, it is argued, m any could not pay the substantially
higher price o f a seat as against the cost o f standing.

  70. I am n o t convinced th a t the cherished culture o f the terraces is wholly lost w hen fans are seated.
W atching the m ore boisterous an d dem on strativ e sections at all-seater grounds, I have noted no absence o f
concerted singing, chanting, clapping o r gesticulating in unison. T h e com m unal sp irit is still there a n d finds
ready expression. To such extent as the seating lim its togetherness o r prevents m ovem ent, th a t price is surely
w orth paying for the benefits in safety an d control.

   71. M oreover, th e m axim um density w hich experience now shows to be acceptable in standing areas tends
to take th e force o ut o f th e first two argum ents. I f standing density is little m ore than seating density, the
m elded m ass previously found on terraces becom es m ore diffuse an d the intensity o f the togetherness
becom es little greater standing th a n sitting. Likewise, a t such a density, the difference betw een the adm issible
num bers standing a n d sitting becom e m arginal. It can be m ade up by having two or m ore tiers o f seating
w here previously there was only one tier o f standing.

   72. As to cost, clubs m ay well w ish to charge som ew hat m ore for seats th an for standing b u t it should be
possible to plan a price structu re w hich suits the cheapest seats to the pockets o f those presently paying to
stand. A t Ibrox, for exam ple, seating is £ 6, standing £4 - n o t a prohibitive price o r differential.

T he Trend in the U K
   73. T h e su p erio r safety o f seating has already persuaded a n u m ber o f clubs in the U K to convert th eir
terraces to seating e ith er totally o r predom inantly. Following H illsborough, Liverpool have an nounced th eir
in ten tio n to a d a p t th e ir fam ous Kop to seating. In Scotland, A berdeen’s ground at P itto d rie becam e all-seater
in 1978; C lydebank followed suit; St Johnstone’s new ground at P erth is all-seated. W embley stadium will
early in 1990 accom m odate 80,000 spectators, all-seated.

  74. T hose opposed to all-seating p o in t o u t th a t previous attem p ts to in troduce it have m et w ith spectator
resistance. C oventry C ity was the first English club to install seating throughout its ground in 1981. In 1983
the club reverted to allowing 2,000 to stand. In 1985, after visiting fans o f M anchester City tore u p seats an d
used th em as missiles, th e g round reverted to standing. Q ueen’s Park Rangers also m oved tow ards all-seated
acco m m o d atio n b u t rem oved som e seats u n d er pressure from supporters.

   75. Since th en , however, H illsborough has happened; thinking has changed; responsible com m ent by
 governm ent, football au th o rities an d m edia has p repared the way for change. Moreover, there are now seats
 available w hich can n o t be m anually to rn an d used as missiles. T hose at U trecht, for exam ple, have
 survived intact for seven years despite usage an d deliberate experim ental tests o f th eir strength.


                                                             13
   76. It is possible th a t in the early stages o f conversion there m ay be instances o f fans standing on the seats
or in fro n t o f them b ecause they are used to standing o r in o rd er to register a protest, b u t I am satisfied th a t in
E ngland an d Wales as in Scotland an d ab ro ad spectators will becom e accustom ed an d educated to sitting.
T h e evidence I have received shows th a t m ore recently, w here seating has been installed, the fans have com e
to accept an d like it. A t Ibrox Park, for exam ple, the seated areas are the m ost p o pu lar a n d tickets for them
sell in preference to those for standing. Significantly, trouble from m isbehaviour an d physical injuries have
been reduced since m ost o f the crowd becam e seated. Such trouble an d accidental injuries as still occur are
p rim arily in the rem aining standing areas. It is p lan ned to convert th em to seating in the n ear future.

Sir Norman Chester Centre Research
   77. T h e Sir N o rm a n C hester C entre for Football Research, attach ed to the U niversity o f Leicester, is
fu n d ed by the Football Trust. In N ovem ber 1989 th e C entre u n dertook a survey o f registered m em bers o f the
Football Supporters’ A ssociation to discover the views o f co m m itted football fans on a n u m b er o f the issues
after H illsborough w hich are covered in my R eport. T he extension o f seating was one such issue. N um erous
questions were asked o n a n u m b er o f different hypotheses. T h e R eport states th a t substantial m ajorities in
the sam ple were in favour o f m ain tain in g the statu s q uo on the seats/terraces balance at th e ir own clubs.
However, the R eport continues:

  “ 53. 6% claim ed they w ould actually sup p o rt the drive for m ore seating (sic) if they were reasonably priced
  an d covered. T h e a d d itio n o f these last two p oints - concessions on price a n d cover - also seem ed to have
  d ram atic effects in reducing levels o f o p p ositio n to the prospects o f all-seated facilities as we shall see
  later”.

W hen all-seating was p u t to the sam ple there was a m ajority against it, b u t the R eport goes on:

  “ Finally, an d perhaps significantly, oppo sitio n in o u r sam ple to the in tro d u c tio n o f all-seated facilities
  d im inish es considerably w hen one introduces provisos on price an d protection from the elem ents. W hen
  this is done, m ore people in o u r sam ple su p p o rt all-seaters th a n oppose th e m .”

Europe
   78. T h e tre n d tow ards seating is even stronger in E urope a n d is now being driven by decrees o f bo th
n atio n al a n d E uropean football authorities.

   79. In Italy the im m inence o f the 1990 W orld C up com petition has forced th e pace o f progress. T h e Italian
M inistry o f the In te rio r decreed on 25 A ugust 1989 th a t for open air facilities w ith a capacity o f m ore th an
10,000 spectators at football gam es an d for covered ones w ith a capacity o f m ore th an 4,000 spectators no
standing will be allowed after 30 A pril 1990. T hose facilities m ust have only n u m b ered seats each n o t less
th an 0.45 m etres w ide. T he San Siro stad iu m in M ilan will by th en seat 85,000 spectators; the O lim pico
stad iu m in R om e will seat 87,000.

  80. In H olland, U trech t’s g round bu ilt in 1982 has seating for 12,000 an d standing room for 8,000. T he
club already in ten d ed to convert the latter to seating. However, on 6 D ecem ber 1989 the D u tch equivalent o f
the FA (the K N VB) agreed w ith the D u tch clubs to cut the standing capacity o f football grounds by 10% each
year over the next d ecade so as to rend er football stadia in the N eth erlan d s in effect all-seater at the end o f the
1990s.

   81. In following th is phasing H olland’s policy is in accord w ith a resolution presently u n d er consideration
 by UEFA (U nion des A ssociations E uropeennes de Football). T he resolution proposes th a t for the 1990/91
 season only 80% o f the standing tickets m ay be sold, th a t figure to be reduced every season by 10% un til 1999.

    82. FIFA (F ederation In ternatio n ale de Football A ssociation) passed a resolution on 26 July 1989
 providing th a t as from the p re lim in a ry co m p etition for the 1994 W orld C up (starting in au tu m n 1992)
 “ m atches m ay in principle only b e played in all-seater stadia” . T he resolution w ent on “as from 1993 it will
 be the d u ty o f the C onfederations an d N a tio n a l A ssociations to hold high-risk m atches in th eir zones only in
 all-seater stad ia.” H igh-risk m atches are d efin ed u n d er UEFA R egulations as follows:

       “ I All UEFA final and sem i-final ties o f th e UEFA club co m p etitio n s as well as final to u rn a m e n t
           m atches o f th e E uropean Football C ham pionship.

       II W hen declared as such by UEFA on th e basis o f previous incidents o f supporters o f one o r b o th
          team s o r o f o th er exceptional considerations.


                                                               14
     III W hen it is expected th a t visiting team supporters will exceed 10% o f stadium capacity o r will exceed
         3,000 persons.

     IV W hen full capacity stadium is expected o r m ore th an 50,000 spectators present.

     V W hen the m atch is likely to a ttract a large n u m b er o f em igrants/foreign w orkers originating from the
       country o f the visiting team , w ho live eith er in the country w here the m atch is being played o r in
       neighbouring countries.”

   T h us w orld a n d E uropean football au th o rities are clearly d eterm in ed to enforce the conversion o f stadia to
all-seating, so far as international m atches an d o th er m atches under th eir control are concerned. It is true that
th eir resolutions will n o t be binding in regard to League o r dom estic football m atches. But they are a p o in ter
in the direction o f safety an d control and as such have been em ulated by Italy an d H olland domestically.

   83. F u rtherm o re, I am told by the FA th a t they regard them selves as d uty b o u n d to follow, in the dom estic
football scene, any R esolution passed by FIFA although strictly such R esolution is binding only in
in tern atio n al m atches o r m atches betw een U K clubs an d clubs from abroad. Thus, the FA regard the
R esolution o f 26 July 1989 as effective in relation to the League, C up an d o th er dom estic fixtures from 1993
onw ards. T h e R esolution does n o t force clubs to install all-seating as a cond itio n o f staging high-risk m atches.
T here is still the optio n to use only those p arts o f the ground w hich have seating. Clearly, unless these are
substantial, atten d ance will be m uch reduced. O ne w ould therefore expect the m ajor clubs to a d ap t their
grounds to accom m odate the m axim um seating they can m anage by th e tim e the R esolution takes effect.
Sm aller an d m ore im pecunious clubs m ay prefer to p ostpone conversion. However, if a small club w ith little
seating acco m m od atio n draws a large first division club a t hom e in the C u p in 1993 (a high-risk m atch) it will
be able only to use its lim ited seating accom m odation o r the gam e will have to be played at a b e tte r equipped
ground elsewhere.

The Football Spectators Act 1989
   84. T h e in ten tio n to follow this sam e tren d was stated by y our predecessor, M r D ouglas H u rd , in a
statem ent to the H ouse o f C om m o ns two days after H illsborough. H e a d d e d :-

  “T h is w ould involve the disappearance o f terraces at (m ajor) grounds. It m ight also involve am endm ents
  to strengthen th e Football Spectators Bill so th a t its provisions for the licensing o f grounds m atched this
  concept” .

   In the event, m achinery for im plem enting increased seating is to be found in section 11 o f the 1989 Act.
T here, provision is m ade for the Football Licensing A uthority (set u p u n d e r section 8) to be directed by the
Secretary o f State to include in any licence to a d m it spectators a co n d itio n im posing requirem ents as respects
the seating o f spectators at designated football m atches at the prem ises; “a n d it shall be the duty o f the
a u tho rity to com ply w ith the d irectio n ”.

Association Football only or Designated Grounds?
    85. In considering seating an d standing, I have concentrated so far on association football because it
a ttracts the largest an d m ost volatile crow ds an d has been tro u b led w ith m isbehaviour. But should
reco m m en d atio n s ab o u t seating be confined to association football o r should they go further? W herever a
line is draw n co m p lain t m ay be m ade th a t it is illogical, b u t two possibilities seem m ore logical th an most;
eith er to confine recom m endations to th e 92 clubs in the Football League o r to apply th em to grounds
designated u n d er the 1975 Act as am ended. T h e latter course w ould include a n u m b er o f Rugby League,
Rugby U n io n a n d cricket grounds. I acknowledge th a t so far, happily, m isbehaviour a t those grounds has
been m inim al. However, even leaving aside possible m isbehaviour, w here there are large num bers there is a
risk o f overcrowding. A well atten d ed Rugby m atch o f eith er code m ay a ttract num bers in excess o f those
atten d ing m any Football League m atches. T here would seem little reason for requiring a fourth division
League club to convert to seating w hilst p e rm ittin g m ajo r Rugby clubs to keep th eir terraces indefinitely.

    86. O n th e o th er hand, proposals for all-seating w ould clearly be in ap p rop riate in relation to sports events
a t w hich spectators are accustom ed, a n d should be entitled, to move about. For exam ple, at horserace
m eetings, spectators m ay wish to view horses in the paddock, place bets, view races from different vantage
p o in ts an d enjoy the o th er facilities o f w hat is a social occasion as well as a sports event. O th er exam ples o f
events at w hich spectators move ab o u t a n d should be free to do so are greyhound racing an d golf
to u rn am en ts.


                                                            15
  87. T h e criteria for designating a sports ground u n d er the 1975 Act as a m en ded are laid dow n in section
KD;
  “T h e Secretary o f State m ay by o rd e r designate as a sports ground requiring a certificate u n d er this Act (in
  th is A ct referred to as a “safety certificate”) any sports ground w hich in his o pinion has accom m odation for
  m ore th a n 10,000 spectators.”

  Section 1(1)(A) perm its the Secretary o f State to substitute such o th er n u m b er as he considers app ro p riate
for the n u m b e r 10,000.

   88. Clearly the p u rpose o f such designation is to bring safety o f grounds w ith capacity for substantial
num bers u n d er the control o f the local authority. W hilst som e grounds w ith a capacity o f m ore th a n 10,000
m ay currently have an average a tten d an ce o f only say 3,000, there is always the prospect o f a visit from a large
club, an attractive C up draw, o r an u p tu rn in fortunes bringing in larger crowds. Safety provisions m ust be
capable o f coping w ith such events. Indeed, danger is m ore likely to result if there is an occasional m atch w ith
a large atten d an ce th a n if such m atches were regular since those controlling it a n d those atten d in g it will be
inexperienced.

   89. F or these reasons, I th in k reco m m end atio n s to increase seating should be applied to all designated
grounds. I appreciate th a t the m achinery p rovided in section 11 o f the Football Spectators Act 1989 can be
used only to regulate the extension o f seating a t association football grounds. However, the Secretary o f State
has pow er u n d e r section 6(2) o f the 1975 Act, as am ended, to provide for securing safety by regulations and
m ay prescribe term s an d conditions to be inserted in Safety Certificates u n d er section 15A as in d icated in the
next chapter. T hese powers could be used, even w ithout the provision in section 11 o f the 1989 Act, to
prescribe m an d atory rules abo u t seating. So, by a co m b in atio n o f his 1989 Act powers an d his 1975 Act
powers o r solely by exercising the latter, the Secretary o f State can require the progressive extension o f seating
at designated grounds.

  90. I therefore conclude and recom m end th a t designated grounds under the 1975 Act should be required in
due course to be converted to all-seating. I do so for the com pelling reasons o f safety an d control already set
out; also, so far as association football is concerned, because the presen t tren d at hom e a n d abroad an d the
rules o f the w orld and E uropean football au th o rities m ake the move to all-seating irresistible.

P hasing
   91. U nless som e tim e factors are specified, progress tow ards all-seating m ay well be protracted. T h is is
recognised in the phasing proposed in the UEFA R esolution q u o ted above an d in the m achinery set up in
section 11 o f the Football Spectators Act 1989.

  92. For high-risk association football m atches I welcome and endorse the adoption by the FA of the FIFA
Resolution requiring no standing tickets to be sold after 1993 and its application to dom estic fixtures.

    93. As to o th e r m atches, I consider th a t w ith o u t the im petus locally o f the W orld C up, w hich is the spur
 for speedy change in Italy, and having regard to the present state o f o u r grounds, it w ould be asking too m uch
 to require conversion in the U K in the next two o r three years. For all grounds designated under the 1975 Act
 except for first division and second division League grounds, and national stadia, I th in k a tim ing along the
 lines suggested in the Resolution under consideration by U EFA (and now adopted in H olland) is reasonable ie
 th a t standing tickets should be reduced by 10% per year starting w ith a 10% deduction effective from August
 1990 and so be phased out by August 1999.

    94. However, I recommend th a t grounds in the first and second divisions of the League and national stadia
 should be all-seated by the start of the 1994/1995 season. It is at those grounds th a t the larger crowds a tten d
 and, in the interests o f b o th safety an d crowd control, I consider they should have seating for all spectators in
 five years rath er th a n ten years. T h e reduction in standing tickets should therefore be at 20% per annum from
 August 1990 and be complete by A ugust 1994. Any club promoted to the second division of the League should be
 given a reasonable period in which to comply. A sim ilar approach should be adopted in Scotland.

 P lanning G round Improvements
    95. Increased seating an d o th er ground im provem ents will require expert planning a n d m uch finance. As
 to planning, it is crucial th a t before clubs em b ark upon m ajo r work, they should have the best inform ation
 an d advice on m o d ern ground design. C onversion to seating can n o t necessarily be achieved m erely by fixing
 seating o n to existing terraces. For exam ple, sight-lines, access to seats, gangways, ro o f cover an d o th er factors


                                                             16
m ay require m ore extensive changes to the layout. Som e clubs m ay be able wholly to redevelop th e ir existing
grounds; others m ay be lim ited by space, finance o r crowd needs to m ore m odest alterations. In some
instances, th e best course w ould be to move to a new site e ith er alone o r in conjunction w ith an o th er club.
U ltim ate decisions on these o ptio n s m ust be for the club m anagem ent. N o doubt, som e o f the bigger clubs
will be able to engage the forem ost contractors in this field to advise th em an d carry o u t the work. But even
for them , an d certainly for the lesser clubs, it would be o f great value to have a body fully apprised o f the latest
developm ents in ground design, capable o f giving expert advice on possible schemes and on ways an d m eans
o f achieving them .

An Advisory D esign Council
  96. I therefore support the suggestion of Professor M au n d er’s Technical W orking P arty th a t there should be
established an Advisory D esign Council to fulfil th is role. It should, in my view, be set up by the FA and the FL
whose functions should include offering a service of this kind to the clubs. By way o f analogy, in Italy this
function is exercised by the C o m itato O lim pico N azionale Italiano (CONI). A fter studying m any grounds,
including those in M adrid, V ienna an d A thens, C O N I p ro d u ced an excellent pam phlet on “ D esign C riteria
for Safe C om fortable an d Large Sports Facilities” su pported by detailed studies showing how they can be
achieved. T hese, together w ith m odels w hich m ay be inspected at C O N I’s headquarters in R om e, show how a
m od ern stadium can be designed from car park to pitch so as to secure safety an d crowd control.

Research
   97. It has com e to my a tten tio n only recently th a t the Sports C ouncil published in 1981 a “H a n d b o o k o f
Sport an d R ecreational Building D esign”, an d in 1989, a w ork en titled “A renas, a Planning, D esign and
M anagem ent G u id e”. T h e 1981 w ork included, in volum e three, studies on o u td o o r sports stadia. T he 1989
w ork co n cen trated on in d o o r stadia. It seem s th a t n eith er o f these works was sent to the FA o r th e FL, nor
have they acquired them . Again, in July 1986, the In stitu tio n o f Structural Engineers form ed an a d hoc
c o m m ittee “to b ring together all cu rren t technical knowledge relevant to the appraisal o f sports grounds and
th e ir individual elem ents. T he com m ittee’s task was to establish a fully referenced body o f knowledge w ithin
three years w hich w ould be com plem entary to the ‘G u id e to Safety at Sports G rounds’.” T h e ad hoc
co m m ittee has p repared a fifth d raft o f its repo rt w hich will be finalised after the recom m endations in my
R eport have been considered.

  98. It is highly desirable th a t such w orthw hile research as I have m en tio n ed should all b e brought together
to achieve m axim um benefit. W ith a form idable building an d conversion program m e for football grounds
ahead, an A dvisory D esign C ouncil set up by the FA an d FL could m ake the best use o f all available research
here an d a b ro ad to assist an d advise clubs.

Finance
   99. T h e scale o f the changes I recom m end will necessarily require heavy expenditure, albeit over an
extended period. It is n o t my fun ctio n to m ake detailed proposals for financing the work. T h a t is for football
m an ag em en t an d essentially for the clubs. However, lest it be thought th a t I have m ade proposals regardless
o f feasible funding, I ought to indicate sources an d m eth o d s o f finance w hich should m ake the im provem ents
practicable, a n d som e o f the fiscal argum ents w hich have been addressed to me.

T h e Football T rust (FT) and the Football G rounds Im provement T rust (FG IT)
    100. A ssistance in financing safety m easures is presently available from the FT a n d the FG IT . T h e form er
is fu n ded by the three m ajo r pools com panies (Littlewoods, Vernons an d Zetters) from the “Spot the Ball”
C o m p etitio n, at the rate o f 21 % o f turnover, yielding over £9 m illion a year. T h e total given to B ritish football
since 1958 now approaches £120 m illion. T he Trustees are em pow ered to use th e ir funds to prom ote
m easures for the control o r suppression o f unruly beh av io u r in relation to football; to assist clubs to m eet the
obligations o f the Safety o f Sports G ro u n d s Act 1975; to im prove grounds an d facilities for those w ho play
a n d w atch the gam e an d for any o th er purpose they consider to be a benefit to the gam e o f football in G reat
B ritain an d N o rth e rn Ireland. T h e F T allocates ju s t over h alf its incom e (ie over £4.5 m illion) to assisting
expenditure by League clubs on ground safety an d im provem ents. T h is is done through the FG IT, a second
in d ep en d en t trust. T h e F G IT was established in 1975, th e arrangem ents being m odified later in 1979 when
the F T was brought into being.

     101. A lthough it helps to fund m any o th er works, from those at international grounds down to those at the
 lowliest clubs, the T rust continues to give first priority to assisting expenditure essential to the grant o f a
 Safety C ertificate for a designated ground. U n d e r its tru st deed, the F G IT is able to m ake grants o f u p to 7 5%
 o f the total cost available to clubs carrying o u t w ork as a necessary condition o f th eir being given a Safety


                                                              17
C ertificate u n d e r the 1975 Act. Accordingly, should my reco m m en d atio n o f m an dato ry increases in seating
be m ade a conditio n o f the Safety C ertificate, the work would be eligible for a grant from th e FG IT.

    102. However, even at £4.5 m illion a year, the F G IT fund w ould be insufficient. A dditional financial
requirem ents fell u p o n th e League clubs on the im plem en tatio n o f the 1975 A ct a n d still m ore after the fire at
B radford C ity’s ground in M ay 1985. By February 1988 over £37 m illion h ad been p a id o u t in grants.
Pressures on finance led to th e suspension o f im provem ent grants in Ju n e 1987. T h e F G IT was able to
reintroduce im provem ent grant aid on a lim ited basis d uring the closed season o f 1988. However, the range
o f works required to upgrade the League grounds inevitably m eans th a t resources o f the F G IT would be
spread q uite thinly. T hey will n o t be sufficient to finance the kind o f im provem ents I have suggested, b u t the
T rust provides a structure for doing so. By way o f exam ple, Sheffield W ednesday received a grant o f £595,000
for the im provem ent o f the K op e n d at H illsborough. T his was in a d d itio n to som e £431,000 given to the club
for a total o f 21 safety projects betw een Septem ber 1978 a n d O ctober 1988. Even so, funds o f this o rd e r will
be insufficient to b u ild new all-seated stands. How then, can ad d itio n al revenue be generated?

Fiscal Considerations
   103. T h ree argum ents have been addressed to m e by the football au th o rities suggesting alterations in tax
stru cture to m ake funds available for ground im provem ents. Fiscal policy is for governm ent an d ultim ately
P arliam en t to decide, n o t for a judge. All I can usefully do is to set o u t the argum ents.

  (a) VAT on the Spot the Ball Com petition
   104. T h e Football T rust have suggested th a t if VAT were abolished on receipts from th is com petition,
som e £5 to £6 m illion w ould be available. T his w ould am o u n t to a direct subsidy from th e Treasury. It w ould
be contrary as I u n d erstan d it n o t only to present governm ent think in g b u t to long established principles o f
fiscal policy. I f th a t is so, a different an d p erhaps m ore p ro p itiou s approach w ould be for th e FA to urge the
Pool P ro m o ters A ssociation (PPA) to increase th e ir c o n trib u tion as p a rt o f a strategy to ensure th e healthy
developm ent o f the gam e from w hich the PPA m akes its money.

  (b) Pool Betting Tax
    105. A second case m ade by th e FA is for a reduction in Pool B etting Tax now standing at 42.5%. T he
suggestion is a red u ctio n to 40% w hich w ould yield som e £ 16 m illion. This, it is said, could be passed on to
assist ground im provem ents in one o f two ways: eith er the G overnm ent could con tin ue to tax pool betting at
th e cu rren t level b u t m ake a d o n atio n to football equivalent to 2.5% o f the tax recovered, o r it could reduce
th e tax rate to 40% o n the strict u n d erstan din g th a t present proposals as to how any red u ctio n o f th e 42.5%
m ight b e used were a m en d ed to allow football to derive th e entire benefit from the m oney th u s saved by the
pool com panies.

    106. T h e FA seek to sup p o rt th e ir argum ent by reference to the structure o f tax on horse racing. T hey
claim th e com parison shows football to be unfairly treated. In horse racing, the du ty on off-course betting is
8%; on-course betting is n o t now taxed. T here is a H orserace B etting Levy w hich goes to the im provem ent
a n d m aintenance o f race courses. However, the com parison betw een football pools an d racing is not o f like
w ith like. T h e relationship o f stakes to w innings is different. T h e Football League presently receives £14
m illion a year from th e PPA for the use o f its fixture list. T h ere is no paym ent sim ilar to th is in racing. N o r is
there an equivalent in racing to the Football T rust o r the FG IT . T he H orserace B etting Levy is essentially
based o n voluntary agreem ent an d is not regarded by the T reasury as a tax. T h ere could be no basis for a levy
o n football pools unless there were agreem ent betw een the PPA an d the Football League.

    107. For these am ongst o th e r reasons, the racing analogy m ay n o t ad d weight to the FA’s argum ent on pool
b etting tax. However, ap a rt from th a t analogy, the FA subm it there is a strong case for som e reduction o f the
42.5% tax. T h e C hester R eport o f 1968 recom m ended the establishm ent o f a football levy. T h e R othschild
Royal C om m ission o n G am bling recom m ended in 1977 a red u ction in the pool b ettin g tax from the level at
th a t tim e o f 40% to 37% to establish a levy board. T h e FA an d the F L do n o t favour the creation o f a football
levy bo ard . T hey consider th a t the Football T rust an d the F G IT are a p p rop riate bodies to receive an d
a d m in ister any m oney accruing to football were a reduction m ad e in th e pool betting tax. I can only say th a t
th e case for a m odest red u ctio n in the pool betting tax w hich convinced the R othschild C om m ission in 1977
is arguably stronger now th a t the rate stands at 42.5%. It m ust in general be for com m ercial undertakings to
be self-financing. T h is applies th ro u gh o u t the en tertain m en t industry o f w hich football clubs are a part. T he
football a u tho rities appreciate an d accept th a t they m ust find the necessary funding substantially from th eir
own resources. N evertheless, if grounds all over the country are to be upgraded a n d in som e instances
re-located so as to achieve safety for spectators, im provem ent in th e quality o f life for residents n ear grounds


                                                            18
an d a reduction in the expensive police c o m m itm en t to controlling m atches, it can be argued there is a case
for financial assistance, if not by direct subsidy then by som e tax reduction.

   108. W h eth er o r not the FA’s argum ent for tax red u ctio n finds favour, there m ay well be scope for
reassessing an d possibly increasing th e c o n trib u tio n m ad e by pools to football. It w ould not m a tte r w hether
such co n trib u tio n is to be by voluntary levy, by an increase in the present percentage rate on receipts from the
Spot th e Ball C o m p etitio n o r by increasing the am o u n t p aid for the use o f the fixture list.

  (c) C apital Allowances
   109. C o m plain t is m ade th a t no capital allowances can be claim ed against tax in respect o f ground
im provem ents.

   110. W hen asked why they seem ready an d able to spend large sum s, som etim es into m illions o f pounds,
for a single player in preference to spending m oney on im proving th eir grounds, th e clubs usually give two
reasons.

   111. First, the atten d an ce an d satisfaction o f th eir supporters depends essentially on success; so buying a
brilliant player has prio rity over ground im provem ent.

Transfer Fees
    112. T hey say the p o p u lar perception o f tran sfer fees as excessive an d extravagant is m istaken. T he
money, I was told again an d again, sim ply circulates ro u n d the League clubs. It is calculated to bring on
b u d d in g players. T he level o f paym ents is high, b u t it is forced up by prices continental clubs with huge
financial backing (like Ju v en tu s from Fiat) are able to pay.

   113. T h e “circu latio n ” argum ent runs like this. First division club A buys an ace player for £1 m illion
from club B. T h is enables club B to buy three players at, say, £250,000 each from three o th er clubs, C, D and
E. C lubs C, D an d E each buy two up-and-com ing b u t n o t yet arrived players from lesser clubs for perhaps
£100,000 each. So the process an d the prices continue dow nw ards eventually enabling the p oorer clubs to
keep going by cashing in o n players they have train ed from scratch. M eanw hile, to finance th eir £1 m illion
purchase, club A m ay sell two o r three players w ho are past th eir best to lower division clubs. T h is analysis
m ay well have som e validity, b u t there are notable exceptions. For exam ple, w hen a French club bought a
player from an English club for over £4 m illion the m oney h ad not been circulating ro u n d the League clubs.

A Levy on T ransfer Fees?
   114. Even if th e “circu latio n ” argum ent has som e validity, the fact rem ains th a t transfer fees have reached
a level w hich m any regard as grotesque a n d certainly o u t o f all p ro p o rtio n to the am ounts spent on ground
im provem ent. T h ere is a case for the football au th o rities im posing a levy on such fees, the proceeds going to
the F G IT to fu n d gro u n d im provem ents. I suggest consideration be given to this.

T ax “Anomaly”
    115. Secondly (an d th is is th e tax argum ent) football clubs have a strong fiscal inducem ent to spend on
players ra th e r th a n ground im provem ents. Paym ents for players are allowable revenue expenditure.
Im provem ents to th e ground are not. In Brown (Inspector o f taxes) v Burnley Football and Athletic Company
L td 1983 A ER 244, it was held th a t expenditure on a new stan d to replace an old unsafe one d id n ot qualify as
an allowable d ed uctio n w hether as a rep air o r as provision o f plant. It is arguable th a t a fiscal provision which
penalises th e redevelopm ent o f grounds w hilst encouraging the paym ent o f huge transfer fees is an anomaly,
th a t it sends the w rong signals to clubs, an d th a t it encourages them to neglect q uestions o f safety in favour o f
pro m o tin g success on the field. To accede to this argum ent m ight fall foul o f the m axim th at h ard cases m ake
b a d law. B ut as a m a tte r o f policy, it is argued th a t the encouragem ent o f expenditure on ground
im provem ents by a fiscal concession m ay well b e a r re-exam ination.

Club Financing
   116. W hatever m ay com e from the Pool P ro m o ters A ssociation via the two Trusts, o r from any tax
concession, in th e end the bulk o f the finances for ground im provem ent m ust be raised by the clubs
them selves. H ere, clubs are at a disadvantage com p ared w ith th eir E uropean counterparts. O n the continent
m ost grounds are ow ned by local au tho rities w hich lease th em to th e clubs. They are regarded as providing a
com m unal facility an d often the stadium is available for a variety o f sports an d o th er functions; sports
facilities an d offices are b u ilt into th e stadium complex.


                                                            19
   117. N evertheless, there are ways o f financing im provem ents if the club m anagem ent is enterprising and
resourceful. S ponsorship is one. Presently it brings £17.5 m illion in to football annually. A dvertising on
electric score b o ard s an d on hoardings ro u n d the ground as well as on tickets, program m es a n d m em bership
cards is another. A ssociated com panies m arketing sports w ear an d o th er m erchandise w ith the club’s logo,
the sale o f television rights, th e issue o f debentures, and th e sale o f shares to the public are o th er m ethods
w hich can be an d have been used. In particular, I w ould expect the football a u tho rities to seek the highest
possible price for television rights. U n d e r current co ntractual arrangem ents, the Football A ssociation
receives som e £6 m illion pa from the sale o f television rights for dom estic broadcasts, o f w hich som e £2.5
m illion is d istribu ted to clubs. T hey also receive betw een £0.75 m illion a n d £1 m illion for the sale o f
television rights overseas. Separate arrangem ents apply at Wembley. T he Football League contracted som e
two years ago to sell the television rights for League m atches for £11 m illion, linked to the Retail P rice Index.
T h e television com panies know th a t football on th e screen has a vast following. T hey should be expected to
pay a substantial price for the rights to relay p o p u lar m atches. For th eir part, the football authorities should
ensure th a t this valuable source o f revenue is d irected tow ards im proving stadia as a high priority.

    118. T he cost o f covered seating throughout the 92 clubs in the Football League has been investigated by
the FA. W hilst the assessm ent can only be a rough estim ate an d is subject to fluctuations due to inflation and
o th e r factors, the consultants suggested th a t to install seating throughout all the grounds m ight cost ab o u t £30
m illion. To provide cover over all those areas could cost a fu rth e r £100 m illion. It should be noted, however,
th a t no breakdow n o f th a t figure is given. M oreover, it assum es “all existing uncovered standing capacity
should becom e covered”. G iven cu rren t attendances, it w ould seem unnecessary th a t all th a t capacity should
be covered. In m any instances, attendances are always well below the p erm itted capacity o f the ground. In
those cases, a m uch sm aller scale solution involving the rebuilding o r redevelopm ent o f only p art o f the
ground w ould be sufficient. T here w ould be little p o in t in providing covered seating accom m odation
th roughout a gro u n d if there is no realistic possibility o f m ore th a n h a lf o f it being used. C osts m ay therefore
be less d aunting for th e sm aller clubs th a n the consultants’ estim ates suggest.

U pgraded S tad ia or New S tadia
  119. A t m ajo r g rounds w here substantial resources can be generated, vast im provem ents can be m ade on
existing sites if there is sufficient space. I have seen a n u m b er o f im aginative exam ples o f ground
redevelopm ent. It has been achieved a t Ibrox P ark a n d is in the course o f being achieved at O ld Trafford,
W hite H a rt Lane a n d H am p d en P ark, to give only four exam ples.

    120. However, I agree w ith the evidence from the Sports C ouncil as to the n eed for space to facilitate car
parking, external a n d in tern al circulation a n d sufficient exits an d entrances to the spectator areas. They
s a id :-

  “T he location o f m any existing football grounds in central city o r town sites precludes this provision (of
  space) w hich im plies the a d o p tio n o f a gradual b u t progressive policy o f disposing o f grounds in densely
  developed areas a n d replacing the facility on the u rb an periphery. T h e C ouncil believes th a t o pp o rtu n ities
  exist for such developm ents on a self-funding basis in m any instances. T his w ould also provide the
  o p p o rtu n ity for m ore th a n one club to be based a t newly developed stad ia constructed to a high
  specification a n d b u ilt to m eet new d em ands for safety a n d com fort” .

S t Jo h n sto n e
    121. I was im pressed by the way this h a d been done at three p articu lar grounds. A t St Jo hn sto ne in
Scotland, the solution has been to involve private capital directly. T he ASDA su p erm ark et chain bought the
site o f the o ld St Jo h nsto n e Football Club in the centre o f Perth, redeveloped it as a superm arket, a n d built
the club a b ra n d new all-seated stad iu m for 10,000 spectators on the outskirts o f the town. T h e site was, in
effect, d o n ated by a local farmer. It is close to a m otorw ay exit a n d provides for extensive car parks. I accept
th a t th is confluence o f factors m ight n o t be easy to reproduce elsewhere. In particular, land prices in som e
areas w ould be p roh ib itiv e a n d planning perm ission very difficult to obtain. A greenfield site is likely to be in
a conservation o r green belt area a n d the choice o f sites is lim ited by the n eed to m ake the ground accessible
to townsfolk albeit outside the town.

U trecht
   122. I saw two exam ples a b ro ad w here these problem s h ad been tackled resolutely. A t U trech t an old
stad iu m o n the outskirts o f the town was totally redeveloped on the sam e site ostensibly a t nil cost. T he
contracting com pany w hich rebuilt the stad iu m (Ballast N ed am ) is now in consultation w ith 11 clubs in
E ngland a n d Scotland w ith a view to building sim ilar projects in partn ersh ip w ith the Football A ssociation


                                                             20
an d B ritish A erospace o f w hich it is a subsidiary. T h e ir concept involves the recognition th a t in the past, for
all b u t a h an d fu l o f days in the year, a stad iu m com plex has usually an d wastefully lain deserted. A t U trecht
the stadium is ow ned by the m unicipality. T h e space u n d ern eath the stands a n d in the corners o f the ground
has been developed to provide a cco m m o datio n for com m ercial use. T he ren t provides the m unicipality w ith
sports acco m m o d atio n w hich pays for itself. Some 6,000 square m etres o f com m ercial w orking areas an d
24,000 square m etres o f com m ercial offices have been incorporated into the com plex. T he com m ercial uses
o f this acco m m o d atio n include office accom m odation, snack bars, sports facilities, photocopying a n d office
eq u ip m en t services, a driving school a n d a hairdresser. T h e large parking area is used except on m atch days
as a “park a n d rid e ” facility for those w orking in the m ore congested areas o f the city. T he advantages for
business are th a t shops a n d offices enjoy a prestigious high profile address w ith all necessary services an d
facilities. For the com m unity, the com m ercial stadium serves as an aren a b o th for trade an d recreation.
A ppendix 5 is a photograph showing the stad iu m w ith the com m ercial infill in the com ers an d o u t into the
car park.

N im es
   123. T he stadiu m a t N im es in S outhern F rance is also ow ned by the m unicipality . It was bu ilt recently on
the outskirts o f the town w ith extensive parking a n d good access to ro ad com m unications. T he cost was som e
£17 m illion o f w hich £16 m illion cam e from the m u nicipality itself. T h e ju stificatio n for this expenditure o f
public funds is the b elief th a t the stad ium is a com m unal asset. It provides n o t only a stadium for football or
rugby b u t an extensive range o f o th e r sports facilities b u ilt into the com plex. T hese include a gym nastic hall
capable o f hosting in tern atio n al m atches, an “o m n isp o rt” hall for tennis, basket-ball an d volley-ball, a ju d o
hall, facilities for fencing an d billiards, a n d a large exhibition hall which, a t the tim e o f o u r visit, h ad ju st
been used for a car sales exhibition.

Local A uthority A ssistance
   124. All these three stadia are on a com paratively sm all scale. St Johnstone seats 10,000. U trech t
accom m odates 20,000 a n d N im es ab o u t 2 8 ,0 0 0 .1 accept th a t in the cu rren t financial clim ate an d w ith ou r
different ap p ro ach to com m unal funding, local au th o rities are unlikely to be able to provide subsidies for
such stadia, although local au th orities do subsidize, for exam ple, sw im m ing baths, theatres a n d o th er leisure
facilities w hich m ay serve fewer o f th e ir citizens. However, clubs w hich wish to m ove from centre town sites
to new sites on the outskirts o f town m ay well be able to fin d a p urchaser as St Johnstone d id w ith ASDA.
Likewise, those w ho wish eith er to b u ild a new stadiu m on the outskirts o r to redevelop their stadium in town
m ay be able to do so in a way w hich incorporates space for com m ercial lettings.

    125. In such situations, although the local au th o rity m ay be unable to assist w ith finance, it could play a
useful role in bringing parties together a n d as planning authority. It could take a favourable view, for
exam ple, o f a planning application w hich involved the provision n o t only o f a com m unal sports stadium b u t
o f fu rth er facilities, w hether for sport o r otherw ise, b e n e fitin g the c om m unity as a whole. T here has recently
been a n u m b e r o f attem p ts by clubs to fin d greenfield sites for new grounds only to be tu rn ed down a t each
a tte m p t on p lanning grounds. Clearly, an ap p lication for a football gro u n d in a conservation area o r green
belt poses planning problem s. But, although the protection o f such areas is an im p o rta n t principle, two o th er
consid eratio n s m ay also carry weight. First, th a t the quality o f life o f residents living adjacent to a football
ground in a tow n w ould be m uch im proved by resiting it elsewhere. Secondly, th a t if we w ant safety an d
im proved stan d ard s a t grounds there are som e clubs w hich will need a new site a t w hich to achieve them . To
this end, local a u th orities should surely give w hat assistance they properly can. O ne useful exam ple o f the
m u tu al assistance w hich a club a n d a local au th o rity can give each o th er is an agreem ent m ade betw een
Millwall a n d th e L ondon Borough o f Lew isham . T he latter agreed to pay £70,000 a year to the club w hich for
its p a rt agreed in ter alia to m ake the gro u n d available for various activities beneficial to the local com m unity.

Ground S haring
    126. W heth er o r n o t incom e-earning facilities are incorporated into a sports ground, it seems uneconom ic
th a t the stadiu m itself should be used by only one club, in effect once a fortnight. T he cost to each club b oth
o f upgrading o r building a stadium a n d o f m aintain in g it could be halved if sensible sharing arrangem ents
could be m ade. B ut there is resistance to this. A n u m b er o f cities have two clubs, each w ith its own ground.
Such is local rivalry th a t the idea o f ground sharing seems a n ath em a to many. Yet, faced w ith the expense o f
seating an d g round im provem ent, it w ould m ake financial sense. O pposition to sharing an entirely new
g round m ay be m arginally less th a n to one club sharing a n o th er’s existing ground. Recently M r Peter
R obinson, C h ief Executive o f Liverpool F C, was q u o ted as saying:

   “I f som eone were to b uild a high-quality stadium on M erseyside, we a n d Everton would be quite happy to
   share it - even though the idea m ight n o t appeal to the fans a t first”.


                                                             21
  If two clubs could sell th e ir in n er city grounds w ith planning perm ission, the resultant capital w ould go a
long way to building a m o d ern shared stadiu m on a m ore suitable site.

  127. It works abroad. AC M ilan a n d In te r M ilan share the San Siro stadium . In T urin, Juventus an d
Torino also share. G enova an d S am pdoria provide a th ird exam ple.

  128. As long ago as 1981, in the Sports C ouncil’s H an d b o o k o f Sports a n d R ecreational Building D esign,
Volume T hree (O u td o or Sports), ground-sharing was considered in a technical study o f stadia. T he author,
M r F aulkner Brown, w rote a t page 2 4 :-

  “Several courses w ould ap p e a r to be open to football clubs. O ne is th a t they m ight rationalise th e ir position
  and, w herever possible, jo in tly use a single stadium . T his could h appen a t Sheffield, N o ttin g h am a n d
  Bristol. F u lh am could move in w ith C helsea a n d B rentford w ith Q ueen’s P ark Rangers. Inter-M ilan an d
  AC M ilan, for all th e ir deep rivalry, do live happily enough together in th e giant San Siro stadium . T he
  B ritish clubs could all retain th e ir identity, halve th e ir overheads a n d realise handsom ely th e value o f th eir
  freehold properties, if they could cope w ith th e ir fiercely held views o f club in dividuality a n d club pride.

     A n o ther alternativ e w ould be, w here possible, for clubs to offer u nu sed land adjacen t to the stad ium for
  developm ent a n d , in realising th e assets from th e land, to plough th em back into the cost o f stadium
  reconstruction. This, o f course, has hap p en ed at L ord’s an d is having som e noticeable effects at th e Oval
  a n d in o th e r county cricket grounds.

    A fu rth e r alternative is to b u ild ad d itio n al sports facilities alongside the stadium , n o t necessarily in
  em u latio n o f the ancien t G reek exam ple (but nevertheless there is a parallel), so th a t a large n u m b er o f
  sports clubs could use all the facilities. T his schem e has been developed to som e extent b o th in th e U n ited
  States a n d o n th e co n tin en t.”

Super-Stadia
  129. So far, I have referred only to club grounds. B ut there is a case for having a sm all n u m b er o f
super-stadia capable o f accom m odating very large crowds for in tern atio n al m atches o r m ajo r C up ties. At
present, th e only such stadiu m in the U K is W embley w hich will acco m m o d ate 80,000 all-seated. Like
Wembley, any o th er stadia o f large capacity could b e available n o t only for football b u t for o th er sports, for
pop concerts an d o th er large events.

   130. A con so rtium com prising British A erospace, th e FA an d Ballast N ed am (who b u ilt the U trecht
stadium ) is presently considering the building o f a new national stad iu m at B irm ingham to accom m odate
100,000. T here is a suggestion th a t this project, if carried through, w ould provide a replacem ent for
Wembley. However, it may well be th a t there is room for both. T his w ould give a venue in L ondon an d a
venue in th e M id lan d s for m ajo r events. H am p d e n Park has served as Scotland’s in tern atio nal football
ground for m any years an d w hen p lanned im provem ents are com plete it should con tin u e to do so. It is
arguable th a t one m ore large stad iu m m ay be req u ired in the n o rth o f E ngland b u t the upgrading o f a ground
such as O ld T rafford m ight well suffice to achieve th is purpose.

Leadership and Example
   131. I tu rn from stadia and m oney to one aspect o f football w hich gives w ide scope for im provem ent at
very little cost. M uch is w ritten ab o u t the m isbehaviour o f spectators; b u t m isbehaviour is often im itative.
H ooligans in the crowd find others w ho will copy them . Similarly, in citem ent from th e pitch o r b ad
b ehaviour by players has a m align influence on the crowd. For m any fervent followers, the m en on the pitch
are heroes to be revered an d em ulated. A fter a goal, w hen the scorer d em o n strates to the fans b eh in d the
fencing, th e resultant surge forw ard an d hysteria is b ad for safety an d b a d for crowd control. It should not
occur. W orse still, w hen players fight, the fans follow suit. Lest anyone d o u b t this, the recent exam ples o f
fighting betw een players b ear it out. In two o f th e four incidents in N ovem ber 1989, crowd m isbehaviour
resulted directly from fighting betw een players. A t Highbury, fans cam e o u t on to the pitch to jo in in. At
U p to n Park, scuffles betw een W im bledon an d West H am players provoked surging, fighting a n d coin
throw ing on the terraces.

    132. It is in the first instance up to the players them selves, then the referees, the m anagers an d the club
 directors to stop bo th incitem ent an d violence by players w hether o n o r o ff th e ball. T he referees, m anagers
 an d directors have power to do this. I f a n d w hen they fail to use it, the FA m u st take a firm disciplinary line
 using th e ir very full powers to fine those involved including the clubs a n d to penalise the clubs in points. I f all
 else fails, there is no reason why violence on th e pitch should have any im m u n ity from the law o f the land or
 from police action.


                                                             22
   133. O n th e positive side, m anagem ent could do m uch to create a b etter atm osphere in the grounds by
w hat they say an d w hat they w rite in program m es an d m agazines. By consulting w ith supporters they could
enlist th e goodwill an d help o f the decent m ajority to isolate an d reb u ff m isbehaviour from the m inority
rath er th a n im itate it. A cam paign for b e tte r b eh av io u r could be launched by the clubs through th eir
literature a n d backed by m anagers an d players using th e ir p o p u lar hero appeal.

    134. I should ad d th a t violence on th e p itch is not confined to soccer. T here has been a growing incidence
o f stam pings an d punchings in Rugby U n io n gam es even at the highest level. R eaction from referees, clubs
an d even in tern atio nal selectors has ten d ed to play such incidents down. Although spectator b eh avio u r has
not, as yet, been adversely affected by such incidents, the au tho rities ought to deal firmly w ith th em before
th a t h ap p en s an d in any event, sim ply because violence should be p u t down.

Fam ily and M em bership Areas
    135. M uch progress has been m ade at a n u m b er o f clubs recently in bringing w om en and children back to
w atching football by creating separate fam ily areas. Similarly, partial m em bership schem es have enabled
clubs to reserve p arts o f th e ground exclusively to m em bers. T h is has h a d th e dual advantage o f creating areas
o f reliable good b eh av io u r an d offering discounts, favourable travel facilities and o th er benefits to m em bers.
T h e good b eh av io u r depends o n those w ho pay for m em bership being m ore likely to be responsible and upon
th e ir risking loss o f m em bership if they transgress.

   136. At a n u m b er o f grounds, fam ily areas have been de-segregated in the sense th a t fam ilies draw n from
away su p p o rters have been p erm itted to share fam ily areas w ith hom e supporters. I have already indicated
how segregation has ten d ed to worsen hostility betw een rival fans. It is difficult once segregation has been
practised to dispense w ith it, certainly at a stroke. These jo in t fam ily areas m ay prove to be th e first step in a
retreat from segregation. I f the process can be extended gradually to allowing m em bers o f the visiting club to
share th e m em bership area o f th e h om e club, useful progress will have been m ade. It will be m ade easier if
there is seating ra th e r th a n standing.

T h e D isabled
   137. I received evidence from the Royal A ssociation for D isability an d R ehabilitation (RA D A R) an d the
Access C o m m ittee for England draw ing a tten tion to th e o p p o rtu n ity which redevelopm ent o f grounds
presents to m ake b e tte r provision for disabled people. M any clubs already m ake provision for th e disabled
b u t this is by n o m eans universal. P articu lar atten tion is needed to th e provision o f safe an d adequately
spacious view ing areas for w heelchair users, w ith a seat alongside for a com panion, protected from the
weather, accessible to toilet facilities designed specifically for the disabled, and easily reached from a car park
(w ith reserved c ar spaces for O range Badge holders) by m eans o f ram ps. T h e needs o f o th e r disabled people -
those who have difficulty walking, th e partially sighted, and th ose w ith im paired hearing - require special
attentio n , for exam ple by the provision o f handrails, clear signposts, steps painted in bright colours, an d the
use o f electronic scoreboards to supplem ent loudspeaker announcem ents, if these people are to be able to
atte n d sporting events enjoyably an d safely. I endorse the im portance attached to these suggestions and I
h ope th a t th e com prehensive im provem ents w hich I am proposing will include careful atten tio n to them .
C lubs should regard them as integral to th eir planning, not as an optional extra.

Conclusion
  138. I hope in these two chapters I have m ade it clear th a t the years o f patching up grounds, o f having
periodic disasters an d narrowly avoiding m any others by m uddling through on a wing an d a prayer m ust be
over. A totally new approach across th e whole field o f football requires higher standards b o th in bricks and
m o rta r an d in h u m a n relationships.




                                                           23
                           PART II - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                                                        CHAPTER 3

                                                 T H E FRAMEWORK

Minimum Standards of Safety
   139.     It is a tru ism th a t safety an d crowd control are inter-dependent. I f a crowd gets o ut o f control safety
will be in jeopardy. M easures to control the crowd, such as fencing, alm ost always have an im pact on safety.
N evertheless, I shall seek to tre a t each separately. In this P art I shall deal w ith m anagem ent an d features o f
the ground affecting safety.

    140 I have already stressed the need for football m anagem ent to give higher priority to the safety and
well-being o f spectators. Clearly, the cost o f safety m easures an d im provem ents can m ore easily be b o rn e o r
raised by th e successful clubs th a n by those struggling to keep going. B ut the safety o f spectators invited to a
ground cann o t be left to d ep en d u p o n th e affluence o f th e club. T h ere m ust be prescribed m inim urn
requirem ents w hich have to be fulfilled at any g round if spectators are to be ad m itted there. T h e evidence o f
practice pre-H illsborough an d in d eed post-H illsborough, right u p to D ecem b er 1989, convinces me th a t the
provisions presently in place, statu to ry a n d otherw ise, have not been strong enough to enforce th a t basic level
o f safety.

Legislation for Safety
   141. T h e principal in stru m en ts aim ed at achieving a fram ew ork for safety are th e Safety o f Sports
G ro u n d s A ct 1975 as am en d ed by th e Fire Safety an d Safety o f Places o f S port A ct 1987 a n d th e H o m e Office
G u id e to Safety at Sports G ro u n d s (G reen G uide).

    142. T h e 1975 Act, as am ended, requires a Safety C ertificate to be issued by the local a u th o rity in respect
o f designated sports grounds. It is an offence (Section 12(l)(d)) to contravene any term o r co n d itio n o f the
C ertificate. T h u s the requirem ents o f th e C ertificate are m an d ato ry b u t w hat those requirem ents should be is
in the discretion o f the local authority.

   143. Section 2(1) o f the 1975 A ct p ro v id es:-

   “A safety certificate shall co n tain such term s an d co nd itio ns as th e local a u th o rity consider necessary or
   expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stad iu m w hen it is in use for the specified activity o r activities,
   an d the term s an d co n d itio n s m ay be such as to involve alterations o r ad d itio n s to the stadium .

    144. Originally, certain obligatory term s h ad to be inserted in Safety Certificates. Section 2(2) p ro v id e d .-

   “W ith o u t prejudice to subsection (1) above, a safety certificate -

      (a) shall specify the m axim um n u m b er o f spectators to be a d m itte d to the stadium ;

      (b) m ay specify th e m axim u m n u m b e r to be ad m itted to different p arts o f it; an d

      (c) shall include term s and conditions: -
          (i) as to the num ber, size an d situ atio n o f entrances to an d exits from th e stad iu m o r any p a rt o f it
          (including m eans o f escape in case o f fire o r o th er emergency) an d th e m eans o f access to any such
          entrances o r exits;
          (ii) requiring those entrances, exits an d m eans o f access to be properly m a in ta in e d and kept free
          from obstruction; and

          (iii) as to the num ber, strength a n d situ atio n o f any crush barriers.”

     However, w hen the Fire Safety an d Safety o f Places o f Sport A ct 1987 extended the application o f the 1975
  A ct from sports stadia to all sports grounds, there was su bstitu ted for section 2(2), by section 19 o f th e 1987
  Act, a new section 2(2) an d a new section 15A giving power to th e Secretary o f State by o rd er to lay dow n w hat
  term s an d conditions a Safety C ertificate shall include. N o o rd er has yet been m ad e b u t guidance from the
  H o m e Office has recom m ended local au tho rities to approach th e ir fun ctio n u n d e r section 2( 1) in accordance
  w ith th e criteria in th e superseded section 2(2). (See H o m e Office C ircular 71/1987 d ated 25 N ovem ber
   1987, A nnex A, paragraph 6.)


                                                                24
    145. So, presently, local auth o rities are not b o u n d to include term s o r conditions on any p articu lar aspect
o f safety in the Certificate. In practice, they no d o u b t follow the H om e Office guidance. T hey also take
account o f the G reen G uide.

Green Guide
  146. T h e latter, however, is by way o f guidance only. It provides as follows:-

  “ 6. D eviations from individual guidelines are possible w ithout necessarily d etracting from the overall
  safety o f the ground. T h e variety o f type, function an d layout o f sports grounds an d the inter-relationship
  o f the different parts o f them m eans th a t a flexible ap proach should be m ain tain ed to take account o f the
  particu lar circum stances at individual grounds”.

   Such flexibility is obviously highly desirable in relation to som e aspects o f the guidance. But flexibility can
becom e degraded. W here a local a u th o rity has chosen to in corporate the criteria o f the G reen G uide into a
Safety C ertificate there has been scope for considerable deviation from provisions which ought to com m and
stan d ard adherence. T hus, for exam ple, at H illsborough w here the Safety C ertificate required com pliance
w ith certain G reen G u id e recom m endations an d a d e p a rtu re was shown to have occurred, the defence was
th a t the G uide expressly provided for flexibility so th a t a deviation from its provisions was a m atter o f
legitim ate discretion.

   147. In view o f this an d evidence I have received suggesting th a t the G reen G uide m ay n o t be followed as
closely as is desirable, I consider th a t w hen it is revised it needs to b e given m ore effect. A t present there is a
risk o f slackness developing in the absence o f any m an d ato ry provisions. T here w ould ap p ear to be two
alternative courses open. It would be possible to m ake the term s o f the G reen G uide m an d ato ry throughout.
However, I th ink th a t th is could be too rigid an d in relation to som e peripheral m atters im practical. T h e other
course is to m ake som e o f its provisions obligatory inclusions in the Safety C ertificate. I prefer this.

   148. There are some requirements of such crucial importance to safety that it should be mandatory for
Safety Certificates to specify them. I consider those specified in the original section 2(2) of the 1975 Act fall
into this category. Moreover, so far as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned “shall” should be substituted
for “may”. T h is is critical to ensuring th a t no discrete area becom es overcrowded.

   149. Accordingly, I recommend that the Secretary of State exercise his specific powers under section 15A
or his general powers under section 6(2) by order or regulation to achieve this. In specifying the requirem ents
in the C ertificate, for a p articu lar ground, the local a u th o rity should follow the G reen G uide criteria; but
once th a t is d one an d the ap p ro p riate figures an d term s for th a t ground have been decided no room should be
left for flexibility. By the stage w hen the local auth o rity h as specified the requirem ents in the Certificate,
flexibility has been exhausted.

    150. Where a local authority incorporates any other provision of the Green Guide into the Safety
Certificate it should make it clear whether that provision is to be complied with absolutely or with
discretionary flexibility. For exam ple, paragraph 88 o f th e G reen G u id e provides th a t a ram p subject to
heavy crowd flow should preferably not exceed a gradient o f 1 in 10. Should a local au th o rity require in a
Safety C ertificate th a t a club com ply w ith a G reen G u id e recom m endation as to gradients it should m ake
clear w hether it restricts gradients to a m axim um o f 1 in 10 o r w hether it leaves flexibility to the discretion o f
th e club.

   151. In puttin g the responsibility for the Safety C ertificate u p o n the local authority, P arliam ent no d oubt
had two sound reasons; first, since all sports grounds differ in th eir layout and environs, local knowledge
ought sensibly to be utilised in laying dow n an d m onitoring term s a n d conditions; secondly, a local body can
respond quickly to any problem w hich m ay arise. N evertheless, there are two aspects o f such local
ad m in istratio n w hich can cause problem s.

   (i) The Advisory Group
   152. T h e issue, review an d enforcem ent o f Safety C ertificates should be based upon efficient professional
inspection an d o p in io n an d should be conducted in a businesslike m anner. In Sheffield, the Safety
C ertificate procedure b o th for H illsborough an d for Sheffield U n ite d ’s ground at Bram all Lane was
unsatisfactory as I indicated in paragraphs 150 to 158 o f my Interim R eport. 1 hope th a t this was exceptional.
It is important that there should be a safety' team consisting of appropriate members of the local authority’s own
staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services and of the building authority. W hat nam e
is given to this group does not in the end m atter. At Sheffield it began by being called the Officer W orking Party.


                                                            25
W hen Sheffield City C ouncil took over from South Yorkshire C ounty C ouncil, the nam e was changed to the
“ Safety o f Sports G ro u n d s A dvisory G ro u p ”, o r the A dvisory G ro u p for short. In my interim
recom m endations (N u m b er 17) I said an A dvisory G roup should be set up. I h ad in m in d the type o f safety
team already referred to. Apparently, in som e quarters, it was thought th a t I was suggesting a second body
called an A dvisory G ro u p to advise the safety team . T his was n o t so. Also, in th a t recom m endation, I
suggested th a t representatives o f the club an d o f a recognised supporters’ club should be m em bers o f the
A dvisory G roup. I have reconsidered this in th e light o f evidence a n d advice received. T h e responsibility for
the Safety C ertificate is exclusively th a t o f the local authority. I therefore think that the correct course is that
representatives of the club and of a recognised supporters’ organisation should be consulted, since they may
have relevant suggestions o r criticism s to m ake, b u t they should n o t be full m em bers o f the team .

  153. I repeat my recommendation that the Advisory Group’s terms of reference should encompass all
matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and attendance at matches.
There should be a chairman from the local authority, and an effective procedure. Resolutions should be recorded
and regular written reports should be required for consideration by the local authority.

   (ii) A Review Body
   154. T h e o th er d isadvantage o f Safety Certificates being issued locally is th a t different stan d ard s m ay be
applied by different au th o rities even in practically identical situations. A safety team , o r som e very
influential m em b er o f it, m ay be m uch stricter in one place th an the com parable a u th o rity elsewhere. I have
h ad com plaints th a t since H illsborough m easures ap p rop riate to a larger ground have been rigidly an d
inappropriately enforced at grounds with negligible attendance. Conversely, it is possible th a t too indulgent
o r lax an approach m ay be ad o p ted o r develop in a particular locality. Again, sim ply left to solve th eir own
problem s, there would be little o p po rtun ity for local au th o rities to learn from com parison w ith solutions
adopted elsewhere. In these circum stances, it has been suggested th a t there should be a N ation al Forum in
w hich local au th o rity team s could m eet periodically to discuss a n d com pare th eir procedures, an d th a t there
should be a national overseeing a n d inspecting body to m o n ito r an d review the consistent discharge by local
au th o rities o f th eir certificating duties. H aving discussed this with local au th o rity representatives bo th in
E ngland an d in Scotland I am satisfied th a t two approaches are not necessary. The better course is to have a
National Inspectorate and Review Body. This is now provided for in the Football Spectators Act 1989 by section
13. It is there laid down that the Football Licensing Authority shall have the function of keeping under review
the discharge by local authorities of their functions under the 1975 Act. T h e FLA may, having consulted the
local a u th o rity an d certain local officers, require term s an d conditions to be included in any Safety
C ertificate. T he section em powers any inspector ap p o in ted by the FLA to m ake inspections a n d inquiry as
necessary. T h e local a u tho rity m ay by notice be required to furnish the FLA w ith in form atio n regarding its
discharge o f its 197 5 A ct functions.

   155. I warmly welcome the appointment of a national body to conduct these inspecting and reviewing
functions. Assum ing it successfully discharges those functions, the effect should b e to im prove the efficiency
an d consistency o f practice w ith regard to the issue an d review o f Safety C ertificates. T h is would be enhanced
if the review body were to circulate, to all local authorities from tim e to tim e, advice based upon th eir
experience o f problem s a n d solutions at various grounds. (See also R ecom m en d atio n 16 o f the report o f the
Technical W orking P arty at A ppendix 3).

   156. Because the Football Spectators Act 1989 applies only to association football, the inspecting and
reviewing role of the FLA would be exercisable only in relation to Safety Certificates at football grounds.
Nevertheless, this remit of the FLA should be extended to cover all grounds designated under the 1975 Act and
indeed all grounds requiring Safety Certificates or licences under Parts III and IV of the 1987 Act. Should Part
I of the 1989 Act either not be implemented or be substantially delayed, the same functions should be given to
another suitably constituted body to cover all sports grounds.

    157. It has been suggested th a t the H ealth an d Safety Executive could fulfil th is fun ctio n if necessary or
 indeed th a t it could m o n ito r spectator safety u n d e r the provisions o f the H ealth an d Safety at W ork Etc Act
 1974. However, its resources w ould need to be increased. M oreover, un til now the H ealth an d Safety
 Executive, being prim arily concerned w ith the safety o f employees p u rsu an t to the 1974 Act, has not
 extended its surveillance to include spectators a t football grounds. T h e H om e O ffice evidence on this p o in t is
 as follows:

   “T he H ealth an d Safety at W ork Act could also be used to enforce general spectator safety a t sports grounds.
   Section 3 o f the A ct is w ide ranging in th a t it places a du ty on an em ployer to conduct his u ndertaking in
   such a way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, th a t persons n o t in h is em ploym ent who m ay be
   affected thereby are n o t exposed to risks to th eir health o r safety. A sports o r o th er en tertain m en t


                                                            26
“undertak in g ” w ould fall w ithin this category. However, it is the stated policy o f the H ealth and Safety
C om m ission th at, as a general principle, they an d the Executive wish to avoid duplication o f enforcem ent
w ith o th er authorities. T h e HSE would not therefore generally a tte m p t to enforce the requirem ents o f
Section 3 o f the 1974 A ct w hen they overlap w ith d uties im posed by o th er m ore specific legislation where
o th e r a u th o rities have responsibility for policy an d enforcem ent. T h e Safety o f Sports G rounds A ct 1975
represents m o re specific legislation an d the H ealth a n d Safety Executive does not enforce Section 3 o f the
1974 Act to secure the safety o f spectators at sports grounds. T h is arrangem ent is agreed betw een the
H ealth a n d Safety Executive a n d the H om e O ffice.”




                                                         27
                                                      CHA PTER 4

                                           SU B ST A N T IV E P R O V IS IO N S

   158. H aving considered the fram ew ork for safety provided by the statutory provisions a n d the G reen
G uide, I m u st now deal w ith certain key substantive provisions.

Capacity
    159. I accept the Technical W orking P arty ’s statem ent th a t “the safe allowable capacity o f any viewing
area w h eth er seated o r standing is the least o f (i) its holding capacity, (ii) the n u m b er o f persons who can leave
through a norm al exit system w ithin a prescribed tim e at the end o f an event, (iii) the n u m b er o f persons who
can leave through an em ergency exit system w ithin a prescribed tim e an d (iv) the n u m b er o f persons who can
be a d m itte d through the turnstiles serving th a t area w ithin one hour.” T h e “prescribed tim e ” for norm al exit
is said in paragraph 230 o f the G u id e to be 8 m inutes. T h e “prescribed tim e” for em ergency exit is not
definitively fixed in the G uide as it will vary from area to area. It will need to be d eterm in ed by the local
a u th o rity on advice from the A dvisory G ro u p an d especially the fire service.

   160. Subject to factors (ii), (iii) a n d (iv), w here there is a properly designed seating area, capacity is sim ply
d eterm in ed by the n u m b er o f seats. Increasingly, therefore, problem s o f m axim um capacity will fade o u t as
seating is phased in. But, as long as we have standing areas, grounds will be vulnerable to overcrowding an d
m ax im u m lim its m u st be set an d achieved.

   161. T h e G reen G u id e provides in paragraphs 221 and 222 for a m axim um density o f 54 persons p er 10 sq
m etres assum ing a terrace o r view ing slope in good condition. For som e reason, not easy to u n d erstan d , the
G u id e also provides the lower figure o f 27 persons per 10 sq m etres w hen the slope o r terrace “m aterially
deviates from the recom m ended guidelines, so as to constitute a possible h azard to individuals closely
packed” . T his m ight be taken to im ply th a t w hatever the hazards there is no need to reduce capacity below
27. In the heading to C h ap ter 16, the G reen G u id e em phasises th a t “account should be taken o f the features
o f the ind iv id u al ground, its configuration, general condition, use a n d any deviations from the G uide’s
provisions.”

   162. It becam e clear from evidence before m e at b o th stages o f this Inquiry th a t n o t only was the
m ax im u m o f 54 p er 10 sq m etres grossly exceeded a t H illsborough; insufficient was being d one generally to
ensure e ith er by counting o r by inform ed assessm ent th a t the G reen G u id e criteria were observed.
Accordingly, I reaffirm ed the advice in the G u ide a n d recom m ended th a t a red u ctio n o f 15% b e m ade as an
interim m easure to im prove the safety m argin. T h e question now is w hat should be the final recom m endation
on this difficult subject.

   163. I entirely agree w ith the Technical W orking P arty th a t there is no b enefit to be gained from retaining
the lower figure o f 27 o r any o th er m in im u m figure. Indeed, it could be a dangerous suggestion. T h e scale of
perm issible density should be from 0 up to the m axim um figure applicable only in good conditions. I note
the Technical W orking P arty ’s view th a t “a uniformly distributed density o f 5.4/m 2 should be safe in static
conditions in fu ll compliance with the Green Guide'”. However, the w ords in italics are crucial to th e ir view.
It is one thing to place 54 docile people evenly in a n area o f 10 sq m etres on a terrace a n d say they should be
safe. It is q u ite a n o th e r if they are excited, if they sway o r surge to an d fro, if one end o f the area is a b etter
viewing p o int th a n the o th er a n d if account is taken o f possible incidents in the crowd eg a scuffle o r a
firework. Any o f those factors can cause bunching; bunching can quickly becom e crushing.

   164. M ost clubs have responsibly applied the recom m ended 15% reduction. Som e have jib b e d a t it;
understandably, in view o f its im p act on revenue. O n the o ther h an d , as I h ave already observed, som e Police
C o m m an d ers expressed relief th a t num bers have been reduced. I m u st also p o in t o u t that, even w hilst the
red u ctio n has been in force, events have shown how easy it is for crushing to occur.

   165. A t the start o f the 1989/90 season, on 19 August, C oventry w ere a t h om e to Everton. T here were
com plaints afterw ards o f congestion a n d crushing before the m atch o utside the turnstiles a n d after the m atch
as spectators pressed to get out.

   166. Even m ore w orrying was a n incident on 9 D ecem ber a t A yresom e Park w hen M iddlesbrough were at
h om e to Leeds. I have not conducted a full inq u iry into the incid ent having no rem it to do so. B ut I have
received a full rep o rt from the police. I have also viewed m ore th a n once a video film o f w hat happened. It
was ho rribly rem iniscent o f H illsborough.


                                                              28
   167. T he following facts are clear. Leeds supporters h a d been allocated, as a standing area, a w edge-shaped
pen “D ” at the south east c o m e r o f the ground. It was flanked by a narrow sterile area on each side. T here was
a b ro ad gangway runn in g from top to b o tto m o f pen “D ”. T h e p erim eter fencing at the front o f the pen was
topped w ith spikes. T here was n o t a single gate to the pitch. T h e only way o u t for those a t the fro n t was by a
gate a t each side into the sterile area an d thence through a n o th e r gate to the pitch. T hose gates were closed
during the m atch. T he capacity o f the pen in accordance w ith my in terim recom m endation was 2108. Leeds
supporters were a d m itted to th e pen, fam ilies w ith very young children being p u t a t the front. T h e gangway
was n o t kept clear. Som e Leeds supporters m anaged to get tickets for the opposite h om e en d o f the ground
causing apprehension o f trouble. A n u m b er o f them were taken o u t a n d m oved into pen “D ” from the pitch
side. O th er Leeds fans w ith tickets for the w rong end were also allowed into pen “D ” from the back. Shortly
after the m atch started, there was distress am ong those at the fro n t o f the pen. A fter two surges down p art o f
the pen w here there were no barriers from front to back, the police h a d to assist in getting spectators,
especially children, o u t o f the pen. T h is was done principally over th e fencing although the side gates were
o pened a n d sh ut a n u m b er o f tim es. In the event, 14 people h a d to be treated for m in or injuries in the
am bulance ro o m . Five spectators, three o f them children aged 10, 11 a n d 12, were taken to hospital w ith
chest injuries, lacerations an d bruising.

   168. T h e local authority, the police a n d the club were clearly shocked by this incident an d have taken
p ro m p t rem edial action. A dditional crush b arriers are to be installed, ad d itio n al gates are to be provided
including one for pen D , the capacity o f th a t pen is to be halved. A dm ission to all p arts o f the ground, save the
visitors’ section (pen D), is to be for m em bers only to prevent away supporters buying tickets for the hom e
end. Finally, there is to be a phased program m e w hich will extend seating to all spectators by 1991 /1992.

  169. T h is in cid en t a n d its afterm ath p ro m p t the query: does there have to be a disaster o r near-disaster at
each ground to trigger radical action? I hope not.

   170. T h e p erm itted capacity o f the pen was exceeded, although it is not clear to w hat extent. T he police
view is th a t it was only by ab o u t 60 persons. In a sense, the sm aller the excess the m ore the p o in t is m ad e th a t
danger can occur very quickly on a standing terrace even w ith m o d erate num bers. Som e argue th a t reducing
num bers an d giving spectators m ore room sim ply enables a surge to gather greater m om entum ; th a t the
tighter people are packed together th e less the scope for surging o r m isbehaviour. T his was the philosophy
w hich allowed excessive n um bers to be packed into pens p rio r to H illsborough. T h e only sensible conclusion
is th a t unless b o th n um bers a n d terrace layouts are strictly controlled, there will always be a risk o f crushing
on a standing terrace. T he co m b in atio n o f num bers, excitem ent an d partisanship, even leaving aside
m isbehaviour, h as a potential for danger.

   171. C o m p arison w ith criteria ad o p ted ab ro ad is instructive. France an d Belgium ad o p t the G reen G uide
figure o f 5.4/m 2. But in H olland, the m axim um standing capacity is 4 /m 2. In Italy, the rule varies betw een
m unicipalities. In M ilan th e figure is 2 /m 2. In R om e it is 4 /m 2. But in Italy little difference is recognised in
principle betw een the figures perm issible for standing a n d those for sitting.

   172. W eighing all these factors I d o not th in k it w ould be right to recom m end a substantial dep artu re from
the effect o f the 15% in terim reduction. Now, rath er th a n take a figure a n d d ed u ct a percentage from it, what
is required is a specific figure for m axim um standing density when terrace conditions are good by G reen Guide
criteria. I recommend th a t th a t figure should be 47 per 10 sq m etres and I would substitute 47 for the figure of
54 in the G reen Guide. T h e effect is approxim ately a 13% ra th e r th a n a 15% reduction from the form er figure
o f 54. I wish to stress as forcefully as I can, however, th a t this figure is a maximum and it is for the local
authority acting on the recom m endation of its Advisory Group to m ake necessary and realistic reductions from
th a t figure in respect of any feature of the terrace which deviates significantly from G reen G uide criteria or has
any o th er significant shortcoming.

Counting T hem In
   173. It is no use fixing a m axim um capacity for a pen o r enclosure unless there are reliable m eans o f
ensuring it is n o t exceeded. I therefore repeat my recom m endation th a t the num ber of spectators entering each
self-contained pen or o th e r stan d in g a re a m ust be lim ited electronically, m echanically, by a ticketin g
arrangem ent, by counting or otherw ise. T h e best arrangem ent is one w hich m akes all facilities for a single
view ing area self-contained; access should be through turnstiles solely serving th a t area via a concourse doing
likewise w ith its own toilets a n d refreshm ent points. T h is p o in t has already been clearly m ade in paragraphs
101 an d 206 o f th e G reen G u id e :-

  “ Each section should ideally be self-contained an d should be serviced by its own entrance/exits,
  refreshm ent facilities a n d to ile ts . . . ”


                                                              29
   T h a t way the num bers can be accurately recorded at the turnstiles on entry a n d no extra spectators can get
in to the area from elsewhere a t half-tim e o r after visiting com m on toilets o r snack-bars.

  174. A rrangem ents m ust be made to close off further access to each pen or area w hen m axim um capacity is
about to be reached and to close the turnstiles leading to the relevant area.

Gangways
  175. T h e G reen G uide, in p aragraphs 97 to 99, m akes recom m endations as to gangways as follows:-

  “ Spectators should be discouraged from standing in lateral gangways because this disrupts free m ovem ent
  ab o u t the ground (or w ithin sections o f it). Also, spectators on the terrace steps b eh in d the gangway may
  have th e ir view obstructed, w hich will cause th em to stretch a n d strain, a n d so generate dangerous
  pressures w ithin th e crowd. Spectators w ould be discouraged from standing in these gangways if they were
  sunk from 100mm to 200m m a n d i f crush barriers were provided b eh in d b u t n o t im m ediately in front o f
  them .

     Similarly, spectators should be discouraged from standing in radial gangways. T hese are relatively long
  a n d u ncontrolled dow nw ard p a th s through terraces, a n d are difficult to keep clear, especially w hen sited in
  p o p u lar viewing areas, eg b eh in d the goal area at a football ground. It is helpful to sink th em 150m m to
  2 00m m an d to in terru p t an otherw ise continuously descending gangway by tu rn s along, say, lateral
  gangways.

    W here sinking gangways, lateral o r radial, is not thought to be practical, th e ir b o u n daries should be
  highlighted w ith p a in t an d spectators advised by signs n o t to stan d there. Stewards m ay be needed to
  enforce th is in stru ctio n .”

   176. In m y view these provisions need to be m uch tougher. I agree with the Technical W orking P arty th at
gangways should be kept clear. T h ere is no p o in t in having them , in calling th em gangways an d in excluding
th em from the area used to calculate capacity u n d er paragraph 221 if spectators are allowed to stan d in them .
T h e whole p o in t o f crush barriers on terraces is to prevent u n restrain ed m ovem ent o f large m asses o f fans
from back to front dow n th e terrace. It they are allowed to stan d in the gangways w here there are no barriers,
such m ovem ent can occur w ithout in hibition. T h e incident at A yresome Park on 9 D ecem ber 1989 involved
ju st th at. Two surges causing crushing against the fence cam e dow n th e terrace u nrestrain ed by barriers.

     177. W hilst paragraph 98 o f th e G u id e notes the difficulty o f keeping radial gangways clear, it can be done.
 O ne way is to fix a radial rail on each side o f the gangway an d parallel to it, inh ib itin g lateral m ovem ent into
 th e gangway from the standing areas. A nother surprisingly effective m etho d w hich I saw used successfully by
 Millwall is to p u t red an d w hite tapes in the sam e p osition to indicate th e gangway as a no-go area for
 standing.

   178. Gangways should be painted in a conspicuous colour (yellow is used m ost com m only) w hether they are
 sunk or not. T h e Safety Certificate should require th a t no standing is allowed in gangways and th a t they be
 painted.

 Fencing
    179. P erhaps the m ost em otive an d d isp u ted topic in this field is w hat should be d one abo u t perim eter
 fences. T hey were installed a t m any grounds to prevent p itch invasions d uring the 1970s. A fter H illsborough
 there was a strong clam our to take th em down. Som e clubs did. W ithin weeks o f H illsborough, however, there
 were unruly incidents involving p itch invasions at m ore th a n one ground, as I no ted in paragraph 308 o f my
 In terim R eport. I deferred m aking any in terim reco m m en datio n involving structural alterations at the
 in terim stage, confining m yself to saying th a t gates to the pitch ought to be kept fully open.

    180. Since then, w hilst visiting grounds, I have seen a full range o f practices from one extrem e to the other.
 T h ere is no consensus. A t som e g rounds eg Highbury, there have never been p erim eter fences. A t others, like
 A nfield an d W hite H art Lane, th ere were fences b u t they have been taken down. A t o th e r grounds the fences
 vary in height a n d design. Som e are fearsom e high structures w ith florid arrangem ents o f spikes, redolent o f
 m edieval weaponry. T hey look m ore suited to a prison th a n a sports ground. C om ing dow n the scale, there
 are high fences w ith only vertical spikes an d lower fences w ithout spikes; fences o f wire m esh a n d fences o f
 strong m etal; fences w ith a good provision o f gates directly to the pitch, fences w ith only one gate p er large
 p en (like H illsborough), an d som e w ith no gate at all (as in p en D at A yresom e Park). Again, som e clubs have
 left th e ir gates to th e pitch fully o pen as I recom m ended. Som e have taken the gates o ut a n d left blank spaces,
som e have o pened th e gates b u t p u t red an d w hite tap e across the gap; others have kept the gates open during
the m atch, b u t closed th em tow ards its conclusion to stop pitch invasions at the final whistle. O thers again
have kept the gates closed an d b o lted b u t m an n ed individually. At M illwall’s ground, an effective procedure
is followed before each m atch w hereby it is an no u n ced over the public address system th a t stewards will
d em o n strate the gates affording escape to the pitch. T h e stew ards then do so in th e m an n e r o f an air
stewardess d em o n stratin g em ergency procedures. T h e gates are then closed to, b u t n o t locked.

   181. T h is w ide variety o f practices is surprising. I f a club were concerned only w ith its own supporters,
divergence o f practice w ould be readily u nderstandable. C lub A m ight say: “O u r supporters can be trusted
not to invade the pitch; so no fencing”. Club B m ight say: “ Som e o f o u r supporters have shown th a t given the
chance they will invade the pitch, so we m ust have high fences to stop th e m ” . But all the clubs in any division,
including clubs o f type A a n d B, visit each other; so one h as fans o f club B, used to being caged in at hom e,
being given th e chance w hen visiting club A to invade the pitch. They do n o t seem to m ake a p o in t o f doing so
with any frequency. However instances do occur, as I have m entio n ed ; they are unpredictable an d m ay
happen at any tim e d epending probably upon the occurrence o f som e incident thought to be provocative.
W hen they occur, they can cause serious danger. T here is risk o f injury to players, to the referee an d to the
police, quite ap art from the risk o f injury through fighting betw een fans. It is true, as is often said, th a t so far
no fatality h as resulted from a pitch invasion, w hereas 95 people d ied against a fence installed to prevent such
invasion. But if fighting betw een fans starts on th e pitch area, it is difficult to stop an d injuries can be caused.
A t Selhurst Park on 13 M ay 1989, five police officers an d 16 supporters required hospital treatm ent.

    182. Since each club in a League division has to cope during the season w ith at least som e o f the
supporters o f all the o th er clubs in the division, the widely differing solutions to th e fencing problem m ust be
d u e to different attitu d es ra th e r th an objectively different needs. T h e different attitu d es taken by clubs or
local au th o rities stem from the difficulty in balancing o r deciding the priority o f three crucial considerations:

    i.    Fences, especially high, spiked fences, are intim id atin g , ugly an d dem oralising.

    ii.   A dequate m easures m u st be taken to prevent pitch invasions for the reasons already given.

     iii. W hatever the m easures taken to prevent pitch invasions, there m ust be adequate provision for
          escape in emergencies.

   183. A t som e grounds, p o in t ii. has been regarded as p a ra m o u n t so th a t i. has h a d to give way. At others,
eith er p o in t i. or, especially after H illsborough, p o in t iii. have carried greatest weight so as to remove or
greatly reduce th e fencing.

  184. Is there any way o f achieving a satisfactory balance o f all three considerations? I believe so: th a t it is
possible to have sufficient obstacles to pitch invasion w ithout prison-type fences an d also to provide for
escape in emergency. I deal w ith the three considerations in turn.

  i. H ig h Spiked Fences
    185. I agree w ith the view th a t high, prison-type fences w ith spikes and overhanging sections should go. T he
spectacle o f these huge cage-like fences is inconsistent w ith a sports ground being for pleasure an d recreation.
M oreover, I believe such in tim id ato ry fences have an adverse affect on bo th the m orale and the behaviour o f
fans. They feel badly treated. H aving to stan d in a cage for your Saturday afternoon recreation inevitably
causes resentm ent. R esentm ent often results in hostility to those controlling the m atch. A sour relationship
develops a n d continues betw een the fans a n d those in authority, m aking th e jo b o f police and stewards m uch
m o re difficult. Being inside the cage provokes som e to hurl abuse o r m issiles at those outside, rival fans,
players o r police. T h e security o f the fencing (in th a t the rival fans can n o t p enetrate it) encourages bravado to
indulge in such activity. T he spiked fences im ply an expectation th a t trouble will o r m ay occur. They also
h a m p e r a clear view o f the game. To rem ove th em w ould signal the advent o f a new future for football and
especially a new attitu d e from th e authorities to th e spectators. Accordingly, I consider th at w hen perim eter
fencing is used it should n o t exceed a prescribed m ax im u m height a n d all spike arrangem ents an d top
sections angled inw ards should go. T his view is in accord w ith the recom m endation o f th e Technical W orking
Party (A ppendix 3 paragraph 20). But w hat should be the prescribed m axim um height? T h a t leads to
consideration ii.




                                                             31
  ii. Adequate M easures to Prevent P itch Invasions
  186. UEFA regulation B6 o f 1988 requires as follows:-

  “P rotection o f the playing field by m eans o f

  (a)   a fence o f a t least 2.2 m etres in height o r a m o at o r else

  (b)   a b a rrie r w ith ad eq u ate policing so as to m ake it im possible for spectators to enter the field o f play.

   Fences m u st have sufficient security gates opening tow ards the playing field a n d in the case o f m oats o r a
co m b inatio n o f m oats a n d fences ad eq u ate o th er security passages should be pro v id ed ” .

  187 Inquiries show th a t the figure o f 2.2 m etres was chosen sim ply by reference to the height o f existing
fencing at various grounds especially in West G erm any an d the need to choose a height o ffen ce w hich would
am o u n t to “a real o b stru ctio n ” to pitch invasion. As to the word “im possible” sim ilar inquiries suggest th a t
the in ten tio n was to leave it to th e police c o m m an d er to decide w hat resources h e m ight need. Should a pitc
invasion occur, UEFA w ould consider all the circum stances before deciding w hat if any action to take.

   188. In m y view a fence should b e o f sufficient height to b e a serious obstacle to pitch invasion. It should
provide sufficient o b stru ctio n to enable the police to take tim ely action should pitch invasion be attem p ted
w ithout being so high as seriously to interfere w ith vision o r to give a feeling o f im p riso n m en t. Although
appreciate the UEFA regulation says “at least 2.2 m etres”, these criteria lead me to recommend th a t
perim eter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 m etres. T h a t m easurem ent I take from ground level a t the
front of the terrace to the top of the fencing ie the 2.2 m etres may consist entirely o f fencing o r partly ot wall
an d partly o f fencing m ou n ted o n the wall. For exam ple, at Ibrox Park the fencing is ab o u t 1.45 m etres high
b u t it is m o u n ted on a wall an d th e total height o f wall and fence is 2.2 m etres.

  189. In m aking this reco m m en datio n I am m erely indicating a m axim um height should p erim eter fencing
be used I do n o t suggest there m ust b e such fencing o r indeed any fencing. T hose clubs w hich presently have
no p erim eter fencing m ay well th in k it safe to con tin u e th a t way. O thers m ay em ulate them . Still m ore may
consider th a t they can dispense w ith fencing o r bring it to a lower level th a n 2.2 m etres in fro n t ot th eir tam i y
areas o r th e ir seated areas. As the seating areas increase it should progressively be found possible to achieve a
corresponding red u ctio n in fencing. T hese options, subject to the m axim um height o f 2.2 m etres w hich 1
have indicated, should be left to the discretion o f local authorities acting on the advice o f th eir A dvisory
G ro u p w hich will have consulted the club and supporters.
    190. I should m ake clear th a t I have thus far referred only to p erim eter fencing a t the p itch side o f viewing
 areas. D ifferent considerations m ay well apply to the height o f radial fencing used to segregate rival fans. T he
 m axim um height o f such fences should be a m a tte r for local_ decision an d m ay d ep en d for exam ple on
 w hether there are sterile areas betw een pens o f rival fans; but I still recommend th a t no spikes be used.

    191. Som e m ay feel I am being naive o r over-optim istic in recom m ending th a t fencing be brought dow n to
 a lower level. H ooligans m ay take advantage o f this relaxation to have, literally, a field day. However, I draw
 atten tio n to those grounds w here fences have already been brought down to o r below the level I recom m end
 an d others w here there are none at all. If we w ish to m ake progress, som e initiative m ust surely b e taken to
 stop the cycle o f b a d b eh av iou r m et w ith repression inducing worse behaviour.

    192. Besides, there are o th er ways o f deterring p itch invasions th an by dauntingly fortified fences. O ne is
 to balance the lowering o f the fences w ith a p ro h ib itio n against going on to the pitch w itho u t reasonable
 excuse. I shall deal w ith th a t in the next chapter. T h e o th er is by alternative physical m eans.

 Safety Corridors
    193. O ne m eth o d has been adopted, so far successfully, at Anfield, G o odison P ark an d W hite H a rt Lane.
 It involves reserving a safety co rrid o r o r dry m o at betw een the fro n t row o f standing spectators a n d a
 p erim eter fence o r wall o f m oderate pro p o rtio n s. T h e two photographs A ppendix 6 illustrate the Liverpoo
 an d E verton versions o f it. T h e fro n t few steps o f the terrace are sacrificed as a viewing area an d lett as a
 sterile strip. B ehind th a t area, the front row o f crush barriers is filled in an d m ade continuous w ith no gpps
 T he E verton version has no fence above the p erim eter wall. At Anfield there is a low red rail tence. l h a t
 arrangem ent does n o t absolutely prevent pitch invasion, b u t it inhibits it. M oreover, anyone o r any group
 m in d ed to get to the pitch has first to get over the fro n t crush barrier, th en cross th e corridor, then get up the
 steps o r over the wall onto the p erim eter track. At W hite H a rt Lane there is finally a line o f advertising
 hoardings to be scaled. By th a t tim e the police should be able to intervene. A t high-risk m atches no d o u b t
 police could patrol the sterile area.


                                                                 32
M oats
   194. T h e safety co rrid o r at these three grounds is n o t truly a dry m oat. But I have seen exam ples b o th in
H olland a n d Italy o f a concrete dry m o at providing a total obstacle to p itch invasion. At U trecht, there is a
deep b ro a d m oat; provision is m ade to enable spectators to descend into the m oat an d use it as a passageway
for entrance an d exit. A photograph is at A ppendix 7. A t the San Siro stad ium in M ilan, there is a sim ilar
m o at at one side o f the ground w hich will b e extended all round. At p resen t there is no provision for access to
it o r across it to the p itch b u t I was told in R om e th a t access to the pitch by bridges will have to be p rovided to
accord w ith the Italian regulations.

    195. To interpose a full scale m oat o f th e U trech t o r M ilan type betw een the spectators an d the pitch
requires considerable space. It is easier to provide it as an integral p a rt o f the design o f a new stadium th a n to
in troduce it as a m odification o f an old one. A t m ost U K grounds the space betw een pitch an d spectators is
very lim ited a n d to introduce a m oat w ould involve a large loss o f viewing area. Nevertheless, it is a solution
w orthy o f co n sid eratio n a n d especially so for a new stadium . Its advantage is th a t it effectively prevents pitch
invasion w ith o u t im peding vision o r im porting a prison atm osphere. A few rows back from it, you are not
even aware o f its existence. Its disadvantage, ap art from the space it requires, is the difficulty o f com bining it
w ith access to the pitch in emergencies.

  iii Emergency Escape
   196. H illsborough showed conclusively th at, if there are to be p erim eter fences, there m ust be sufficient
gates to p e rm it escape to the pitch an d they m ust be im m ediately available in an emergency. T h a t lesson was
reaffirm ed by the recent incident at Ayresome Park. I know there is a school o f thought opposed to access to
the pitch in any circum stances, preferring th a t alternative evacuation routes should all be away from the
pitch. T hus, at som e grounds (H illsborough was one) em ergency plans d id not require gates to the pitch or
take any such existing gates into account in calculating the tim e required for alternative routes o f evacuation.
At H illsborough, evacuation was to be via the central tunnel, o r alternatively through the radial gates a t the
back o f the terrace an d ro un d the ends o f the west stand. But, if the em ergency arises at the front o f the
terraces (as it did) those alternative routes can n o t an d d id not afford tim ely relief. Presently, although
em ergency access to the pitch could readily be gained at b o th A nfield an d G oodison Park, the plans do not
rely on em ergency evacuation in th a t direction. T he tragic B radford City disaster, in w hich fire swiftly
engulfed a stand, w ould have caused m uch greater loss o f life h ad there n o t been ready access to the pitch. It
can no d o u b t be argued th a t inflam m able stands w ith neglected underspaces should n o t recur, th a t w ith
m o d ern stands constructed o f non-inflam m able m aterials there should be no risk o f a n o th er Bradford, an d
th a t if capacities a n d safety m easures are observed no H illsborough situ atio n should recur. T he solem n fact is
th a t those two disasters d id occur. O ne can n o t predict w hat emergency m ay arise to m ake evacuation away
from the pitch e ith er wholly im practical o r too slow.

  197. T he UEFA regulation cited above recognises th a t w here there are fences access to the p itch should be
preserved. I agree with that view and recommend that emergency access to the pitch should be provided.

   198. How should this be done? T h ere is no significant problem w here there are eith er no fences o r none
higher th an crush b arrier level. A t A nfield o r G oodison Park, for exam ple, it w ould n ot be difficult to get over
the fro n t crush b a rrie r into the “dry m o at” an d thence to the pitch. T h a t arrangem ent could be m odified to
include radial gangways at intervals runn in g straight dow n to the “dry m o at” through gaps in the front
barrier. T his w ould give even readier access. It m ust be for local ju d g em en t to balance the need for ready
access to the p itch in em ergencies w ith the need to deter such access otherwise.

   199. T he m ore difficult problem arises at grounds w here fences o f up to 2.2 m etres are deem ed necessary.
In such fences there must, in my view, be sufficient gates not less than 1.1 metre in width as approved by the
Green Guide. It is no use seeking to specify how m any gates will be required by reference to the length o f
fencing at the fro n t o f a given pen o r o th er enclosure. T he length o f the frontage is only one factor. M uch will
d ep en d on th e d ep th o f th e terrace an d the num bers it is p erm itted to hold. I prefer, in concurrence w ith the
Technical W orking Party (A ppendix 3 paragraph 22) to say th a t the gates should be sufficient in number to
enable the pen or other enclosure to be evacuated in the time required for any other emergency evacuation route.
Such gates should be evenly spaced along the frontage of the pen to avoid congestion on exit.

The Gates at Nim es
   200. O ne solution to this problem is the system installed in the new stadium at N im es w hich I visited
together w ith the Assessors. There, the fence consists o f a n u m b er o f electrically o perated panels w hich open
as gates to the pitch, as shown in A ppendix 8. T here are six sections o f the ground. T h e fencing in each section
is governed by a trigger gate w hich m ay be o perated electrically o r manually. T h e po st upon w hich it is


                                                             33
m o u n ted has an electro-m agnet w hich holds the m echanism inside the po st in a p osition keeping the gate
shut. W hen a b u tto n is pressed, the m agnet is de-activated, the gate descends in its m ou n tin g a n d is free to
swing tow ards the pitch. As it does so, it releases the next gate w hich is also m o u n ted on a swivelling device
w ith in its post, operating by gravity to open the gate. T his d o m in o effect continues th ro ug h o u t the section. It
can be arrested by som eone leaning against one o f the gates from the pitch side b u t how far anyone there
could w ith stan d substantial crowd pressure is doubtful. T he trigger gate can be o perated m anually b u t this
seem ed to require considerable force. To sh u t the gate again seem ed to require considerable force an d a lifting
m otion. T h e gates are ab o u t nine inches higher th a n the front floor o f th e terrace, b u t there is no sum p such as
often exists in grounds in the U K . T h e system could be a d ap ted to U K grounds b u t there are a n u m b er o f
factors u p o n w hich greater reassurance m ight be required. I f the gates were fixed on top o f a low wall such as
th a t at Leppings Lane, there w ould b e a danger o f crushing in the sum p o r a t least o f broken lim bs as people
tried to get out. T h e system has been in o p eratio n at N im es for only a few m o nth s an d has n ot been severely
tested to show th a t it w ould be effective u n d er crowd pressure. Although a firm is licensed to m ark et the
system in 34 countries w orldw ide, o u r in fo rm atio n is th a t so far they have been fitted only at N im es an d
T oulon although one o r two o th er French clubs are interested. In these circum stances the robustness o f the
fencing a n d the effects o f English w eather u p o n it are as yet unproved. At N im es th e system operates w ith a
level walkway on the spectators’ side o f the fencing. A part from a very sm all step, the pitch is at the sam e
level. To achieve this arrangem ent w ould require considerable alteration to the layout o f m any U K grounds
involving in p articu lar raising th e lower p a rt o f terraces to m ake them level w ith the pitch an d w ith the
b o tto m o f the fencing.

Gates Unlocked
   201. I m ade an interim reco m m en d atio n to leave gates fully open w hen the pen o r enclosure was
occupied. T his was for three stated reasons; first, to afford in stan t access to the pitch; secondly, to provide
visual reassurance to fans after H illsborough th a t there was an escape route an d thirdly, to keep police an d
stew ards alert to conditions inside the gateway. I also h ad in m in d th a t the num bers an d size o f gates m ight at
som e grounds be inad eq u ate an d I was not m aking any reco m m end atio n for structural change at th a t stage.
Along w ith reduced capacities, provision o f sufficient gates a n d lower fences, I m u st now consider w hether to
keep o r m odify my recom m endation to leave gates fully open. I know th a t som e Police C o m m an ders have
been anxious th a t to do so is an in v ita tio n to p itch invasion; hence the practice a t som e grounds o f closing the
gates n ear the en d o f the game o r keeping them sh ut b u t n o t locked. I would still hope that gates would be left
fully open wherever those in command feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be
fully open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when the pen or enclosure is
occupied. They should th u s be easily available for emergency exits an d spectators should be con fiden t o f this.

   202. I repeat my interim recommendation that all gates in radial and perimeter fences of pens or other
self-contained areas should be painted in a different colour from the rest of the fences and marked “Emergency
E xit”.

Authorising Access to the Pitch
   203. In terim recom m endation n u m b er 9 p rovided as follows:-

   “ * 9. T here should be in respect o f each gate in a p erim eter fence (or group o f gates if they are close
   together) a police officer au th o rised to decide w hether o r n o t to allow spectators through a gate to relieve
   overcrow ding. . . ”

    D espite the m uch greater alertness to the possibility o f an em ergency w hich now exists, following
 H illsborough, I still believe it necessary to m ake a recom m endation to ensure th a t p ro p er provision is m ade
 for swift action to authorise the opening o f gates in the event o f an emergency. However, it has been draw n to
 my atten tio n th a t strict observance o f this interim reco m m en d atio n verges o n the ab su rd w here a pen
 contains only a handful o f spectators. Moreover, to be b o u n d to provide a police officer a t each gate o r group
 o f gates in all circum stances involves a heavy c o m m itm en t o f police m anpow er w hich w ould be even heavier
 w ith an increase in the n u m b e r o f gates. Accordingly, I have decided to recommend that although each gate
 should be manned when the enclosure is occupied, whether such manning should be by a police officer or by a
 steward is for the Police Commander to decide. In either event plans should ensure that the police can authorise
 access through gates to the pitch immediately in the event of an emergency.

 M onitoring Crowd Density
    204. It is convenient to m en tion a m odification I th in k sensible regarding in terim reco m m en d atio n 5.
 T h a t provided: -


                                                              34
  “ * 5. A t each m atch, there should be on the perim eter track, for each self-contained pen o r o th e r terraced
  area, a stew ard (if the club is m on ito rin g th a t area) o r a police officer (if the police are m onitoring it) whose
  sole du ty is to check crowd c o nd itio ns in th a t area for possible overcrowding o r distress th roughout the
  perio d the area is occupied by spectators. W hoever is so ap p o in ted should be in ad d itio n to any other
  stew ard o r police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised u n d er
  R eco m m en d atio n 9 below, an d by radio to the control ro o m .”

   I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of wording to achieve clarity) but qualify it to avoid
absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other
standing area where the spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do not
exceed one third of the area’s maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000, whichever is the lower.

Cutting Equipment
  205. In the im m ediate afterm ath o f H illsborough, I recom m ended th a t suitable an d sufficient cutting
eq u ip m en t should be p rovided to enable spectators to be released from b eh in d p erim eter fencing. A ssum ing
the recom m ended m ax im um capacities are observed, th a t fences are lowered, th a t sufficient gates are
provided an d left unlocked, cutting e q u ip m en t should n o t be necessary. Som ething in these provisions would
have to go badly w rong for such e q u ip m en t to be required. Nevertheless, I recommend that the equipment
should be maintained in case of some unforeseen emergency.

Functions of Police and Stewards
   206. W hich functions should be discharged by the police an d w hich by the club’s stew ards is one o f the
m ost vexed questions. To describe the background to the argum ent I can d o no b e tte r th a n repeat w hat I said
in m y In terim R eport at pages 28 an d 29.

  “W ho should M o n ito r the Terraces?

    161. Should it be the ho st club via its stewards? Should it be both? O r should it be by arrangem ent,
  depending u p o n the ground o r section o f the ground in question?

     162. In principle, a football club w hich invites th e public to a m atch on its prem ises for reward is
  responsible for securing safety a t th a t event. T h e G reen G u id e (1986) provides:


    “23. T h e safety o f the public inside the ground is the responsibility o f those w ho stage the event and
    ad m in ister the ground in w hich it is held, ie the “m an ag em en t”. T h is responsibility applies in both
    norm al a n d em ergency s itu a tio n s . . .

     195. . . . there are five basic d uties w hich stew ards are called u p o n to carry out. T hese are:

         (a) controlling o r directing m em bers o f the public w ho are entering o r leaving the ground, to help
         achieve an even flow o f people to the viewing areas an d safe dispersal o f spectators on the terraces or
         viewing slopes;

         (b) patrolling the ground to deal w ith any em ergencies, eg raising alarm s o r extinguishing fires;

         (c) m an n in g entrances, exits an d o th er strategic points, especially exit doors and gates w hich are
         continuously open w hilst the ground is in use;

          (d) assisting police as ap p ro p riate o r as requested w ith crowd control; and

          (e) undertak in g specific d uties in an emergency. ”

  T h e In terim Popplewell Report
     163. T h ere was considerable controversy in the course o f the public inquiry held by M r Justice
  Popplewell in 1985 as to the responsibility o f the club a n d the police. In paragraph 3.6 o f his in terim report,
  M r Justice Popplewell q u o ted from a report produced for the M inister o f H ousing a n d Local G overnm ent
  in 1969 as follows: -

     “T he responsibility for controlling crowd beh av io u r is div id ed betw een the police an d the club operating
  th e ground. T h e b ro ad line o f division being th a t police are responsible for m ovem ent o f spectators in
  public thoroughfares an d from public thoroughfares in to the ground, while the club is responsible for the
  control o f spectators once they are o n the club’s p re m is e s . . . ”


                                                             35
 M r Justice Popplewell said he d id n o t quarrel w ith th a t view an d w ent on to observe th a t in practice the
 police have to take charge an d be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. H e then said (paragraph
 3.8):

   “It follows, therefore, th a t as a m a tte r o f practice, while the physical safety o f the building an d the
   m ain ten an ce an d good housekeeping o f the ground m ust always be the responsibility o f the club, the
   police have to take th e de facto responsibility o f organising the crowd, w ith all th a t entails, d uring the
   gam e...”

 M r Justice Popplewell w ent on to instance evacuation o f the ground as a p rocedure in w hich only the police
 could b e a r the responsibility o f supervising the organisation o f the crowd.

 T h e Final Popplewell R eport
     164. H e harked back to this subject in ch ap ter 4 o f his Final R eport. T here, he cam e dow n m ore firm ly
 in favour o f holding the club responsible for crowd safety. A t paragraph 4.13 he said Because, as a m atter
 o f practice, police officers have regularly atten d ed in large num bers at football grounds, it has somehow
 been assum ed by the clubs th a t the responsibility for control o f w hat goes on inside the ground has passed
 from th em to the police. A police presence is there to assist in the enforcem ent o f law an d order. Those
 responsible for organising a private function, however, have the prim ary a n d c o n tin u ing obligation and
 responsibility to ensure reasonable safety for those w ho are invited on to th eir prem ises. M r Justice
 Popplewell ended th a t section as follows: “ It can n o t be too strongly em phasised th a t it is u p o n the club, or
 the occupier o f the ground w ho is pu ttin g on the function, th a t the prim ary an d continuing obligation
  rests.”

     165. T h ere rem ains, however, the question w hether there are some grounds o r p arts o f grounds where
  the club m ay need to rely u p o n the police (w hom they pay to attend) to control filling o f pens an d
  m o n itorin g them for overcrowding. In o th er words, w hilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests upon the
  club, they m ay need, an d by agreem ent be en titled, to em ploy the police to act as th e ir agents in certain
  circum stances. T h is very difficult and grey area as to club an d police responsibility will need to be reviewed
  in greater depth a t stage two o f this Inquiry.”

  Since H illsborough was concerned w ith a d isaster on the terraces, I headed th a t passage “W ho should
m o n ito r the terraces?”. B ut the w ider question is: w ho should control the entry o f spectators, th e ir placing
an d m ovem ent w hilst in the ground an d th eir exit from it? It is u n d isp uted th a t th e club, as a m a tte r o f law,
has a duty to take reasonable care for the safety o f the spectators invited to its prem ises. T h ere have, however,
been two practical difficulties ab ou t th e club, rath er th a n the police, being de facto in charge.

   207. First, the club discharges its duty through stewards. T hey are p art-tim e em ployees o r assistants whose
d uties are confined to m atch days. M any o f th em are seasoned supporters o f the club an d som e ten d to be
elderly: others are keen young supporters. D ue eith er to age o r youth, m any therefore lack th e physique to
cope w ith aw kw ard custom ers. T hey are usually n o t well paid, part o f th eir “ rem u n eratio n (indeed all o f it at
som e clubs) consisting o f the o pp o rtu n ity to see the game. As the subm ission from th e A ssociation o f Chie
Police O fficers o f E ngland, W ales and N o rth ern Irelan d (ACPO) pu ts it:

   “(Stewards) are at best casual w orkers (usually w orking one day in two weeks), they are probably n o t people
   w ho have a supervisory role in o rdinary life an d are n o t always equipped o r used to giving directions or
   facing obstruction. M any are retired people an d pay is n o t so attractive as to guarantee com m itm en t.

  W hilst there are exceptions, I have frequently been told th a t the stew ards presently em ployed at m any
clubs are o f lim ited capacity an d reliability.

   208. Secondly, there has to be a police presence a t a m atch to m ain tain law an d order. Police are train ed to
give an d enforce instructions. T his, together w ith th e u niform they w ear an d the respect for an d fear o f the
law w hich the m ajority o f spectators have, gives the police far m ore a u th o rity th a n stew ards. M oreover, it
trouble arises, w hether from m isbehaviour o r from any o th e r cause, the police will inevitably be d rawn into
assum ing control. T hey have all the m eans to do so at th eir disposal - the control room , th e CCTV the
p lanned deploym ent o f serials o f officers ro u n d the ground, a com m unications system to co-ordinate them
an d reserves on call. T h e subm ission from A CPO suggests th a t in these circum stances, an d to avoid
confusion, the police ought to accept p rim e responsibility for controlling the crowd. I quote two passages
from th eir argum ent:


                                                               36
  “ It m ay be th a t the am biguous position o f the police is part o f the problem - th a t is acknowledging the
  c lu b ’s responsibility for safety on the one hand, w hilst routinely assum ing all those tasks o f stew arding
  w hich the stew ards can n o t do, eith er because o f th e truculence o f supporters o r the lim ited talents o f the
  stew ards them selves, on the other. It has to be said th a t the present lack o f clarity in these arrangem ents can
  lead to som ething o f a ‘dog’s d in n e r’. In som e clubs the police actively control the stewards, in others the
  stew ards are q u ite in d ep end ent and, despite som e im provem ents, stan d ard s o f stew arding vary
  considerably w ith m any being too old o r sim ply unreliable...

    ... It m ay be b e tte r to acknowledge th a t if trouble is an ticip ated o r if crowd control is going to test the
  ground capacities then, in the interests o f public safety, police should take control over the stewards
  through th e ir supervisory c h ain ”.

     “As to th e question o f ‘responsibility’, the m a tte r o f civil liability should not cause us to resile from ou r
  decisions if they are necessary. D ual responsibility for safety is a recipe for confusion. T h e police are always
  going to seize th e initiative in a crisis; crowd control is always going to be inextricably linked to crim inal
  hooliganism : the police are never going to accept direction from stewards; stew arding will never (at least
  n o t in the foreseeable future) be able to cope w ithout som e law enforcem ent backup; and finally police do
  ‘own’ m o st o f the m eans o f control. In these circum stances the police m ust accept a leading role and,
  despite the req u irem ents an d civil liabilities o f football clubs, them selves take on supervision o f the overall
  conduct o f events w herever crowd safety is an issue.”

   209. T h e q uestio n is one o f balance. C arrying delegation to its u ltim ate, clubs could lean back a n d leave it
to the police to take over the m anagem ent o f spectators from street to terraces a n d back again, w ith stewards
perform ing a m in im al role. T h is w ould involve a very heavy police com m itm en t a n d indeed the
co m m itm en t at present is very substantial. As already indicated, som e 5,000 officers o r m ore are deployed
every S aturday at football m atches.

C osts of Police and Stew ards
   210. T he tem p ta tio n to the clubs to leave it all to the police is stronger if they are n o t required to m ake
realistic p aym ent for police services. N o charge is m ad e for officers outside the ground since m aintain in g law
a n d o rd e r in the streets is a norm al public function o f th e police. A t the present tim e, the practice as to
recovering costs o f policing inside the grounds from clubs varies greatly from place to place, different
form ulae being used. In som e areas, the charge m ade is the actual cost o f the officers attending in the ground.
At others, it is m ad e on a sliding scale dep en d en t on w hether the m atch is category A (high-risk) B o r C. At
others it is d epen d en t on the size o f the crowd attending. A t som e, it appears to be entirely arbitrary an d at
one ground it is said to be nil. In my view a more consistent and businesslike approach should be made to such
charges. If clubs were to fin d it m ore econom ical to recruit efficient stewards th an to delegate d uties to the
police, there could be a significant reduction in the n u m b er o f police deployed at football grounds to the
benefit o f th e co m m u n ity at large. I f this is to happen, stew ards m ust be fit, active and robust. I would suggest
they should be between the ages of 18 and 55. They m ust also be fully trained. Som e clubs presently have
efficient stew ards w hom they recruit individually a n d train fully w ith the assistance o f the police. O thers hire
security firm s to bring in a w ell-trained team o f stewards.

Division of Functions
   211. T here are clearly m any aspects o f crowd control a n d m anagem ent w hich are capable o f being carried
o u t by efficient stewards. M anning gates, directing spectators to the correct areas an d to their seats, keeping
gangways clear, m o n ito rin g the density o f packing in pens o r enclosures - indeed, the duties specified in
paragraph 195 o f the G reen G uide, as already quoted. At m ost grounds, an d in m ost parts o f each ground,
these duties ought to be capable o f being perform ed by properly tra in e d stewards. W here th a t is so, clubs
should require stew ards to perform the d uties an d should n o t take the o p tio n o f leaving all to the police.

  212. However, I accept th a t there m ay well be p articu lar areas o f a ground, perhaps on visitors’ terraces
an d particularly at high-risk m atches, w hich call for the greater auth o rity and resilience o f the police. W hat
the division o f functions should be m u st be a m a tte r for local decision a n d in the last resort for the Police
C o m m an d er to determ ine.

W ritten S tatem ent of Intent
  213. I therefore repeat my recommendation th a t there should be a written document setting out the
respective functions of club and police for crowd safety and control “and in particular for the filling of each
self-contained pen or other terraced a rea and the m onitoring of spectators in each such pen or a rea to avoid


                                                            37
overcrowding.” (Interim recom m endation 4). T he aim should b e for th e club through its stew ards to perform
all those functions o f controlling spectators o f w hich they are capable having regard to the quality o f the
stewards, the layout o f the ground an d the n atu re o f the m atch. W here they are not able to discharge any such
function the police should perform it. As the p rop o rtio n o f seating a t grounds increases, control by stewards
should becom e the norm .

   214. In m aking interim reco m m en d ation 4, I used the phrase “w ritten agreem ent”. T h is led to anxiety
th a t w hat was required was a b in din g legal co n tract w hich would deprive the police o f any flexibility in
response to circum stances o f the day. My in ten tio n was n o t to shackle either party by a b inding contract; it
was sim ply to have a d ocum ent setting o u t how functions were to be divid ed so th a t no m isunderstanding
could arise w hereby one party thought the o th er h ad undertaken som e duty an d vice versa. I am content that
the document be referred to simply as a “statement of intent”, so th a t it can be subject to alteration w ithout
breach o f contract should circum stances so dem and.

Police Commanders
  215. T h e u ltim ate control at any m atch m u st be th a t o f the Police C om m ander. H e has auth ority to decide
how m any officers he needs an d to deploy th em in an d outside the ground. H e has, if necessary, to take such
decisions as to po stpone kick-off, to stop the m atch, to evacuate the ground o r any area o f it. Police
C o m m an ders ten d to rem ain in post for lengthy periods. T hey th u s acquire skill, experience an d special
knowledge o f the problem s at th e ir p articu lar ground. However, there m ust com e a tim e for change. It is then
essential for the new C o m m an d er to have ad eq u ate tim e an d training to acq u ain t him self w ith his functions
an d the problem s o f policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject of a
specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do
so. Such a course would give induction training in the basic strategy of policing football matches an d w ould also
give o p p o rtu n ity for th e pooling o f experience a n d the solution o f com m on problem s.

Rate of Admission
   216. An im p o rta n t causative factor at H illsborough was the congestion w hich bu ilt up outside the
turnstiles in the last 20 m inutes before kick-off. Twenty-three turnstiles were req u ired to ad m it 24,256
spectators; only seven turnstiles were available to ad m it the 10,100 w ith tickets for the west terraces. M uch
was m ad e in evidence o f the late arrival o f the Liverpool fans. However, fu rth e r evidence at stage two o f the
Inquiry suggests th a t the late arrival o f large num bers is a com m on feature at m any grounds. A part from
those w ishing to d rin k as long as possible (w hom I consider in chapter 6) there are m any w ho do n o t care to
stan d o r even sit for a long perio d in a d d itio n to the 90 m inutes o f the m atch. M oreover, at all-ticket m atches
o r to those w ith tickets in seated areas, there seem s little reason to arrive early since places are assured. T he
absence o f any a ttractiv e pre-m atch en te rta in m e n t is a fu rth er disincentive to early arrival. W hilst m easures
should be taken to encourage earlier entry to th e ground, it is essential th a t turnstiles o r o ther entrances can
cope safely an d efficiently w ith spectators as a n d w hen they arrive. To do this requires sufficient turnstiles or
o th er entrances to adm it, if necessary, a large late influx w ithout dangerous congestion. T h a t involves
assessing th e rate o f flow through turnstiles o r gates an d the tim e w ithin w hich they should be capable o f
ad m ittin g all the spectators they are in ten d ed to serve.

   217. I accept the view o f the Technical W orking Party th a t the G reen G uid e figure o f 7 50 persons p e r h o u r
is too o p tim istic a tu rn stile flow-rate. It m ay be achieved o r even b ettered in ideal conditions. But as soon as
there is a build-up, the flow-rate will dim inish . T here are also delays caused by those w ith no tickets, those
w ith w rong tickets o r o th er problem s. I accept the recommendation that 660 should be the maximum notional
rate. The Green Guide should be amended accordingly.

   218. I repeat my interim recommendation that the turnstiles serving a discrete area should be capable of
 admitting its holding capacity within one hour. U nless this can be done, there will be a risk o f serious
 congestion in the last h a lf o r q u a rte r o f an hour. If it cannot be done, the permitted capacity of the area must be
 reduced accordingly. This recommendation relates to one of the crucial matters contained in the original section
 2(2)(c)(i) of the 1975 Act and should therefore be a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

 Communications
   219. T h e efficient deploym ent a n d co-o rd in atio n o f police an d stew ards d epend upon effective system s o f
 com m unication. R adio systems are susceptible to two problem s; excessive a ir traffic on the channels in use
 an d the volum e o f noise from the crowd.


                                                             38
   220. If large num bers o f officers are issued w ith radios an d are all entitled to use the sam e channel,
confusion m ay result should a m ajo r in cid en t occur. In such an event, m any officers may wish to speak
sim ultaneously. Especially if the channel is used on “talk-through” (w hereby all officers including those in
control give an d receive messages w ithout priority) the C o m m an d er in the police room m ay be unable
effectively to issue orders. Again, if the level o f crowd noise is high, as it often is, an officer on the perim eter
track m ay have great difficulty in hearing messages. A lthough ea r pieces are o f som e assistance, they are not
totally successful in excluding crowd noise an d are not usually issued to every officer carrying a radio.

   221. M r Ju stice Popplewell in his Interim R eport recom m ended th a t “early a tten tio n should be given by
the H o m e Office D irectorate o f T elecom m unications to consider the practicality o f producing a m ore
suitable personal rad io for the police”. In his Final R eport, he retu rn ed to the subject at paragraphs
4.102-104. By th a t tim e, he rep orted th a t “a detailed study is being com m issioned by the H o m e Office
D irectorate o f T elecom m unications into the problem o f personal radios” .

   222. T he D irectorate produced an upgraded specification. As a result, supplies o f two new m odels have
been m ade available. T hey are the P hilips P F X an d the M otorola M T600E. T hese radios have greater range
a n d clarity th a n those previously used. T hey also give access to m any m ore channels. To take advantage o f
this, the police have been allocated eight a dd itio nal U H F frequencies.

   223. Police C om m anders have told m e th at, in ad d itio n to any o th er channel o r channels in use, there
should always be a command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to communicate with his senior
officers round the ground. T h is is o f th e first im p o rtan ce since it enables the C o m m an d er to use the
in form atio n com ing to him in the control room to deploy his forces pro m p tly an d effectively at any p art o f
the ground w ith ou t radio in terru p tio n . I recommend this should be done.

  224. As suggested by the Technical W orking Party, I repeat the recommendations I made in my Interim
Report as to communications, with one exception. A sentence in one recom m endation suggested th at
“consideration should also be given to the use by police officers o f a sim ple code o f h an d signals to indicate to
the control room the existence o f certain em ergencies o r req u irem en ts.” I am persuaded by evidence from the
police that the use of hand signals could create a risk of confusion and I do not therefore repeat that suggestion.

Other Topics in the Green Guide
  225. I have in this chapter considered specifically a n u m b er o f key safety factors covered by the G reen
G uide. I have suggested respects in w hich the G u ide should be strengthened o r am ended. In a d d itio n to those
topics, the Technical Working Party considered a number of further aspects of safety - crush barriers, stands,
ingress and egress, stairways and ramps, inspections and testing, fire safety, emergency power and disabled
spectators. I accept and adopt the Technical Working Party’s Report and recommendations on those matters
(A ppendix 3). W ith o u t repeating th em in this text, I ad d only a few ad d itio n al com m ents.

   226. As to crush barriers, paragraphs 25 to 28 o f th e ir report recom m end a sim pler an d clearer test
p rocedure th a n th a t in the current G uide. In particular, the values to be achieved by way of percentage recovery
after the required loading test will depend upon the material from which the barrier is constructed eg concrete,
steel or wrought iron. When the Guide is revised, acceptable values for various materials should be specified.

    227. T h e G reen G u id e does, in paragraph 6 o f A nnex C, refer to the possibility o f doubts arising as to the
safety o f a b a rrie r “for any reason (including such m atters as cracking o f the terracing o r disto rtio n o f
connections)”. It does not, however, presently m ake any special m en tio n o f the need to inspect crush barriers
for possible corrosion. T he evidence from th e H ealth an d Safety Executive after th eir inspection o f barriers
a t H illsborough suggests th a t corrosion is a serious th reat to the safety o f m etal barriers. When the Green
Guide is revised, the need to inspect for possible corrosion should be specifically mentioned and emphasised.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services
   228. It is vital th a t ad equate provision should be m ad e for possible emergencies arising from fire or
accid en t an d from illness o r injuries however caused. I repeat the recommendations I made in my Interim
Report regarding co-ordination of the emergency services. In addition, although it is m entioned in paragraph
176 o f the G reen G uide, I em phasise th a t “jo in t consultation betw een m anagem ent, police, fire, am bulance
an d o th e r em ergency services should take place in o rder to produce agreed plans o f action for all foreseeable
types o f emergency." Such plans should include, for exam ple, contingency arrangem ents for adm issions to
p articu lar hospitals in the event o f a n u m b er o f casualties an d consideration o f possible casualty clearing
areas at the sports ground. Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control
room to the local headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency
calls can be made instantly.


                                                          39
First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
   229. T h e scale o f available m edical facilities has been the subject o f controversy. A fter H illsborough, there
were com plaints o f insufficient basic e q u ipm en t such as stretchers. I repeat w hat I said in m y In terim R eport
at paragraphs 298 and 2 9 9 :-

  “298. It w ould be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium , m edical facilities capable o f dealing with
  a m ajo r d isaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, o ther
  eq u ip m en t an d m edical staff sufficient to deal w ith over 100 casualties is n o t practicable.

   299. W hat is required is a basic level o f provision for first aid, for professional m edical a tten tion an d for
  am bulance attendance, together w ith a system o f co-ordination w ith the emergency services w hich will
  bring them to the scene swiftly in w hatever num bers are required. W hat will am o u n t to an appropriate
  basic provision for the future eg the eq u ip m en t in a first aid room , requires expert evaluation an d advice .

  230. The Scottish ambulance service has developed a “major incident equipment vehicle” designed and
equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties. It is packed with 50 stretchers, blankets, and medical supplies and is
in effect a travelling storehouse for such equipment. A vehicle of that type is deployed in addition to other
ambulance attendance at matches with crowds over 25,000. This provision goes a long way towards meeting the
criticism raised after Hillsborough and I recommend that it be adopted elsewhere.

  231. I repeat the Interim Recommendations I made under this heading subject to two variations. First, it has
been sensibly urged th a t it is unreasonable to require a m edical p ractitio n er to be p resent th ro u g h o u t a m atch
where atten d an ce is very small. A t such a m atch it is suggested th a t to have a m edical p ractitio n er on call
would be sufficient. I agree with this and recommend that the full-time presence of a doctor should not be
required where there is no reasonable expectation of more than 2,000 spectators attending.

    232. Secondly, som e clubs have told m e th a t they can secure private am bulance services more
 econom ically th a n those from the ap p ro p riate am bulance authority. T hey accordingly wish to have freedom
 to choose. I modify my Interim Recommendation in deference to this argument by requiring at least one fully
 equipped ambulance from, or approved by, the appropriate ambulance authority should be in attendance at al
 matches with an expected crowd o f 5,000 or more.

 Status of the Green Guide
    233. 1 have recom m ended th a t som e safety factors covered by the G u id e should be m ade m andatory
 requ irem en ts in Safety C ertificates. T hose a p art, I consider the G u id e should rem ain a no n -m and ato ry set o f
 guidelines. Sports grounds vary greatly in th eir layout and fixtures. It m ust be open to a local au th o rity to
 judge the p ropriety o f deviating in som e respect from the G reen G u ide reco m m en d atio n s at a p articular
 ground. However, I agree w ith the Technical W orking Party th a t where there is a d ep artu re from a specific
  reco m m en d atio n o f the G uide, the local au th o rity should be aware o f it and should be satisfied th a t such
 d ep a rtu re is ju stified for good reason.

 Revision of the Green Guide
   234. N e ith e r I no r the Technical W orking Party have sought to revise o r redraft the specific w ording o f the
 G u id e. We have sim ply indicated w here and to w hat effect it should be altered. D etailed consideration o f the
 revision m u st be for a suitably qualified b o d y to be set up by th e H om e Office for the purpose. T he Technical
 W orking Party, in a d d itio n to th eir report, have prepared detailed supplem entary notes o n som e aspects o f
 the G u id e w hich will be available an d I am sure useful to those revising it. Accordingly, I recommend that the
 Hom e Office set up a body to revise the Green Guide as a matter of urgency.

  Sports Grounds Within Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
     235. T h is P art o f the 1987 Act applies in relation to a sports ground w hich is not a designated sports
  g round b u t w hich provides covered accom m odation in stands for spectators. A Safety C ertificate is required
  where such a stand provides covered accom m odation for 500 o r m ore spectators. By section 27(1) the Safety
  C ertificate:-

     “shall contain such term s an d co n d itio n s as the local au th o rity consider necessary o r ex pedient to secure
     reasonable safety in the stand w hen it is in use for viewing the specified activity o r activities a t the ground,
     an d the term s an d conditions m ay be such as to involve alterations o r ad ditio n s to the stand o r any
     in stallations in o r serving the stan d .”


                                                               40
  236. These provisions apply to a variety o f sports such as tennis, golf, horseracing, greyhound racing or
m o to r racing.

   237. I have received a n u m b er o f com plaints th a t local authorities, perhaps in response to Hillsborough,
have sought to apply the full rigour o f my In terim R ecom m endations to sports grounds requiring a Safety
C ertificate u n d er these provisions, n o t being designated sports grounds u n d e r the 1975 Act. O n occasion this
has been done w ithout regard to the G reen G uid e o r to H om e Office guidance. Exam ples given are
requirem ents in relation to greyhound stadia regarding the presence o f a m edical practitioner, the size o f a
first aid room , an d capacity o f parts o f the stadium o th er th a n the covered stand itself.

  238. T he G reen G u id e provides at paragraph 5 as follow s:-

  “T he G u id e is inten ded to cover grounds where sporting events o f all kinds are held and where the
  gathering o f large crowds is likely to present a safety problem . However, m uch o f the guidance has
  p articu lar ap plication to football stadia and this should be borne in m in d w hen applying the G uide to
  grounds used for o th er sports and m odifications m ay prove necessary, because the m easures to m eet
  problem s o f stadia used for association football m ay n o t always be necessary at o th e r grounds used for
  o th er types o f sports. For exam ple, if a ground has no terraced o r sloped viewing areas, crush barrier
  requirem ents are unlikely to be o f concern” .

   A sim ilar approach is app ro p riate in relation to my Final R ecom m endations. They are essentially directed
tow ards designated sports grounds. M any are relevant to o th e r sports grounds b u t will need to be applied
w ith due regard to the different circum stances at those o th er sports grounds.

  239. O ne ap p rop riate fun ctio n o f the inspecting an d reviewing body, which I propose should cover all
certificating an d licensing o f sports grounds, would be to ensure th a t recom m endations in the G reen G uide
an d those m ade in this R eport are applied sensibly across the varied range o f sports grounds.

Sports Grounds Within Part IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
   240. T his P art o f the 1987 Act relates to in d o o r sports licences. It introduced am endm ents to the
L ondon G ov ern m en t Act 1963 and the Local G ov ern m en t (M iscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 requiring
a licence to be granted by the relevant local au thority w here prem ises are to be used for “ any entertainm ent
which consists o f any sporting event to w hich the public are invited as spectators” (a “sports
en te rta in m e n t”).

  241. U n d e r this legislation, the relevant local authority

  “m ay grant to any applicant, an d from tim e to tim e renew, a licence for the use o f any prem ises specified
  in it for any sports en tertain m en t on such term s an d conditions an d subject to such restrictions as may be
  so specified” .

   242. I have received evidence from a n u m ber o f bodies com plaining th a t the procedure followed in
pursuance o f these provisions often requires different applications to be m ade by different applicants for
different “sports en tertain m en ts” at the sam e prem ises. A part from the expenditure o f tim e and effort, such
m ultiple applications ten d to be expensive to am ateu r sports organisations which are often im pecunious. The
suggestion is m ade th a t a procedure should be available whereby a licence for a range o f “sports
e n tertainm en ts” at the sam e prem ises could be obtain ed by a single o p erato r periodically. T his m atter
m erits review by the app ro p riate authorities.




                                                          41
                   PART III - CROWD CONTROL AND HOOLIGANISM
                                                      CHAPTER 5

                                      POLICE PLA N N IN G A N D CONTROL

   243. T h e role o f th e police is crucial to crowd control. In my findings as to w hat h ap p en ed a t H illsborough
a n d why, I criticised the police operation on the day a n d especially som e senior officers. I did, however,
recognise th a t the South Y orkshire Police h ad a good record, th a t day apart, for handling difficult crowd
problem s successfully. I also co m m en ded m any ju n io r officers for th eir efforts to rescue a n d assist those
crushed o r trap p ed a t H illsborough.

   244. I should like here to pay trib u te to police forces generally for th eir invaluable w ork in m aintaining
o rd e r a t sports events a n d especially in an d outside football stadia, Saturday after Saturday. W ith o u t them ,
sports events w ould be chaotic a n d indeed m any could n o t be p erm itted to take place. T h e ir service is often
thankless a n d n o t infrequently they are subjected to abuse a n d worse from those they are there to serve.

   245. T hey w ould be su p erh u m an if on occasions they d id not react, a t any rate verbally, to the stress an d
provocation they have to endure. T h is leads m any fans to feel the police are against th em . M oreover, it is
often difficult in th e confusion o f a crow ded scene for firm police action against m iscreants n o t to im pinge
also, o r focus by m istake, on the innocent. T h e la tte r th en feel aggrieved a n d others becom e aggrieved on
th e ir behalf.

  246. It is therefore vital th a t police discipline a n d self-control be o f the highest s tan d ard a n d th a t friendly
relations w ith supporters are cultivated. I know a n d have m yself seen th a t this is achieved a t m any grounds.
B ut there are reports th at, a t som e places, som e police tre a t supporters, especially away supporters, w ith a
m easure o f contem pt. W hen this happens it unfortunately sours the attitu d e o f the supporters tow ards all
police.

   247. Accordingly, Police C o m m an d ers should in th eir briefings stress the need to balance firm control
w ith good h u m o u r an d patience.

  248. A s to the planning of police operations and the techniques to be considered, I repeat my interim
recommendations (numbers 6 and 26 to 30) which are now recommendations 16 ,4 4 to 4 6 ,4 9 and 51.

Police Control Room
   249. It is essential to efficient police operations that their control room inside the ground should be well
placed, of sufficient size and well equipped. A n u m b er I have seen have been very good. Some are too small,
however. There should be room for at least the Commander, his deputy and enough officers to man the radios,
telephones and CCl'V screens. The room should leave space for others who may need from time to time to visit
the room eg other senior officers, club management or a member of the emergency services. The room should
command a good view of the whole pitch and of the spectator areas surrounding it. It should where necessary be
sound-proofed against excessive crowd noise. Failure to provide the police w ith a satisfactory control room is
m isguided thrift.
                                                      CHAPTER 6

                                                      ALCOHOL

   250. T here can be no d o u b t th a t excessive drinking by fans significantly aggravates problem s o f crowd
control. Because alcohol ten d s to rem ove in h ib ition s a n d self control, those w ho have d ru n k too m uch may
becom e aggressive a n d even v iolent especially w hen provoked. Short o f this, however, alcohol can m ake fans
resistant to sensible a n d reasonable instructions, m ore im p a tie n t a n d less considerate o f others. All o f this
increases the problem s for police a n d stew ards in m anaging large num bers w hich is difficult enough even
w ith co-operation.

Legislation
   251. In Scotland, serious crowd m isbehaviour, m uch o f it drink-related, led to the ap p o in tm e n t in 1976 o f
the W orking G ro u p chaired by M r Frank M cElhone MP. T h e recom m endations o f his rep o rt were followed in
the C rim inal Justice (Scotland) A ct 1980 w hich m ade it an offence to be in, o r to a tte m p t to enter, a
designated g round w hile in possession o f alcohol o r to be in, o r to a tte m p t to enter, the ground w hilst drunk.
It also b an n e d the possession o f alcoholic liq u o r on public service vehicles carrying passengers to o r from a
designated sporting event a n d by a m en d m en t th is b an was extended to vehicles ad ap ted to carry nine or
m ore passengers.


  252. I am in n o d o u b t after discussions w ith senior Scottish police officers th a t this m easure has greatly
reduced the p roblem o f m isbehaviour at Scottish football grounds. Sectarian violence still has to be
contained, especially a t Rangers an d Celtic m atches. T here is still trouble from the “new hooligan” groups,
known in S cotland as “casuals” . B ut m uch o f the m isbehaviour o f groups II an d III in the Popplewell
classification has ab ated d u e to the firm enforcem ent o f the 1980 Act by the Scottish police.

  253. In E ngland a n d W ales th is lead was followed in the Sporting Events (C ontrol o f Alcohol etc) Act 1985
w hich m ade sim ilar provisions.


   254. T here is, however, an im p o rta n t difference betw een the Scottish provisions a n d those applying in
E ngland a n d Wales. In Scotland, the b an on alcohol is absolute. N o sales o f alcoholic d rin k are p erm itted in
the ground. In E ngland an d W ales, section 3 o f the 1985 Act perm its Licensing Justices to grant exem ption
from the b a n o n sales in the ground. T his is subject to alcohol n o t being sold o r consum ed a t any p a rt o f the
ground from w hich the sporting event m ay be directly view ed a n d to o th er conditions im posed by the
Justices. It is open to the Justices to revoke o r vary an o rd e r an d the police have power to shut dow n the sale
o f alcohol a t a p a rtic u la r event if they consider it w ould be d etrim en tal to orderly conduct or safety.

Alcohol Sales in Grounds?
   255. It is against th is background th a t I m ust consider the subm ission o f the FA a n d others th a t sale o f
alcoholic d rin k in football grounds should be generally p erm itted w ith o u t need to obtain an exem ption order.
T he argum ent is th a t the b an on such sales does n o t prevent fans from drinking. It merely drives th em to
d rin k in public houses u n til a short tim e before the m atch. They th en arrive late, often inebriated an d
truculent, thereby causing congestion a n d o th e r problem s at entrances. Far better, it is said, to m ake alcoholic
d rin k available at the ground so as to brin g th em in earlier. Since service o f d rin k inside the ground is slow
an d selling p o in ts are crow ded it is argued th a t the visito r will be lucky to buy m ore th a n one round. H e is
therefore unlikely to becom e d ru n k from d rinking inside the ground.

   256. Ideally I accept th a t people a tten d in g a football m atch should be able to buy refreshm ents including
alcoholic d rin k ju st as they can a t the theatre o r o th e r places o f entertain m ent. I hope, in halcyon days ahead,
a b e tte r atm o sp h ere a t football grounds m ay justify b ans being relaxed. I d o not, however, th in k the present
tim e is ripe for such relaxation.

   257. I have m e n tio n ed the great im provem ent o f crowd beh av iou r in Scotland w here the b an is absolute
a n d h as been in force now for nearly 10 years. N o d o u b t o th er factors such as increased seating have played
th eir p a rt in this. T he im provem ent has been recognised by the G overnm ent, an d is the m ain reason why the
Football Spectators A ct 1989 h as n o t been ap plied to Scotland. T hu s M r M oynihan, the M inister for Sport,
said on the T h ird D ay o f the C om m ittee Stage (Official R eport, colum n 83):



                                                            43
  “T h ere h as been a m ark ed im provem ent in the b ehaviour o f football crowds in Scotland, w hich is accepted
  by all p arties an d th e Scottish Football A ssociation. T h e Scottish Office is m onitoring developm ents
  closely a n d . . . it does n o t believe th a t it is necessary to legislate for a n atio n al m em bership schem e in
  Scotland. However, it will be able to take action in the future should the p osition d eterio rate” .

  In E ngland a n d W ales, the b an h as h a d only four a n d a h a lf years to operate a n d is w atered dow n by the
availability o f exem ptions. W here it is thought appropriate, there is n o th in g to prevent clubs from applying
to th eir local justices for an exem ption. T here m ay regrettably be places w here the local circum stances,
known to th e justices, w arrant refusal o f a n exem ption. A t m any others, it will be granted as indeed it has
been already at a n u m b e r o f grounds.

  258. W hen such exem ptions exist, there is n o clear evidence to suggest th a t late arrivals are greatly
reduced. Indeed, the argum ent th a t no-one can get d ru n k in the ground because o f the problem s o f getting
served o r because only low alcohol b eer is available, seems to m e contradictory to the m ain argum ent. T hose
w ho w ish to d rin k full strength b eer in qu an tity will n o t be m uch a ttracted by the service offered inside the
ground.

  259. In these circum stances I consider it w ould be a retrograde o r at least p rem atu re step at this tim e to
restore a b lan k et licence to sell alcohol at designated sports events. I do n o t go so far as to suggest th a t the
total b a n applicable in S cotland should be extended to E ngland a n d Wales ie th a t no exem ptions should be
available. B ut I d o n o t believe it ap p ro p riate to relax the present restrictions.

  260. Are there o th er steps w hich could a n d should be taken to reduce problem s from excessive drinking?

A rrests
   261. I have referred to the provision in Section 2 o f the 1985 A ct m aking it an offence to be in, o r to
attem p t to enter, a designated sports ground w hilst d ru n k o r in possession o f intoxicating liquor. T h e im pact
o f these provisions clearly depends u p o n enforcem ent. H ere again there is a co n trast betw een S cotland an d
England. In E ngland, although arrests are m ade, there is a tendency to eject m any offenders w ithout arresting
them . In Scotland the police take a firm line. T hey do n o t eject offenders; they arrest them . T he English
ap proach m ay partly be due to a co m m endable desire n o t to be seen as hostile to football spectators.
However, it is also a m a tte r o f expediency. M aking an arrest requires the arresting officer to take the offender
to a police ro o m a n d go through the prescribed procedure an d paperw ork. T h is takes the officer away from
his p o st for a m in im u m o f a q u a rte r o f an hour. A t som e grounds (H illsborough was one) evidence suggests a
m uch lengthier absence is com m on. Clearly, if a serial o f eight officers is p osted to a b ank o f turnstiles, three
o r fo ur arrests m ay greatly reduce the team for a significant period. T here is a tendency, therefore, to avoid
m aking arrests save in the w orst cases. I do n o t wish to advocate repressive m easures w hich w ould be cou n ter
to all I have said a b o u t the need for a new a ttitu d e tow ards spectators. O n the o th e r h an d , it can n ot be a good
ground for declining to m ake an arrest th a t one can n o t spare an officer to d o it. I therefore recommend th a t
consideration be given to stream lining a rre st procedures so as to divert an arresting officer from his post for
the m inim um tim e. O ne m eth o d I have seen ad o p ted is for the officer to give only basic details o f the arrest
a n d be p h o to grap h ed w ith the offender before resum ing his duties. H e can then retu rn after the m atch to
com plete th e do cu m entatio n .

Closing B ars
   262. In som e areas, b ars in the vicinity o f the g round are closed e ith er thro u g ho u t a m atch day o r betw een
certain hours. T h is m ay be req u ired by the Justices o r it m ay be the result o f agreem ent betw een police an d
publicans. Such a m easure m ay how ever have lim ited effect. To close the p u b s in a radius o f one o r two miles
o f the gro u nd sim ply diverts d rinkers to bars outside th a t range an d m ay aggravate late arrival. M oreover,
b eer from shops w ith off-licences probably accounts for as m uch p re-m atch d rink in g as th a t bought in bars.
T h is said, it m ay well be sensible to lim it the availability o f alcohol especially before a high-risk m atch. How
effective the m easure can be d epends on the locality. In L ondon o r o th er large cities it could have little
im pact; in a m ore isolated town it could be very effective.

 E arly Kick-Offs
    263. Traditionally, kick-off at football m atches has been a t three o ’clock. T h a t m ay form erly have been to
 accom m o date those w ho w orked on Saturday m ornings. By a n o th er trad itio n , p e rm itte d ho u rs in pubs led to
 a recognised d rin k in g p erio d from m id -m o rn in g un til three o ’clock. T h e co m b in atio n o f these two trad itio n s
 often brings fans to a m atch w ith too m uch d rin k on board. T here is therefore much to be said for an early
 kick-off especially in a high-risk m atch. It gives less o p po rtun ity for prolonged d rin k in g sessions im m ediately


                                                                 44
before the game. A m id-day kick-off gives tim e for away supporters to reach the ground b u t less tim e for early
arrivals to kick th e ir heels an d lift th eir elbows in bars.

   264. It is tru e th a t an early kick-off will discharge the fans earlier at th e end o f the m atch. Som e anxiety
has been expressed as to w hether drunkenness avoided before a n d d uring the m atch m ay have m ore hours to
build up after the gam e causing problem s for the police an d the local com m unity in the evening. T his could
be so, b u t there are two m oderating factors. First, dru n k en b ehaviour in the town, although a problem for the
police, is less likely to cause serious danger to m any people th a n at a m atch w here it m ay be co m po u n d ed by
excitem ent, partisan sh ip an d incidents o f the gam e an d w here large num bers are in a confined space.
Secondly, the segregation exercise often results in the bulk o f away supporters being escorted back to th eir
ro ad o r rail tra n sp o rt as soon as th e m atch is over rath er th a n lingering in the town.

Sunday M atches
   265. Sunday m atches ought also to be a considered option. O n a Sunday, there is less traffic, especially
com m ercial traffic, to com pete w ith those arriving for the m atch. A rrival, parking an d d ep artu re are
therefore easier for th em in private coaches a n d cars. It is tru e th a t public tran sp o rt generally o n a Sunday is
less plentiful b u t special arrangem ents are often m ade for m ajo r events. Again, bars an d indeed m any places
o f en te rta in m e n t being closed on Sundays, there is less incentive to have a night on the town after a Sunday
game.




                                                            45
                                                     CHAPTER 7

                                              T IC K E T S A N D T O U T S
Inform ation on T ickets and Signs
   266. It is vital to good crowd control th a t those attending a sports event should have clear directions where
to go. It m akes for confusion an d hence ad d ed problem s for stew ards an d police if spectators are m illing
ab o u t looking for th eir ap p ro priate entrances. T h e congestion at H illsborough was aggravated by poor
in fo rm atio n o n the tickets an d p o o r signposting outside an d inside the turnstiles. I therefore repeat my
recom m endations th a t tickets and signs should provide simple, clear and consistent inform ation to
spectators.
  267. All available m easures should be taken in the prin tin g o f tickets to prevent forgeries being produced.
Com puter Record of Tickets
   268. It would greatly help to defeat forgery and theft of tickets as well as assisting in the apprehension of
those m isbehaving in the ground, if clubs m aintained a record on com puter of ticket sales. T h is is done in
Italy w here season tickets an d tickets for all-ticket m atches in seated areas are n um b ered an d a record is
m ain tain ed o f the nam es an d addresses o f purchasers. Such in fo rm atio n is o f great value to the police in
identifying forgeries and tracing offenders. Clearly, season tickets for seats could be m ad e attractive if
favourable term s were offered (especially to young supporters). T h is w ould enable the au tho rities to know for
a w hole season w ho was occupying a p articu lar seat. As seating accom m odation increases this w ould give
greater in fo rm ation an d control.
Fans W ithout Tickets
   269. O ne problem w hich creates difficulties for the police is the arrival o f w ould-be spectators w ithout
tickets at an all-ticket m atch. A lthough I found there was n o t a large body o f such fans at H illsborough there
und ou b ted ly were some. A t o th er m atches the n um bers have n o t only been large; they have been d eterm ined
to gain en tran ce by one m eans o r another. If they could n o t acquire tickets at the ground they have created so
m uch trouble th a t the police have ju d g ed it best to let th em in. S om etim es this has been for paym ent; on
occasions, even free. T he rationale has been th a t it is b etter to have troublem akers inside the ground where
they can be m onitored th a n roam ing ro u n d the tow n at large. Obviously, the practice o f ad m ittin g fans
w itho u t tickets has a b ad knock-on effect. B ands o f fans u nable to get tickets believe th a t if they tu rn up and
create sufficient clam our the police will a d m it them .
Police Policy
   270. T his m ust n o t be allowed to continue. It is intolerable th a t those w ith no tickets should be able to
blackm ail th e ir way into a ground. “ If you d on’t let us in we’ll force the gates o r wreck your tow n”, is n o t a
th re a t to w hich a police force should subm it. T h e policy o f ad m ittin g such people is also un fair to those w ho
have tak en th e trouble an d spent m oney to buy tickets. It fu rth e r involves, at a capacity m atch, letting in fans
for w hom there m ay be insufficient space. It m ay also create problem s o f segregation. Above all, it is allowing
the m ob to rule.
   271. True, I held th a t in the crisis w hich developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles on 15 A pril 1989,
opening gate C was ju stified since life w ould otherw ise have been at risk outside the ground. However, th at
was a m a tte r o f life an d death. It arose because o f inadequate facilities a n d inad eq u ate crowd control. I would
hope such a situ ation will never recur. If anything like it should recur, preservation o f life m ust clearly be
p a ram o u n t. But when the police have an option to let fans w ithout tickets in or keep them out, th eir policy
m ust clearly be to exclude them . U nless th a t rule is firm ly a n d universally applied an d know n the problem
will grow.
A ll-ticket M atches
   272. All the evidence I have received suggests th a t great cau tio n should be exercised before m aking a
m atch all-ticket. To do so can assist in achieving segregation. In general, it should however be done only
w here a capacity o r n ear capacity crow d is expected. T here should th en be little difficulty in selling all the
tickets in advance. T h e p oint o f m aking such a m atch all-ticket is to prevent the arrival o f greater num bers
th a n the ground can accom m odate. However, if a less p o p u lar m atch is m ade all-ticket, it m ay tu rn o u t th a t
only a m odest p ro p o rtio n o f the tickets is sold in advance. If then fans arrive w ithout tickets, they will be
aggrieved at being tu rn ed away w hen there is space available. M oreover, the club will be tem p ted to give in to
th em an d sell tickets o n the day. T h is discredits the all-ticket policy an d m ay cause breaches o f the
segregation strategy. I therefore recommend th a t all-ticket m atches should be confined to those at which a
capacity or near capacity crowd is expected and that, having so designated them , clubs m aintain a firm policy of
not selling tickets at the match.


                                                            46
Touts
   273. T h e reco m m en d atio n s in the last two paragraphs are designed to deter those w ithout tickets from
tu rn in g up at m atches an d so obviating any trouble they m ay be tem p ted to cause. However, m any fans
w ith o u t tickets tu rn up a t the ground in the hope o f buying th em from touts.

   274. D uring my visits to sports grounds I have found universal co n d em n atio n o f to u ts by all involved in
organising a n d m anaging large stadiu m events. A part from the obstruction they them selves cause, touts
a ttract fans w ith o u t tickets to atte n d at grounds in the hope o f getting in. Moreover, they sell tickets to all
com ers regardless o f th e ir allegiance. T hus tickets for the hom e area at a soccer m atch fall into the hands o f
away supporters a n d vice versa. T h e result is to frustrate the efforts o f clubs an d police to achieve peaceful
segregation. Pockets o f alien affiliation planted am ongst h om e supporters form a focus for hostility an d often
violence results. A p art from these objections, voiced by the FA, the FL, the police and the clubs, m ost
supporters also detest touts because they often corn er the m arket for a p opular m atch an d offer tickets at
grossly excessive prices.

   275. F ro m all these q uarters the plea is to take positive action against ticket touts at football m atches.
I am m indful o f the need for caution before advocating a law lim iting liberty to conduct oneself an d one’s
business freely an d according to established practice. I likewise accept th a t m arket forces should, in general,
o perate freely in the com m ercial field. N evertheless, I am satisfied from w hat I have read, heard an d seen
th a t outsid e football grounds the presence a n d activities o f touts have a grossly anti-social effect leading both
directly an d indirectly to disorder. Directly, through obstruction an d the attraction o f num bers w ithout
tickets. Indirectly, because o f trouble from those so a ttracted who, in the end, can n o t o r do n o t buy tickets
an d from those w ho buy th eir way into an o pposition enclave.

   276. Touts operate, o f course, at places o th er th an football grounds. T hey are to be found, for exam ple, at
national rugby stadia, at the All E ngland Lawn Tennis C lub at W im bledon an d at countless o th er sporting
events. D epending on how one defines “to u ting ”, the activity could include selling u nw anted tickets for the
opera, the th eatre o r concert halls. T outing usually m eans, however, n o t ju s t selling at face value a ticket you
can n o t use, b u t selling num bers o f tickets at an inflated price as a com m ercial venture. T here is a clear
d istin ctio n betw een the im p act o f touting at football grounds and elsewhere. Football is the only sport at
w hich segregation is practised to prevent violence. T his is because it is the sport w here violence inside and
outside the ground is, at present, m ost prevalent. T here are therefore strong grounds for regarding football as
a special case as the G ov ern m en t has recognised by pro m o ting the Football Spectators Act.

  277. W hatever the policy m erits o f freedom to trad e an d m ark et forces, they m ust surely yield to the
m aintenance o f safety an d the prevention o f disorder. Touts at football m atches p u t bo th at risk. A t other
sports an d in o th e r leisure fields the tout does n o t endanger safety o r o rd er to the sam e extent. Accordingly,
w hatever view one takes o f him , he can be left to ply his trad e there. B ut so far as football is concerned, in my
view to u tin g should be m ade unlawful. T he fast buck should stop here.

   278. A t present, police can deal w ith tou ts only by som ew hat strained a n d stretched use o f existing laws.
They arrest th em for obstruction even if the physical o bstruction caused is m inim al. Alternatively, they m ake
an arrest on the grounds th a t they suspect the to u t o f carrying forged tickets, although th e suspicion o f forgery
m ay m erely be c onvenient conjecture. A fter holding th e to u t d uring th e m atch th e police release him a n d the
now valueless b u t genuine tickets are retu rn ed to him . G row ing wise to this, m any to u ts now carry only two o r
three tickets a t a tim e, relying on a ru n n er to bring up m ore from a “b ank er" standing o ff w ith perhaps
h u n d red s o f tickets in his possession. I f the salesm an is arrested the m erchandise is n o t all lost. Police should
n o t have to stretch the law to deal w ith a public mischief. T h ere should be a specific p rohibition w hich police
can th en enforce.

   279. How to form ulate a p ro h ib itio n against touting a t football grounds will require careful consideration
a n d drafting. I t could be m ade an offence to sell tickets for and on th e day of a football m atch without
authority from th e hom e club to do so. A n o th er way w ould be to p ro h ibit such sales w ithin a specified radius
o f th e ground on the day o f th e m atch. Yet an o th er w ould be to p roh ib it sales o f tickets for a football m atch at
m ore th a n face value. T his th ird alternative w ould p erm it any genuine purchaser o f a ticket w ho found he
could n o t use it to recoup his outlay by selling his ticket outside th e m atch. Its disadvantage w ould be the
difficulty o f proving a to u t h a d sold at m ore th a n face value; ways w ould also be devised to evade the
prohibition. I te n d to favour th e first alternative w hich is sim ple an d capable o f easy proof. T he genuine
ticket holder, finding h im self unable on th e day to use his ticket, an d n o t p erm itted to sell it outside the
ground, should be p erm itted to retu rn it to th e club a n d recover his money. C lubs should be prepared to
accept such tickets in th e interests o f fairness a n d o f having a law w hich defeats touts. I f touting outside the
gro u n d is ban n ed , fans w ith no tickets for an all-ticket m atch could have no excuse for turn in g up outside
hoping to get in.


                                                             47
                                                     CHAPTER 8

                                POLICE STRATEGIES AGAINST H O O LIG AN S

Cautious Optimism
    280. I tu rn now to ways o f curbing m isbehaviour a n d dealing w ith hooligans. A t th e outset, I m ust record
th a t there are grounds for cautious o p tim ism ab o u t m isbehaviour inside football grounds although the same
c a n n o t be said o f b eh av io u r outside a n d en route. E vidence I have received from various police forces, from
A CPO, from the football au th o rities an d from th e clubs suggests th a t m easures taken in the last couple o f
years have reduced in cidents o f v iolent m isbehaviour inside grounds. Also, for the first tim e for decades,
there has been a sm all b u t steady increase in atten d an ces a t m atches in each o f the last three years. T his has
occurred despite reductions in capacity. It is a ttrib u te d by police a n d football a u th o rities a n d by supporters’
organisations to greater confidence by th e decent m ajority o f spectators th a t violence in th e ground is under
control.

  281. These w elcome signs m u st be seen in perspective. D iso rd er in the ground has been, for th e m o st part,
controlled n o t elim inated. T here have still been occasional o u tbursts o f violence in recent m onths. All th a t
can be said w ith confidence is th a t th e police are now m uch b etter equipped a n d inform ed to deal w ith
hooligans th a n they were three years ago an d th e ir operations have been m ore successful in controlling
disorder.

CCTV
  282. In particular, the installation o f CC TV has greatly im proved police surveillance o f the crowd bo th
inside the ground a n d at th e turnstiles.

   283. In 1985, after th e B radford D isaster, th e Football T ru st m ade funds available to install C CTV a t all
first an d second division football grounds. U nfortunately, th e systems initially installed, although the best
available a t th e tim e, proved to be o f inad eq u ate quality for id entification purposes. M oreover, operators
initially lacked the train ing an d expertise necessary to m ake effective use o f the equipm ent.

  284. A n u m b er o f clubs now have b etter e q uip m ent a n d m o st o f the rem ain d er o f th e 92 clubs in the
League have applied to th e Football T rust for funding to enable th em to do likewise. T h e Football T rust, not
unnaturally, wish to be sure th e m oney will be well spent. T hey have therefore asked th a t an agreed
specification should be laid dow n as to the quality o f th e C C T V to be installed. A CPO h ope to provide this as
soon as possible.

  285. In the two years ending Ju n e 1989, a b o u t 200 operators were train ed in th e use o f C C T V a t m atches.
A train in g video is also available to all police forces.

   286. Already, C C T V has h ad a m ajo r im pact on the hooligan problem inside football grounds as well as
proving extrem ely useful to m o n ito r safety m easures. I f any trouble appears on the screen o r is rep o rted from
any q u arter o f the ground, the C C T V can zoom in o n the incident. T he police can th en record w hat occurs on
colour video an d on h a rd copy prints. Individuals can be picked o u t by facial ap pearance a n d th e colour o f
th e ir clothing. T h e evidential effect o f such a video recording has proved form idable. It has persuaded
hooligans, w ho w ould previously have sought to challenge oral evidence o f iden tificatio n , to plead guilty.
H ooligans know cam eras are keeping a roving w atch an d th e ir activities in the g round are in h ib ited by th a t
knowledge. Police evidence suggest th a t as a result o f C C T V surveillance a n d the police strategies it
facilitates, the m ore co m m itted hooligans now concentrate th e ir activities outside th e ground, attacking
opposing fans on th e ir way to o r from m atches.

National Football Intelligence Unit
   287. A CPO have for som e years encouraged the developm ent o f an intelligence netw ork nationw ide. A
national index o f football liaison officers was set up to collect, record a n d pass on in fo rm atio n ab o u t the
behaviour, p ast a n d an ticipated, o f club supporters, especially the hooligan elem ent. T hus, before a m atch,
th e police responsible for it can receive info rm atio n from th e football liaison officer in the visiting club’s area
as to the propensities o f the visiting supporters a n d any known plans any elem ent am ong th em m ay have.
A lthough this schem e has proved useful, the need was recognised for a central u n it e q uip p ed w ith a com puter
to gather, record a n d dissem inate intelligence. A CPO , in th e ir w ritten subm ission, say :-


                                                            48
  “H ooligan gangs operate across a w ide area an d m ay o f course be involved in crim inal escapades in any
  town betw een th e ir p o in t o f d ep artu re an d the venue o f the fixture. F u rtherm ore, in recent tim es there is
  good evidence th a t they will often plan crim inal violence w hich has nothing w hatever to do w ith football.
  T here is a need to overview such events to identify p attern s an d recognise w hat is b eh in d seemingly
  un connected events.”

   288.      T h e N atio n al Football Intelligence U n it has now been set up. It is based in London; staff are in post;
the U n it is being funded by the H om e Office. It is h oped the com puter will be installed shortly. T he U n it will
th e n be o f great value in dealing not only w ith dom estic football-related crim e b u t also w ith hooligans
travelling to m atches abroad.
                                                         CHAPTER 9

                                             O F F E N C E S IN T H E G R O U N D

   289. A lthough in cidents o f physical violence inside grounds are now m uch fewer, there rem ains an
u n d ercu rren t o f unruly b ehaviour w hich can an d occasionally does result in disorder. T hree activities in
p articu lar have this potential: (i) throw ing coins an d o th er missiles (ii) chanting obscene o r racialist abuse
(iii) going on to the pitch w ithout reasonable excuse.

    i.      T here can be no possible excuse for hurling m issiles at a sports ground. It is not only dangerous in
            itself. It m ay a n d often does incite others to do likewise; th a t m ay a n d often does provoke retaliation.
            Violence m ay th en escalate.

    ii.     N o-one could expect th a t verbal exchanges on the terraces w ould be as polite as those at a vicarage
            tea party. But shouting o r chanting gross obscenities o r racialist abuse ought not to be p erm itted. If
            one starts, o thers jo in in, a n d to the m ajority o f reasonable supporters, as well as to those abused, the
            sound o f such chants from num bers in unison is offensive an d provocative.

    iii. R u n nin g on th e pitch often provokes a n d is the prelude to disorder. T his is not ju s t because it
         in terru p ts the gam e o r because it invades the hallowed turf. It is often d one w ith the in ten tio n o f
         attacking som eone. Even if th e invasion is not w ith in ten t to attack the referee, a player o r opposing
         fans, it tem p ts others to follow suit. I f rival fans com e onto the pitch violence will probably break
         out. Even if they d o not, there m ay well be violent exchanges w ith police seeking to repel the
         invaders. A fan m ay ru n o n to the pitch m erely to congratulate a goal scorer. But his action could well
         provoke opposing fans (displeased by the goal anyway) to invade the pitch w ith less benign intent.

  290. O ught not these activities therefore to be m ade crim inal offences? T h is has been raised before. M r
Justice Popplewell considered the sam e three activities. A fter discussing w hether they should be m ade
separate offences, he concluded, on analogy w ith the Scottish “breach o f the peace”, th a t a sim ple offence o f
disorderly conduct at a sports ground w ould sweep up n ot only the three activities m e n tio n ed above b u t other
disorderly activities too. H e concluded, a t p aragraph 4.74 o f his Final R eport, as follows:

  “4.74 Q u ite clearly a new offence in E ngland an d Wales o f disorderly conduct o r breach o f the peace on
  the lines o f the Scottish com m on law offence, w ould be o f substantial assistance in dealing w ith
  hooliganism . It w ould avoid the problem o f trying to define all the different types o f beh av io u r w hich give
  rise to d iso rd er at football m atches an d w ould undoubtedly enable the police to take action m uch earlier
  th a n they can u n d e r the present law. T h is offence should be confined to sports grounds w here the
  disorderly conduct is likely to have such a devastating effect on crowd safety. D isorderly conduct would
  clearly include throw ing a m issile, ru n n in g on to the pitch, seeking to clim b over o r to pull dow n a perim eter
  fence, shining a m irro r tow ards a batsm an, throw ing bottles o r cans on to th e field o f play, o r interfering
  w ith a greyhound o r horse race. I suggest th a t it should be triable sum m arily a n d there should be a power o f
  arrest. I recommend, therefore, that consideration should be given to creating an offence o f disorderly
  conduct a t a sports ground.”

   291. T h is reco m m en d atio n was n o t taken up. At the tim e M r Justice Popplewell reported, the Public O rd er
Act 1986 w as in preparation. It created new offences relating to public o rd e r b u t none specifically related to
conduct inside sports grounds. Evidence from the H om e Office gives two reasons for this. First, it was thought
w rong in p rinciple to tre a t football o r sports grounds as a special case. Secondly, it was apparently th o u g ht th a t
the provisions o f the 1986 Act, especially section 5, sufficiently covered the field.

   292. As to the first reason, one m ust surely look at the n ature o f the m ischief. T h e three specified activities
would, o f course, be an anti-social nuisance anyw here. But at a designated sports ground they are fraught
w ith poten tial disorderly consequences. T here is good reason therefore to tre a t as a special case the
p ro h ib itio n o f these activities at such grounds. By analogy, having alcohol in one’s b lood over a fixed lim it
has been m ade an offence only in relation to driving, because it is dangerous to the public in th a t special
context.

  293. T h e second reason requires an ex am in atio n o f sections 4(1) a n d 5(1) o f the 1986 Act. So far as is
relevant, these provide as follows:-

   “4( 1) A person is guilty o f an offence if he -

         (a) uses tow ards a n o th er person threatening, abusive o r insulting w ords o r beh av io u r . . .


                                                                 50
          w ith in ten t to cause th a t person to believe th a t im m ed iate unlaw ful violence will be used against him
          o r a n o th e r by any person, o r to provoke the im m ediate use o f unlaw ful violence by th a t person or
          another, o r w hereby th a t person is likely to believe th a t such violence will be used o r it is likely that
          such violence will be provoked . . .

  5(1) A person is guilty o f an offence if he -

    (a)   uses threatening, abusive o r insulting w ords o r behaviour, o r disorderly b ehaviour . . .
          w ith in th e hearing o r sight o f a person likely to be caused harassm ent, alarm o r distress thereby” .

   294. T hrow ing missiles could only be caught u n d er section 5 as “disorderly b ehaviour” if the additional
elem ent were proved th a t it was “w ithin the h earing o r sight o f a person likely to be caused harassm ent, alarm
o r distress thereby”. To adduce evidence o f this last elem ent m ay be very difficult indeed. It should surely be
sufficient to show th a t the accused threw a m issile at a football m atch.

    295. As to obscene o r racialist chanting sim ilar difficulties arise. Although the chanting m ay be proved
abusive o r insulting it w ould also have to be shown, u n d er section 4, th a t it was used “tow ards a n o th er person
. . . w ith in te n t to cause th a t person to believe th a t im m ed iate unlaw ful violence will be used against him etc” .
P ro o f o f those elem ents m ay n o t be possible.

  296. U n d e r section 5, w hilst again the chanting m ay be proved to have contained “abusive o r insulting
w ords” , it m ay be difficult to show th a t this was d one “w ith in the hearing o r sight o f a person likely to be
caused harassm ent, alarm o r distress thereby” . T he w ords m ay cause nothing o th er th an disgust.

   297. N o r does section 18 o f th e Act help. U n d e r the heading “Acts inten d ed o r likely to stir u p racial
h a tre d ”, the section provides as follows so far as is relevan t:-

  “ 18(1) A person w ho uses threatening, abusive o r insulting w ords o r b e h a v io u r. . . is guilty o f an offence
  if-

     (a) he in tend s thereby to stir up racial hatred , or

     (b) having regard to all the circum stances racial h atred is likely to be stirred u p thereby”.

   298. R acialist abuse o f the kin d chanted at football m atches is probably not inten d ed to stir u p racial
h atred. N o r could it readily be proved th a t racial h atred was likely to be stirred up. T he effect o f such
chanting is to give cheap an d ignoble am usem ent to those participating w hilst causing offence and
em b arrassm en t to those abused an d to th e decent m ajority o f fans.

   299. For these reasons, I do not consider th a t the activities w hich M r Justice Popplewell concluded should
b e the subject o f a crim inal offence are covered by the 1986 Act. H e set o u t the argum ents for an d against
legislation to p ro h ib it them at paragraphs 4.42 to 4.74 o f his F inal R eport. I do n ot rehearse those argum ents.
I agree w ith his conclusion th a t on balance, despite the difficulties o f drafting an d enforcem ent, these
activities should be prohibited. M r Justice Popplewell concluded th a t a “catch-all” offence o f disorderly
conduct at a sports ground should be considered. I appreciate the force o f his reasoning. However, I would
prefer to see separate offences in respect of each of the three activities I have mentioned. T h e object o f the
legislation m ust be not merely to prosecute offences w hen they occur b u t to deter them . If there is a specific
offence o f throw ing m issiles at a designated sports ground, a separate specific offence o f chanting obscene or
racialist abuse there an d a th ird specific offence o f going on the pitch w ith o u t reasonable excuse there and, if
full publicity is given to the legislation, hooligans will know precisely w hat is p rohibited a n d th a t they do
those things at th e ir peril.

  300. As to going on the pitch, I have a reason for recom m ending p rohibition additional to those which
convinced M r Justice Popplewell. I have recom m ended lowering the level o f fences a n d rem oving spikes and
overhanging sections. T h at relaxation is m ade in the interests o f the decent m ajority o f supporters w ho have
no yen to invade the pitch. To back up the lesser d eterren t effect o f lower fences I th in k it p ru d en t to have a
crim inal sanction against pitch invasion.

   301. I ap preciate th a t at som e sports grounds there is a tra d itio n o f running on to the pitch w hen the game
is over sim ply from jo ie de vivre o r to p at players on the back. A t M urrayfield, for exam ple, schoolboys sit on
form s on the pitch side o f the p erim eter fencing an d run on harm lessly at the en d o f the game. Again, going
o n to th e pitch to escape som e hazard on the terraces in an em ergency should, o f course, be legitim ate.
Accordingly, the offence should be aim ed at p rohibiting invasion o f the pitch w ith o ut good reason or
reasonable excuse. T h e police will in th is as in m any o th e r situations have to exercise sensible discretion and
judgm ent.


                                                              51
                                                     C H A P T E R 10

                                 CLUB STRATEGIES AGAINST H O O LIG A N S

  302. V arious club schem es to exclude hooligans have been u nd ertak en o r suggested.

Luton
  303. In M arch 1985, Millwall visited L uton w ith a large contingent o f “ supporters”. W idespread disorder
broke o u t causing injuries to bo th fans an d police. Serious dam age was also done in an d outside the ground as
well as to train s returning to L ondon.

  304. Following this episode, L uton FC decided to ad o p t a H om e O nly Supporters Schem e excluding away
supporters an d allowing only L uton m em bers an d th eir guests to atte n d m atches. I am grateful to the
m anagem ent o f Luton FC an d to the B edfordshire police who explained to m e the history, operatio n and
m erits o f this scheme.

   305. A pplicants for m em bership norm ally reside w ithin 25 m iles o f L uton. T hose fu rth e r away m ust
justify why they wish to jo in . A m em b ersh ip card entitles the m em b er to buy a ticket for entry, eith er in
advance o r on the day, an d to bring in w ith him u p to three guests. T h e card has a bar-coding a n d m ust be
presented to obtain a ticket in advance. To buy a ticket on the day, the card is “sw iped” through a
com puterised read er by the m em ber at an o u ter set o f turnstiles at the K enilw orth R oad end o f the ground.
P aym ent for a ticket is th en m ad e at a n o th e r in n er set o f turnstiles. T hose m em bers who m isbehave are
d eprived o f m em bership. A ban n ed list is m ain tain ed on the com puter. It consisted, at the tim e I received
evidence, o f only six nam es. I f entry is attem p ted by using a b an n e d card, a red light shows an d the turnstile
will n o t open. A steward then escorts th e holder to an office outside the turnstiles where the problem is
investigated.

   306. T he schem e started in A ugust 1986. T h e e q u ip m en t installed initially proved unsatisfactory. Som e o f
the p ro b lem s were: failure through condensation, delay w hilst the read er checked the card’s validity, an d the
fact th a t a Barclaycard could do the trick. A fter a n u m b er o f attem p ts at rectification, this e q u ip m en t was
a b an d o n ed an d a different firm o f suppliers was engaged. I should m en tio n th a t eq u ip m en t from the first
source was installed at Plym outh w here it also failed after a n u m b er o f attem p ts an d the experim ent was not
p u rsu ed further.

  307. T he second system at L uton has proved effective after som e teething troubles. It has been working
satisfactorily now for nearly two seasons.

Benefits of the Scheme
   308. B oth the club and the police are happy w ith the effects o f the scheme. T h e exclusion o f away
supporters n aturally excludes the hooligan elem ent w hich they w ould have included. B ut it also rem oves the
focus for the aggression o f any hom e hooligans. W ith no visitors to attack o r bait, it is said th a t the hooligan
elem ents in L uton have faded away. They have n o t sought to jo in the schem e, n o r do they seem to travel to
away gam es. T he town has also benefitted. Shops w hich previously h a d to b o a rd u p th eir w indows now enjoy
a peaceful Saturday trad e w hich has increased by 40%. A rrests at m atches have dro p p ed from over 100 per
season before the schem e to nil. Police costs have been greatly reduced. T he club accepts th a t initially there
was a fall in attendances, b u t claim s they are rising again. In 1985/6, average atten d an ce was 11,100, in
 1986/7 it was 10,300, in 1987/8 it was 8,038 an d in 1988/9 it was 10,039.

   309. T he list o f benefits is im pressive an d there can be no d o u b t th a t the schem e has been a success for
L uton. B ut w ould it be successful elsewhere?

   310. L uton is, in the football context, som ew hat isolated geographically from o th e r clubs, th e ir fans and
th e ir catch m en t areas. In this, its situation differs greatly from , for exam ple, L ondon clubs o r those on
M erseyside, G reater M anchester o r the M idlands. H ence the assum ption th a t those w ithin 25 m iles o f Luton
are likely to be natural L uton supporters. L uton also differs from clubs in the larger co n u rb atio ns by size o f
crowds, th e ir average num bers being only about on e-q u arter o f those a t large clubs. T he b a n n e d list is tiny. An
im p o rtan t feature o f the L uton schem e is the use o f o u ter an d in n e r turnstiles for w hich the g round has am ple
room . M any o th e r grounds do not.


                                                             52
   311. A t L uton, the card-holder him self “swipes” his card through. T he club an d the police acknowledge
th at, if the card had to be passed to a turn stile o p erato r to “ sw ipe” it through, entry w ould be considerably
retarded. T hey also accept th a t th e essential feature o f L uton’s success has been the b an on away supporters
ra th e r th a n the m em bership card schem e itself.

Ban All Away Supporters?
  312. If this is the touchstone o f success in elim inating hooliganism , why not intro d u ce it generally and
have no away supporters at any football m atches nationw ide? T h is has been considered before and rejected.
M r Ju stice Popplewell in his In terim R eport recom m ended that:

   U rgent consideration should be given to introducing a m em bership system in E ngland and W ales so as to
  exclude visiting fans” .

  However, in his Final R eport he m odified this an d reco m m en d ed that:

   C o n sid eratio n should continue to be given to som e form o f m em bership schem e for Football League
  clubs in E ngland an d W ales”.

  313. Clearly the G ov ern m ent has rejected the id ea o f a b an on all away supporters w hich form s no p art o f
the schem e o f the Football Spectators A ct 1989.

   314. To exclude all away su p p o rt would be a d raco nian step. It w ould halve the n u m b er o f m atches fans
could attend. It w ould seriously dim inish clubs’ revenue an d deprive football grounds o f a healthy
a tm osphere o f rivalry, w hich som e say is a casualty o f the L uton scheme. B ut perh ap s the conclusive p o in t is
th at it w ould be im practical an d possibly counter-productive in the cam paign against hooliganism .

   315. To exclude away supporters from L uton is one thing. T hose excluded can at least go at p resent to any
o th er m atch instead. But to exclude all away supporters from all m atches an d especially to exclude them from
“local derby” m atches o r m atches in large cities could cause serious disorder. If M anchester C ity supporters
could n o t go to O ld T rafford w hen th eir team plays there, o r Chelsea supporters follow th eir team to
H ighbury o r to th e ir neighbours Q ueen’s P ark Rangers, tro u b le could result. T here w ould be attem pts and
devices to defeat the schem e an d get into the ground in defiance o f it. T here could well be d isorder outside
grounds. T h e m ore fanatical supporters an d the hooligans w ould be unlikely to stay hom e an d play patience.

Away Members Only
   316. T here is a halfway house betw een freedom for all com ers an d a b an on all away supporters. T his is to
m ake entry to sections o f the ground for away supporters by ticket only; tickets to be allocated strictly to
m em bers o f the away te a m ’s travel club an d no tickets to be available on the day o f the m atch. T his scheme
b uilds on an existing practice a d o p ted at som e grounds for key m atches, for exam ple the Liverpool v Arsenal
m atch in M ay 1989 to decide the cham pionship. It also b uilds upon existing club m em bership schemes.
M ost clubs have a club m em bership schem e o f som e sort following an agreem ent betw een the football
a u tho rities an d the G overnm en t in February 1987, w hereby all clubs were to introduce schem es covering at
least 50% o f each g ro u n d ’s capacity by the beginning o f the 1987/8 season. C om pliance was patchy and
v aried from a m em bership o f over 40,000 at M anchester U n ite d to one o r two clubs w hich d id nothing at all.

    317. T h e away m em bers only solution encourages the p rom o tion o f m em bership schem es offering
discounts, favourable travel facilities an d o th er benefits. It aim s to lim it away supporters to those, in effect,
vouched for by the away club. M isbehaviour would result in loss o f m em bership an d th u s exclusion from
fu tu re away m atches as well as loss o f o th er m em bership privileges. T h e schem e has the unan im o u s approval
o f the 48 th ird a n d fo urth division clubs, given at th eir an n u al general m eeting in Ju n e 1989.

   318. As w ith any pro p o sed solution to the hooligan problem , this schem e cannot be w atertight. It has to be
recognised th a t any m em bership schem e is vulnerable to abuse arising from the loss o r theft o f cards and
from the d eterm in ed activities o f those who, for w hatever reason, do not possess them . T he away m em bers
only schem e does a t least hold o u t good prospects o f im proving behav io u r in the away supporters’ enclosure
since only those vetted by the away club will b e allocated tickets there. T h a t m ay deter others from travelling
b u t there m ay still be som e who are d eterm in ed to travel an d get in. O n occasion, the FA has ordered th a t a
club’s supporters having a b ad record for causing d isord er can be a d m itted at away m atches only if they are
accredited m em bers o f th e ir own club. Leeds U n ited is an exam ple. T h is has, on the whole, proved beneficial.
However, on occasions, Leeds n o n -m em b er supporters - perh ap s those living n ear the ground Leeds U n ited


                                                           53
are due to visit - m anage to get tickets inten ded for hom e supporters at o r from the ground. They then get
into the w rong end an d cause trouble. T h is seem s to be w hat hap p en ed at Ayresome Park on 9 D ecem ber
1989. M uch therefore depends upon th e care a n d scrutiny given to ticket allocation by th e h om e club. O ften
it is too easy for segregation plans to be thw arted by ready availability to all o f tickets from the h om e club
w hether at the box office o r even by cred it card over the telephone. I appreciate the difficulty o f identifying
surely h o m e an d away supporters b u t clubs should review th e ir procedures with a view to tightening them .

  319.    D espite its im perfections, I consider the away m em bers only solution has som e m erit bo th in
excluding undesirables from away supporters’ enclosures a n d in encouraging the growth o f club m em bership
schem es conferring real benefits on m em bers. It should be given fu rth er consideration.




                                                        54
                                                    C H A P T E R 11

                          OTHER PO SSIBLE M EA SU R ES AGAINST H O O LIG A N S

Exclusion Orders
   320. At present, p u rsu an t to P art IV o f the Public O rd e r Act 1986, a court, on convicting a person o f an
offence connected w ith football has power, in ad d itio n to im posing a sentence, m aking a p ro batio n o rd er o r
discharging him , to m ake an exclusion o rd er p rohibiting h im from entering prem ises to attend any football
m atch. T he exclusion o rd e r m ust be for not less th a n three m onths. I f a breach is proved, the offender is liable
to im p riso n m en t for one m onth, to a fine o r to both.

  321. T h is provision has not m ade m uch im pact. It has n o t been greatly used by the courts. W hen orders
have been m ade they have ten d ed to be for too short a p eriod. O n one occasion, absurdly, Justices im posed a
three m o n th exclusion o rd er on an offender appearing before them in May! A great weakness o f a bare
exclusion o rd e r is the difficulty o f discovering w hether it is being obeyed o r flouted.

  322. By section 27(5) o f the Football Spectators Act 1989, the provisions o f the Public O rd er Act 1986
relating to exclusion o rders shall cease to have effect w hen the Secretary o f State, by Statutory Instrum ent,
brings the 1989 Act into effect. So exclusion orders will go, to be replaced by expulsion from th e national
m em bership schem e u n d er Part I o f the 1989 Act an d restriction orders u n d e r Part II, as I shall explain in the
next Chapter.

Enforcing Exclusion by Attendance Centre Order
  323. W ere exclusion o rders to be retained an d used m ore realistically there are two additional m easures
w hich could be taken to enforce them . First, there could be provision for attaching to an exclusion o rd er a
requirem ent to a tten d at an ap p o in ted centre on the occasions o f designated football m atches. Failure to
atten d w ould im m ediately be detected and w ould ren d er the absentee liable to fu rth er penalties including
im prisonm ent.

   324. Such a m easure w ould have a n u m b er o f m erits. A m ere b a n on entering grounds m ay be flouted
w ithout d etection an d in any event does not b a n presence n ear th e ground. A n attendance centre o rd er would
provide a m eans not m erely to b a n a hooligan from entry to a ground b u t to keep him physically from going
there. H e w ould th u s b e prevented from causing trouble outside o r n ear the ground as well as inside it. T his
w ould be achieved w ith o u t adding to th e prison p o p u latio n , unless he defaulted, an d w ithout any elaborate
schem e im pinging on spectators generally. T h e provision w ould be th e logical co u n terp art in the dom estic
scene to the provisions o f Part II o f the 1989 Act relating to foreign m atches.

Is it Practicable?
   325. I appreciate th a t detaining convicted hooligans d uring designated m atches in the dom estic football
program m e is a bigger undertaking and w ould im pose a m ore restrictive penalty th a n requiring th em merely
to report on the occasions o f English m atches abroad. It is necessary, therefore, to consider the present
structure o f atten d an ce centres, w hat extension o f it m ight be necessary, the resource im plications an d the
fairness o f such a m easure.

Attendance Centres
  326. At present section 17 o f the C rim in al Justice Act 1982 empowers courts to m ake attendance centre
orders for young people u n d er 21 who:

     (a) have been convicted o f an im prisonable offence;

     (b) have defaulted on paym ent o f th e ir fines etc; or

     (c) have failed to com ply w ith the requirem ents o f a pro batio n o r supervision order.

   A ttendance centre orders m ay not be used for those w ho have previously been given a custodial sentence
except in special (undefined) circum stances. T he m in im u m length o f an o rd er is 12 hours, except for those
u n d er 14. T h e m axim um is 24 hours u n d e r 17, a n d 36 ho u rs for those aged 17 to 20.



                                                            55
  327. At present there are 137 centres: 111 ju n io r centres for those aged u n d er 17, an d 26 senior centres for
those aged 17 to 20 (m ales only). T h e senior centres are, for the m ost p art, in the larger conurbations. T he
H om e Office has recently reviewed th e use o f the ju n io r centres an d som e w ith low attendance figures are
being closed.

   328. M ost centres are in school prem ises. T hey are norm ally open for 2 (junior) o r 3 (senior) h o u rs every
o th er Saturday, usually, b u t not invariably, in the afternoon. Each centre is staffed by an officer in charge,
norm ally an off-duty o r retired police officer, assisted by o th e r instructors. Regim es include physical
edu catio n an d at least one o th e r activity.

  329. Subject to these factors, atten d an ce centre orders can be m ade at present against those convicted o f
football related offences. T hey can n o t however be im posed on anyone over 21, o r anyone w ho has h ad a
custodial sentence.

   330. Effectively to exclude th e offender from football grounds, it w ould be necessary to have th e centre
open at least on every Saturday afternoon during the season. To try to include week-day evening m atches
w ould create difficulties in m aking centres available an d m ight b e thought too oppressive on th e offender. I f
power to m ake orders were extended to cover those over 21 an d those w ho have served a custodial sentence,
the centre w ould have to provide for a m ore challenging type o f offender. It w ould probably be thought
in ap p ro p riate to m ix 17 to 20 year old atten d ers w ith m ore hard en ed hooligans.

Resource Im plications
   331. Such an extension w ould probably involve an increase in the n u m b er an d calibre o f staff. Presently,
as indicated earlier, staff include retired an d off-duty police officers. M ore such personnel w ould be required.
However, such increases m ight be m odest in com parison w ith the police resources likely to be required to
im plem ent th e n ational m em bership schem e (see paragraphs 420 to 423 infra).

Fairness
   332. I w ould n o t suggest th a t the im position o f an attendance o rd er should be a m andatory
acco m p an im en t to an exclusion order. It w ould be a discretionary power available to the courts to be used in
accordance w ith the sam e criteria as apply in P art II o f the 1989 Act, ie no such o rd er could b e m ade unless
the c o u rt was satisfied th a t m aking it in relation to th e accused w ould help to prevent violence o r d iso rd er at
o r in connection w ith designated football m atches (c f section 15(2) o f the 1989 Act). T h is w ould enable the
courts to keep the n um bers o f orders w ithin m anageable lim its an d to apply th em only in serious cases w here
the offender m ight otherw ise be in danger o f a custodial sentence.

  333. In such situations, if the offender w ere ju d g ed by the co u rt to be a co m m itted football hooligan, and
were required to a tte n d for say two hours each S aturday in the football season, to a m axim um o f 36 ho u rs (ie
nearly h a lf a season) o r even 72 hours, he could not surely have any ju s t grievance. T h e o rd e r w ould be less
harsh th a n even the shortest prison sentence and, from th e public’s p o in t o f view, m uch m ore effective.

   334. I recognise the practical difficulties in im plem enting extended attendance centre orders but, if those
difficulties can be overcome, the scheme would have considerable m erits. I accordingly recommend th a t
consideration be given to im plem enting it.

Tagging
   335. A second possible m easure to enforce exclusion from the ground an d its environs is electronic
m onitoring o r tagging. T his device is used successfully in the U n ited States. Pilot schem es are presently being
ru n here by the H om e Office. Accused persons on rem an d are kept u n d e r supervision using anklets w ith
sm all radio tran sm itters linked to a central com puter. D espite reports o f som e difficulty w ith the pilot
schem es, M r Jo h n P atten in an answ er to a P arliam entary Q uestion on 10 Ja n u a ry 1989 sta te d :-

   “It is already clear th a t the technology can be p u t to practical use an d th a t the procedures for fitting the
   e q u ip m en t an d m onitoring defendants are practicable. It would now be desirable to test the use o f
   electronic m onitoring o n a trial basis in an area in w hich substantial num bers are likely to be eligible for its
   application as a co n d ition o f bail.”

 M oreover, you are rep orted as having said to the Bow G ro u p on 11 D ecem ber 1989:-


                                                            56
  “T here is a need for courts to have powers to m ake curfew orders, confining offenders to th e ir hom es at
 certain tim es. T his should not be a 24 h o u r house arrest. T hey need to be able to go to w ork if they have a
 jo b , a tten d training courses o r p ro b atio n centres, o r receive tre a tm e n t for alcohol o r drug m isuse. But som e
 types o f crim e - p u b brawls, for exam ple, o r car thefts - could be reduced by curfew orders. I very m uch
 h ope th a t o u r experim ents w ith electronic m onitoring will enable it to be extended from defendants on
 rem an d to sentenced offenders, so as to m ake a curfew o rd e r properly enforceable”.

  336. I f the experim ents do enable the tagging to be extended to sentenced offenders, it w ould be a m ost
useful an d effective way o f ordering convicted hooligans, excluded from grounds, to rem ain at h om e during
designated m atches. T h eir obedience to the orders could be m o n ito red w ithout excessive resource
requirem ents.

   337. I therefore recommend th a t consideration be given to using this technology in the sentencing of
offenders convicted of football-related offences.




                                                              57
                    PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989
                                                     C HAPTER 12

                                   OBJECT A N D PR O V ISIO N S OF TH E ACT

   338. T he principal object o f the Football Spectators Act is to break the link betw een football and
hooliganism . It aim s to d o this by a n atio n al m em bership schem e requiring spectators to purchase an d hold
m em bership cards w ith o u t w hich they will n o t gain adm ission. T hose w ho c o m m it relevant offences or
otherw ise m isbehave in a football context will be deprived o f m em bership an d th u s be excluded from
atten d in g m atches. It is h op ed th a t by this strategy hooligan activity will be elim in ated bo th inside and
outside football grounds. T hus, M r Ridley, th en Secretary o f State for the E nv iro n m ent, said a t the launch o f
the Bill on 17 Jan u ary 1989:—

  “For the first tim e, there will be an effective an d com prehensive procedure to keep hooligans away from
  football m atches. O f course there will b e a ttem p ts to abuse the system b u t if the schem e is effective, those
  attem p ts will fail. We believe th a t it offers the real prospect o f ending football hooliganism b o th inside an d
  outside grounds. If hooligans know th a t they will n o t be allowed into football m atches, they will have no
  incentive to travel to them . T he link betw een football an d hooliganism will be b roken an d football will
  cease to be a focus for violence.”

Provisions of Part I
   339. T he S tatute is an enabling Act an d perm its the Secretary o f State to m ake an o rd er by Statutory
In stru m en t to bring it into o peration (section 27(2)). I do n o t propose to set o ut all the provisions o f th e Act in
every detail. In the b roadest term s, however, P art I o f the Act is to the following effect.

  340. Section 1(5) provides for a n atio n al m em bership schem e (“the schem e”) to restrict “the generality o f
spectators atten din g designated football m atches to persons w ho are m em bers o f the schem e” . Section 1(2)
gives the Secretary o f State power to designate football m atches o r an in d iv id u al m atch.

   341. Two new bodies are to be a p p o in ted by the Secretary o f State. T he first is th e Football M em bership
A uthority (FM A), a co rporate body w ith articles o f association. T h e FM A is to be responsible initially for
drafting the schem e (section 4( 1)). T he Secretary o f State is em pow ered to approve th e schem e, again by
S tatutory In stru m en t (section 4(3)). T he FM A is th en to b e responsible for the a d m in istratio n o f the schem e
(section 3(1)). Section 7 disqualifies from becom ing o r continuing to be a m em b er o f the schem e anyone
subject to an exclusion ord er u n d er section 30 o f th e Public O rd er Act 1986 (after conviction o f an offence
connected w ith football) w hilst he is so subject. Also, anyone convicted o f a relevant offence, being one o f
those listed in Schedule 1 to the new Act, is likewise disqualified. A nyone so convicted is disqualified for five
years if he receives an im m ediate prison sentence and for two years if not.

   342. T he second body is a quango to be called th e Football Licensing A uthority (FLA) (section 8). T he
FLA is to be responsible for th e grant (section 10( 1)) o r refusal (section 10(3)) o f a licence to a d m it spectators
to any prem ises to w atch any designated football m atch there. It has power to im pose co n d itio n s on the
licence (section 10(4) to (7)), to m ake inspections an d inqu iries (section 10(8)) an d to vary a licence (section
 10(10)), suspend o r revoke it (section 12). In m aking decisions u n d er section 10, the FLA is to have regard to
w hether the equipm ent, the prem ises an d th e responsible persons there are such as to secure com pliance w ith
the scheme.

   343. T h e FLA also has ancillary functions, as no ted earlier; first, to include in a licence, if the Secretary o f
 State so directs, a cond itio n as to seating (section 11); secondly, to keep u n d er review an d oversee the
 discharge by local auth o rities o f th eir 1975 Act fu n ctio n s regarding football grounds an d Safety C ertificates
 (section 13).

 Contents of the Scheme
   344. Section 5(2) prescribes as follows: -

   “T h e schem e m ust include provision -

      (a) securing th a t the only spectators p erm itted to a tten d at designated football m atches are authorised
          spectators;


                                                              58
    (b) prov id in g fo r tem p o rary m em b ersh ip o f the schem e, including (in p articu lar) th e tem p o rary
        m em bership o f football club guests;

    (c) prov id in g fo r th e ad m issio n as spectators at designated football m atches, w ith o u t th e ir being
        m em bers o f the schem e, o f -

          (i)   disabled persons, and

          (ii) accom panied children,

          in such circum stances and subject to such conditions as are specified in the scheme;

    (d) securing th a t persons w ho are disqualified u n d er section 7 below are excluded from m em bership
        w hile so disqualified;

    (e) providing for the exclusion from m em bership, for an ap p ro priate period not exceeding two years
        d eterm in ed u n d e r th e schem e, o f persons who are, by reference to circum stances specified in the
        schem e, d eterm in ed u n d er the schem e to be unfit for m em bership an d for notifying persons w ho are
        excluded from m em bership o f the grounds for the exclusion;

    (f) im p osin g p ecun iary penalties on any persons having fu n ctio n s u nd er the schem e for failure to
        discharge those functions;

    (g) im posing requirem ents as respects the procedure to be followed in dealing w ith applications for
        m em bership o f th e schem e an d requiring th a t in Wales any application form for m em bership o f the
        schem e shall also be available in Welsh;

    (h) im p o sin g req u irem en ts o n responsible persons as respects the procedure to be followed and
        eq u ip m en t to be used in relation to any designated football m atch to secure that, except in an
        emergency, the only spectators ad m itted to an d p erm itted to rem ain on the prem ises are authorised
        spectators;

    (i)   to such effect, in relation to the adm ission o f spectators to the prem ises, as the Secretary o f State may
          specify in writing;

    (j)   establishing an d m ain tain in g a central register o f m em bers o f the scheme;

    (k) regulating the form an d contents o f m em bership cards; an d

    (1) establishing procedures for th e m aking an d consideration o f representations against decisions m ade
        u n d e r the schem e refusing o r w ithdraw ing m em bership o f it an d for the ind ep en d en t review o f the
        decisions in the light o f the representations;

an d in this subsection “accom panied children” m eans persons u n der the age o f 10 years in the charge o f an
au th o rised spectator.”

  345. Section 5(3) prescribes, in ter alia, th a t the schem e m ay m ake provision for the im position o f charges
for m em bership cards (section 5(3)(b) an d by section 5(3)(c»:-

  “for the adm ission as spectators at designated football m atches, w ithout th e ir being m em bers o f the
  schem e, o f descriptions o f person specified in the schem e in such circum stances an d subject to such
  conditions as are so specified” .

  346. M y sh o rt sum m ary o f P art I om its a nu m b er o f provisions eg the constitution o f the FM A an d o f the
FLA, details o f offences, defences to th em a n d appeals, D ata P rotection Act 1984 im plications etc.

Provisions of P a rt II
   347. Before proceeding to discuss the im plications o f P art I o f the Act, w hich are highly controversial, I
should refer to th e provisions o f P art II w hich are not. A lthough I assum e m y rem it is lim ited to sports events
w ith in the ju risd ic tio n to w hich P art I applies, the schem e o f P art II is, I think, relevant.


                                                            59
  348. T h e aim o f P art II is to prevent convicted hooligans from travelling to m atches abroad including
m atches in S cotland an d there by m isb eh av io u r causing trouble an d dam aging o u r n atio n al reputation.

   349. T h e schem e, again stated in b ro a d term s, is to give courts power to m ake a restriction o rd er after a
conviction for a relevant offence, in a d d itio n to any o th er sentence (section 15). Such an o rd e r is to be for five
years if it accom panies an im m ed iate sentence o f im prisonm ent; otherw ise for two years (section 16(1)). It
im poses a d u ty to report a t a police station (unless exem pted) on the occasion o f designated football m atches
abroad. Failure so to report is an offence punishable on sum m ary conviction by up to one m o n th ’s
im p riso nm en t, by a fine o r by b o th (section 16(5)). T h ere is provision in section 22 for m aking restriction
o rders conseq u en t upon convictions in countries o th er th a n England an d W ales for “corresponding offences”
to those listed in Schedule 1.

    350. Even those im placably hostile to the provisions o f P art I are mostly in favour o f P art II. In my view it
is a sensible a n d practicable m easure to take against a persistent m ischief practised by a small m inority b u t
w ith national repercussions. To a d a p t a fam ous dictum , never in the field o f sport h as so m uch od iu m been
b ro u gh t u p o n so m any by so few. T h e schem e is aim ed directly a n d solely a t the few w hose m isbehaviour
a b ro ad brings such odium u p o n English football supporters generally. I w elcom e it.




                                                             60
                                                     C H A P T E R 13

                                  TH E NATIONAL M E M B E R SH IP SC H EM E

  351. R eturning to P art I, it is crucial to a full evaluation o f its likely im pact to know the term s o f the
schem e to be approved. A t present there is no approved schem e, no r even a draft schem e, since the FM A has
not yet been ap p o in ted , although the FA a n d FL have been offered “first refusal” for a p p o in tm en t as such. I
do n o t know therefore how an d in w hat term s such a schem e w ould com ply w ith the requirem ents o f section 5
set o u t above.

   352. T he only guide presently available is the In v itatio n To T ender (ITT) a n d the S tatem en t O f
R equirem ents (SO R) prepared by E rnst & Young, M anagem ent C onsultants, in conjunction w ith the
D e p a rtm e n t o f the E nvironm ent. T h is do cu m en t is d irected to com panies w hich have shown interest in
tendering for the co ntract to supply the relevant technology. T he IT T was dated 1 D ecem ber 1989 and
required tenderers to respond by 19 Jan u ary 1990. As I w rite this report th a t date is still ah ead a n d so the
response is n o t known. Presently there are seven p o ten tial tenderers.

General Requirements of the ITT and SOR
   353. T h e successful ten d erer will be required to set up, m anage a n d operate a com pany, the “scheme
o perating com pany” (SOC) to ru n the entire schem e. It will work u n d er the overall policy, supervision an d
control o f the FMA. A t the outset o f the ITT, certain key objectives have been identified as follows:-

  “ 1. M inim ise the turn stile process tim e an d the queuing problem s th a t m ight occur in large crowds close
    to kick-off a n d keep them w ithin acceptable lim its.

    2. F u n d the schem e, taking acco un t o f its costs an d also the possible disincentive effect to supporters o f
    paying m em bership fees.

    3. E nsure the application process, card production a n d issue procedures m eet the requirem ents w ithin
    acceptable tu rn a ro u n d tim es to spectators.

    4. D eal w ith invalid card holders a t entry points a n d ensure th a t offenders against the m em bership rules
    are dealt w ith fairly a n d th a t any p u n ish m en t can be enforced.

    5. Keep w ithin m anageable lim its the size o f the referral file containing b an n ed m em bers to ensure that
    speed o f access to it is acceptable a n d still have sufficient protection against the use o f lost, stolen, forged
    cards a n d pass-backs on m atch days.”

  354. T he SO R provides as follow s:-

  “ A part from ensuring financial integrity an d acceptability o f the m arketing strategy, the FM A will be
    concerned to ensure that:

     1.   the n u m b er o f supporters is m axim ised while recovering the cost o f the schem e

     2.   the schem e does n o t ad d to problem s outside grounds

     3.   the schem e assists in reducing hooliganism .”

  T h a t the schem e m u st be self-funding is fu rth er stressed in th e IT T as follows:-

  “ T he Football M em bership Schem e will be self-funding, th a t is, the SOC will be responsible for all costs
    an d expenses (including set-up costs) incurred in carrying o u t its obligations u n d er the contract and
    shall reim burse the FM A for expenditure incurred by the FM A bo th on the SO C’s b eh alf relating to the
    schem e an d in respect o f the FM A fulfilling the requirem ents o f the Act.

    T he costs o f running th e FM A will also need to be recovered from the incom e generated by the SOC.

    T h e levels o f m em bership fees including any variations over the period o f the contract, will be subject to
    the p rio r approval o f the FM A ” .


                                                             61
Ground Modifications
  355. As to the cost o f gro u n d m odifications, the IT T notes:

  “It is anticip ated th a t there could be a significant cost involved in accom m odating the m em bership
  validation system at som e grounds. Therefore any m odifications to be m ade to the existing turnstile
  e q u ip m en t an d the inclusion o f any new turnstiles should be entered against th is item . ”

Applications for Membership
   356. A pplications for m em bership o f the schem e m ust be m ade in person, n o t by post, using a standard
application form . T he form will include personal p articulars a n d the type o f application. T his m ay be for
adult m em bership, renewal, replacem ent, change o f details, tem porary, ju n io r o r senior m em bership. T he
form will state the m em bership p erio d (norm ally two seasons), the applicant’s n o m in ated club allegiance,
second club allegiance an d national allegiance. It will include a box to allow exclusion from any m ailing lists.
T h e Post Office an d the clubs will act as collection p oints for handling applications a n d carrying o u t an initial
verification process. T h is will require the applicant to produce evidence to prove iden tity an d one o r m ore
passport stan d ard photographs. T he collecting agent will be responsible for checking the form , the
acceptability o f the photographs an d th eir general likeness to the applicant as well as the o th e r evidence o f
identification. H e will also accept the fee.

  357. T he SO R prov id es:-

  “Vetting o f applications at the p o in t o f presentation in a collection agency m ust be consistent an d m ethods
  to ensure th a t vetting procedures are followed m ust be em ployed. T h e integrity o f the system as an
  anti-hooligan m easure will depend on this vetting procedure.”

  358. T he SO R states th a t the m ajor problem in handling the application will be to ensure th a t the attached
photographs are linked to the application details to enable the subsequent correct printin g o f m em bership
cards.

Validation Procedures
  359. I concentrate on applications for adult, ju n io r o r senior m em bership. In these cases, th e SO R
provides two basic v alidation procedures which m ust be followed. T he first is a “person check”, explained as
follows:-

  “T he purpose o f this check is to stop supporters getting m ore th an one m em bership card. T h e reason being
  th a t a ban on one m em bership registration w ould still leave the su p p o rter in possession o f ano th er
  m em bership card. T herefore there will be bo th a nam e and an address check against the m em bership
  registration database (postcoding o f all addresses will obviously m ake this procedure a lot faster an d it may
  be necessary to insist upon postcodes from the start). Also it is n o t sufficient to u n d ertak e a straight nam e
  an d address check due to different ways to spell nam es a n d addresses. T h e p rim e co n tracto r should
  propose m ethods to ensure th a t ad eq u ate checking is u n d ertak en against deliberate m ultiple applications.”

   360. Secondly, there m u st be a “ referral file check”. T he referral file will contain particulars o f the
following:

   “ - persons b an n ed from m em bership (existing m em bers)

     - persons who are considered to be undesirable due to th e ir past record who have n o t yet applied for
       m em bership (this will include those w ith existing exclusion orders against them )

     - lost/stolen m em bership cards eith er by direct notification o r due to an application for a replacem ent
       card

     - frau d u len t copies.”

Provision and Updating of Information to Clubs
  361. T h e national referral list will be com m u n icated to all 92 League clubs. M oreover, the list will have to
be u p d ated weekly during the football season to a d d fresh instances o f any o f the fo u r categories o f exclusion
m entioned in the last paragraph; also, to rem ove from the list those no longer excluded eg after a successful
appeal.


                                                            62
  362. Each club will also be given the nam es o f those successful applicants who have claim ed allegiance to
the club. From this in fo rm atio n the club will be required to keep a register o f its own m em bers.

Exploitation of the System
   363. T he IT T provides for the FM A by itself o r a designated agent to be responsible for approving and
co-ordinating the SO C ’s com m ercial exploitation o f the N ational M em bership File an d extracts from th a t
file. T h is is said to be “in o rd er to protect an d p rom ote the rep u tatio n o f football to avoid any possible
conflict w ith existing an d fu tu re com m ercial activities at a club an d n ational level” . T he FM A m ay also
licence clubs to use data relating to m em bers w ho express allegiance to th a t club on term s an d conditions to
be agreed.

Membership Cards
  364. It is m an dato ry th a t the m em bership card m ust carry a photograph o f the m em ber, the m em ber’s
nam e, full m em bership num ber, the expiry date, club allegiance if any an d national allegiance. T he
m em bership n u m b e r m ust be in a “m achine readable form o n the card as it is the only m ethod o f rapidly
enough m atching the card against the national referral file”.

  365. T h e card will need to m eet stan d ard s for size an d durability; it will need to last for m ore th a n the
no rm al m em bership period (two years) as this m ay be increased later.

  366. T h e security level m ust ensure that:

  “ - cards are n o t forgeable

    - photographs can n o t be replaced

    - m achine readable m em bership num bers c an n ot be changed

    - p rin ted details on the cards can n o t be changed

    - supplies o f blan k cards are held in a secure en v iro n m en t.”

  All o f this assum es th a t the m em bership cards “will be the ‘plastic credit-card’ type” .

Entry Checking Procedures
  367. I now com e to requirem ents having a critical bearing on safety an d crowd control. They concern the
checks and procedures at turnstiles. T he following six provisions are m andatory:

    i      A sp ectator m ust present a valid cu rren t m em bership card to the turnstile operator.

     ii    “A sp ectator m ust be authorised to hold the m em bership card an d be p erm itted to a tten d the
           designated m atch. (Note: it has been accepted th a t the turnstile o p erato r will not be able to com pare
           the photograph on the card with the person presenting the card as well as undertaking electronic
           checking).”

     iii   T he card m ust n o t be “present on the referral file” an d

     iv    can only be used “once p er designated m a tc h .”

     v     “T he tu rn stile op erato r m ust n o t let any person into the m atch w ithout them (sic) producing a
           m em bership card an d validating th a t card using the procedures an d e q u ipm en t provided.”

     vi    “T he system should be capable o f directing m em bers into th e ir p erm itted sections o f the ground,
           using the p rim ary an d secondary club allegiance field (unless playing each o ther) in the m em bership
           n u m b e r to determ in e through w hich entry p oints the m em ber m ay pass.”

Turnstile Alarm
   368. If a card fails any o f the six basic checks sum m arised above, th e system m ust alert the officials
(stew ards a n d /o r police). It m ust also be capable o f alerting th e tu rn stile o perato r but not alerting the
spectator w hile in the turnstile.


                                                             63
  369. T h ree types o f failure are envisaged.

    (1) Referral file check shows the card is subject to a ban; card notified as lost o r as stolen; alternatively,
        the card h as been used previously at th a t m atch (pass-back).

    (2) E q u ip m en t/card m alfunction, m em bership expired,tem porary card n ot valid for m atch.

    (3) C ard being presented at th e “w rong” tu rn stile o r no card at all.

Detection
  370. T he procedure to be followed in relation to each o f these three types o f failure is m an dato ry and
im p o rtan t in the evaluation o f the schem e for safety a n d crowd control.

  371. If th e failure is o f type (1 ):-

  “T h e suspect should be app reh en d ed an d taken to an investigation area eith er inside o r outside the ground.
  T hese will be situated a t convenient places a ro u n d th e ground. It is an ticip ated th a t there will need to be
  one investigation area on each side o f th e ground, although this is likely to d ep en d on ground c o n d itio n s” .

  I f th e failure is o f type (2 ):-

  “T h e card will be retained at the entry p o in t a n d a receipt for the card given to the spectator. T h is receipt
  will co n tain e ith er the m em bership n u m b er o r som e m eth o d to identify th e retained card later. T he
  spectator will be advised to contact th e club after the m atch w hen th e problem m ay have been resolved” .

  I f th e failure is o f type (3 ):-

  “T he spectator is tu rn e d back from th e entry p o in t”.

System Contingency
  372. Systems a t tu rn stiles m ust be capable o f operating “a degraded service” in th e event o f system
m alfunction. T h is m ust include replacem ent o f any m alfunctioning u n it w ith in five m in u tes an d alternative
power supplies if the system relies on external power. I f cabling is used it m u st be ta m p e r p ro o f an d m ore th an
one route m u st be provided betw een “every turn stile installed u n it” an d th e processing unit. T urnstile
system s m u st n ot d epend on a single club co m p u ter system.

Perform ance and Environm ental Conditions
  373. Finally, tw o m an d ato ry provisions are laid dow n w hich are o f great im p o rtan ce to safety an d crowd
control.

   374. As to p erform ance the SO R pro v id es:-

  “ It is critical th a t th e conducting o f th e six basic checks a n d any follow-up p rocedures described in th is an d
  the next section m ust give rise to no significant delays to ground entry at turnstiles. T h e m axim um
  a d d itio n al tim e w hich will be considered will be no m ore th a n 1 second p er entry to th e norm al ground
  entry rate for a p a rtic u la r turnstile an d ground configuration at all tim es” .

   375. As to env iro n m en tal conditions, the provision is:-

   “Any system s installed at turn stile locations will have to operate reliably in th e co n d itio n s experienced in
   an outdoor, all-weather, all-year environm ent. Power supplies to turnstiles will be unreliable.”

Sum m ary
   376. As w ith m y analysis o f the statutory provisions, this sum m ary o f th e con ten ts o f th e IT T a n d SO R is
n o t exhaustive. It seeks only to indicate how th e schem e is intend ed to w ork an d w hat is expected o f it.




                                                             64
                                                    C H A P T E R 14

                          A R G U M EN TS R A ISED BY CRITICS O F T H E SC H EM E

  377.    H aving sum m arised the in ten d ed objects an d benefits o f the schem e an d the m eans by w hich it is
required to achieve them , I tu rn now to the argum ents against the schem e raised by its critics.

  (i) Disproportionate?
  First, it is said th a t the schem e w ith all its com plex ram ifications is o u t o f pro p o rtio n to the problem .
  Setting up the technology an d m ain tain in g it secure an d in w orking order; adapting grounds to install it;
  dealing w ith m illions o f applications swiftly; issuing m illions o f cards, renewing them , coping w ith lost and
  stolen cards; setting up a referral list, distrib u tin g it an d updating it; training staff; coping w ith b anned
  cards an d o th er failures at the turnstile; processing offenders; dealing fairly w ith appellants - these, and
  o th er ancillary m easures, a m o u n t to an en orm o u s undertaking. It is aim ed principally a t keeping hooligans
  o u t o f the ground, but, so it is said, the problem inside grounds is less th a n it was an d could be m et by o ther
  less com plex an d less am bitious strategies.

  (ii) Unfair?
  In aim ing to exclude a m inority o f hooligans from the football scene, it is com plained th a t the huge
  m ajority o f d ecent spectators are to be p u t by the schem e to trouble an d expense. Each fan will have to go
  through th e application procedures, presenting his form , proving his identity, purchasing an d producing
  photographs. H e will have to pay betw een £4 an d £10 a year to jo in the schem e in ad d itio n to paying for
  m atch tickets. H e will have to keep his card, rem em ber it on m atch days, guard it from loss an d theft, and
  renew it from tim e to tim e for fu rth e r paym ents. Should he forget it, o r lose it, should it be stolen o r becom e
  dam aged, he will be p u t to trouble to replace it an d to gain entry to m atches meanwhile. It is argued th at
  m easures against hooligans should target the hooligans only, not inconvenience m illions o f spectators in
  th e hope o f weeding o u t a few.

  (iii) Casual Spectators
  T h ere is anxiety th a t the schem e will, in effect, exclude from football the spectator w ho atten d s only on a
  casual basis o r for a rare m atch w hich takes his fancy. Such a spectator, it is argued, w ould not go to the
  expense o r trouble (especially the latter) o f buying a m em bership card sim ply to atte n d an occasional
  m atch. T h is category o f spectator is thought possibly to account for som e 20% o f present attendances -
  sizeable n um bers to be deprived o f th eir present freedom to w atch football.

  (iv) D im inished Club Revenue
  Taking these lost casual visitors together w ith form er regular atten d ers w ho m ay also find the schem e a
  disincentive, the clubs fear th e ir revenue will be severely reduced. For this reason, in ter alia, they have been
  strongly opposed to th e scheme.

  (v) Danger o f Congestion and Disorder
  T here is concern th a t the am b itio u s technology, w hich is yet to be produced an d tested, m ay fail.
  A lternatively, th a t even if, by persistence an d through trial an d error, it could in the end be m ade to
  function reliably, there m ay be serious failures in the teething period. In eith er o f these events the fear is
  th a t congestion a t the turnstiles could cause serious danger o r disorder.

   (vi) Will the Schem e Defeat Hooligans?
   Even if the technology works according to plan, will it (a) exclude determ in ed hooligans from inside the
   ground a n d (b) also induce th em to stay away from the environs o f the ground? T he criticism is th a t it
   m ay d o n eith er o f these things, especially n o t the latter.

   (vii) Police Resources
   T here is concern, especially from the police them selves, as to the num bers o f police to be deployed a n d the
   facilities they will need at the ground to cope w ith problem s arising from the schem e at the turnstiles.
   T hese will involve b an n ed cards, lost cards, stolen cards, unreadable cards an d determ in ed hooligans
   trying by various m eans to buck the system.

 In short, critics say the schem e proposes a sledgeham m er to crack a nut; a sledgeham m er w hich m ay not
 swing at all but, if it does, may n o t swing safely o r even reach the nut.


                                                            65
A rgum ents Relevant to th is Inquiry
    378. O f the seven argum ents I have ju s t briefly sum m arised, the first four do not b ear directly upon safety
o r crowd control. They m ay have considerable force a n d (ii) an d (iii) do b ear upon m atters considered in Part
I o f this R eport (especially better tre a tm e n t o f spectators). However, they raise issues o f policy w hich are
essentially for P arliam ent. Accordingly, I say no m ore as to those four points.

  379. O n the o th er hand, argum ents (v), (vi) a n d (vii) do b ear very relevantly up o n safety an d crowd
control. They are therefore w ithin my rem it an d I shall explore them in turn.




                                                          66
                                                    C H A P T E R 15

                                 DANG ER OF C O N G ESTIO N OR D ISO R DER

Present Risk o f Congestion
   380. C ongestion outside turnstiles an d consequent injuries o r diso rd er are already recognised risks. T hose
risks are aggravated by the lim ited n u m b er o f turnstiles available an d the lim ited scope for increasing th em at
m any old grounds. They are also increased by the late arrival o f a large p roportion o f the crowd, which is a
com m on occurrence.

  381. D u rin g the last busy 20 m inutes before kick-off, queues, o r som etim es a phalanx, o f waiting
spectators, ten d to b u ild up. I f the delivery through the turnstiles is delayed o r slowed down, th a t build-up
grows an d its pressure fu rth er retards the turn stile operation. T he next stage is th a t those w aiting becom e
restive, fearing they will n o t get in for the kick-off. Crowd noise from the ground, denoting th a t the team s are
out, increases im patience. T here is then real danger o f pressure tow ards the turnstiles causing injuries and
panic causing disorder. T his is w hat h appened at H illsborough. It is said th a t it nearly happened again,
despite H illsborough an d the in terim recom m endations, a t C oventry on the first day o f the new season.

Additional Time to Check Cards
   382. T hese risks have existed even w ithout a n ational m em bership scheme. Since the schem e requires
th a t all spectators passing through the turnstiles m ust produce th eir m em bership cards for checking, it is
inevitable th a t som e ad d itio n al tim e will be taken for each spectator.

  383. In realistic acknow ledgem ent o f the risk this m ight create, the IT T states as its first key objective:-

  “ M inim ise the turn stile process tim e an d the queuing problem s th a t m ight occur in large crowds close to
  kick-off an d keep th em w ithin acceptable lim its” .

  T h e SO R likewise requires the FM A to ensure:-

  “T he schem e does n o t ad d to problem s outside grounds” .

  M ore specifically, I repeat the m and ato ry provision o f the SO R as follows:-

  “It is critical th a t the conducting o f the six basic checks an d any follow-up procedures ... m ust give rise to
  n o significant delays to ground entry a t turnstiles. T he m ax im um additional tim e w hich will be considered
  will be n o m ore th a n 1 second per entry to the no rm al ground entry rate for a p articu lar turnstile and
  ground configuration a t all tim es” .

  384. Even if this is achieved, it w ould reduce the num bers per h o u r adm issible through a turn stile from
the n o rm o f 500 (m entioned in A ppendix 3 at paragraph 33) to ab ou t 436.

  385. But can it be achieved? T h is depends upon two factors: (i) w hat has to be done at the turnstile; (ii)
w hether the technology can achieve the required rate; n o t only in favourable conditions b u t in real life and
despite attem p ts to defeat it.

     (i) Procedures a t the Turnstiles
   386. T h e six entry checks w hich have to be undertaken at the turnstile (see supra paragraph 367) require
th e spectator to “present a valid cu rren t m em bership card to the turnstile op erato r” . So, in the norm al case,
there will be a passing o f the card to the operator, a v alid atio n o f it by him , an d a re tu rn o f the card to the
hold er - all o f this to be ad d itio n al to buying a ticket or (at an all-ticket m atch) presenting a ticket an d having
the stub returned.

   387. T h e system as prescribed in the IT T depends upon the o perato r getting possession o f the card
because it has to b e “ retain ed ” at the turnstile if there is a failure o f type (2) eg m alfunction o r card expired.
T h is req u irem en t is significant w hen one is dealing w ith a tim e factor n o t to exceed 1 second. T he schem e is
unlike th a t at L uton, for exam ple, w hich m ust be quicker since (a) there are two sets o f turnstiles w ith an
o p erato r only at the in n er set an d (b) the m em b er swipes his own card through at the o u ter turnstile. I f the
IT T were to be changed to follow the L uton exam ple, however, w hat w ould happen at grounds w here there is


                                                            67
insufficient space for two sets o f turnstiles an d how w ould the op erato r get possession o f the card so as to
“retain ” it if there were a m alfunction?

  388. If th e turnstile alarm alerts the o p erato r to a failure o f type (1) - a banned, lost o r stolen card or
pass-back - the suspect is to be apprehended. T he turnstile o p erato r will therefore have no m ore to do with
him ; b u t how long it will take to have the suspect ap p reh en d ed inside o r outside the tu rn stile will depend on
the police presence to w hich I shall tu rn later.

  389. If the failure is o f type (2), ap a rt from retaining the card, the o perato r is required to give the holder a
receipt for it w hich “will contain e ith er the m em bership n u m b e r o r som e o th e r m eth od to identify the
retained card later”. Since the o p erato r will be unable to a n ticip ate the card num bers o f those w hich fail for a
type (2) reason, he can n o t have a receipt ready in advance. I f he has to m ake one out, h a n d it to the en tran t
an d explain the procedure for redeem ing the card later, the exercise w ould take considerably longer th an 1
second - especially if, as w ould be likely, there is som e backchat.

   390. It is tru e th a t the SO R req u irem en t th a t the schem e m ust ad d no m ore th a n 1 second to the turnstile
tim e, although said to be m and ato ry a n d critical, could be changed. However, in my view the authors o f the
SO R were right to choose 1 second as “the m ax im u m add itio nal tim e w hich will be con sid ered ”. A t 500 per
hour, each e n tra n t has 7.2 seconds to go through the turnstile. A ny additional tim e could cause difficulty; 1
second is an a d d itio n o f nearly 14% to the existing 7.2 seconds an d m ore than 1 second would, as the SOR
says, be unacceptable.

  391. I f the failure is o f type (3) - w rong turnstile: n o card - the IT T requires th a t “the spectator is tu rn ed
back from the entry p o in t” . T h e evidence I heard a t Sheffield from m any police w itnesses, a n d all I have seen
an d read since, m akes it clear th a t w here there are queues, let alone a phalanx, trying to get som eone who is
wedged in the narrow s o f a turn stile back through those w aiting is at best a slow, laborious an d u n p o p ular
exercise. A t H illsborough, the crush m ad e it im possible.

    (ii) The Technology
   392. It has yet to be shown th a t a com puterised system can be produced w hich is capable, even in
favourable conditions, o f achieving reliably the requirem ents o f the ITT. So far as I am aware, now here has a
com puterised system been installed to cope w ith the m assive n u m bers o f people, in th e short perio d o f tim e
an d in the all-w eather context w hich will be required by this schem e, quite ap art from the ad d ed problem s o f
attem p ted disruption. T h e schem e therefore invites tenderers to break new ground. T h e fact th a t it has n o t
been d one before does not, o f course, show th a t it can n o t b e done. But it does require greater caution an d a
m ore extensive testing procedure th a n if there were a successful precedent.

   393. T he only com parable exercise which has been atte m p te d was a Football Id en tity C ard Schem e in
H olland. T h a t failed in its early stages a n d has been shelved. However, I should stress th a t the D u tch schem e
was very different from th a t proposed u n d er the 1989 Act. It involved only five clubs w ith a b ad history o f
hooliganism an d it applied only to the away m atches o f those clubs. O nly 25,000 cards were issued. M uch
depen d ed on careful control o f ticket sales. T he schem e was in tro d u ced at the start o f the 1989/90 season.
U nfortunately, the opening m atches o f the season featured two o f the five clubs hosting two o f the others.
Ticket sales were n o t controlled effectively, the clubs were hostile to the schem e, away supporters were
a d m itted w ithout tickets a n d supporters on bo th sides com bined to defeat the experim ent.

  394. In these circum stances, I do n o t th in k th a t the failure o f the D u tch schem e can fo u n d a fair argum ent
against the totally different schem e p roposed in the 1989 Act. W h at it does show is the need to m ake any such
schem e p ro o f against w recking tactics.


D em onstration
   395. O ne o f the seven potential tenderers gave a d em o n stratio n to a P arliam entary group using a
laboratory prototype to show the technology they could deploy. T h a t being so, a sim ilar d em o n stratio n was
arranged for m e an d my Assessors. We were shown a “sm art-card” an d how it could be p rogram m ed an d used
as a football m em bership card. Each “sm art-card” contains its own m ini-com puter. M uch in fo rm atio n can
be stored inside it. T h e d em o n stratio n showed the holder passing the card over a reader a n d the possible
responses o f red, am b er o r green light, depending on w hether the card was valid, doubtful o r invalid.
A dvertising possibilities an d o th e r packages o f benefits were also explained an d illustrated.


                                                            68
   396. I was extrem ely im pressed by w hat we were shown. However, this was a single card, at a single
sim ulated turnstile, in w arm , dry, in d o o r conditions, w ith o u t a large national referral file to be searched and
w itho u t anyone trying to circum vent o r wreck the system.

Police A pprehensions
  397. I quote from the w ritten evidence su b m itted by A C P O :-

  “T he question, however, w hich m ost concerns police officers relates to the efficacy o f the technology. T he
  (Act) naturally does n o t detail how it will work o r w hat is required o f it but, it is clear that, unless it is robust
  a n d virtually trouble-free, it will be counter-productive. In the worst case it could be massively
  counter-productive. At the least each turnstile m ust have access to a national database a n d m ust be able to
  survey th a t datab ase alm ost instantaneously. T h e m achine itself m ust be durable against sabotage . . . and
  m ust work w ith o u t persistent f a u lt.. . .

  All o u r experience to date has been th a t co m p u ter salesm en have offered m uch an d delivered little. T he
  police feel th a t they m ust be involved in th e specification for any technology an d w ould need to be satisfied
  th a t it works before sup p ort could be given to this schem e. T he consequences o f repeated failure, hostile
  queues, in term in ab le delays a n d the rest, are u n th in k ab le” .

C om puter Reliability
   398. T he concern expressed in th a t passage ab o u t co m p u ter perform ance is n o t unduly cynical. M any
people have personal experience o f co m p uter failures in o n e field o r another. T he co m p u ter “going dow n” at
an airp o rt causing delays at check-in, co m p u ter errors in banks, problem s w ith com puterised entrances to the
L ondon U n derground, and, recently, co m p u ter “viruses” , are m erely a few exam ples. These problem s
con tin u e to occur from tim e to tim e even w ith co m p u ter system s w hich have been thoroughly tested, which
are widely used a n d have long ago passed through w hat was thought to be the teething period. In m any cases
such failures cause delay o r annoyance b u t n o t danger. T h e technology for the present scheme, however, has
n o t yet been through the stage o f teething troubles. Moreover, th e schem e could cause dangerous build-ups if
the technology e ith er failed wholly o r failed to w ork at the stipulated rate. In the L ondon U nderground,
where build-ups were occurring, a m ann ed entrance channel has h ad to be provided at m any stations
alongside those w hich are com puterised, as a safety valve. To have to open extra non-com puterised entrances
at football grounds w ould (unlike the U nderground) scupper the system. Its whole an d sole p o in t is to exclude
hooligans by c o m p u ter checking.

    399. In fact, the Act seem s to leave it open to the FM A to include in the schem e power for a person in
a u tho rity to o pen gates a n d let spectators in, w hether they have m em bership cards o r not, should an
em ergency arise (section 2(2), section 5(2)(h), section 5(3)(c) an d section 10(12)(a)). If the exercise o f that
power should have to be considered, all the problem s w hich arose outside H illsborough would arise again
- deciding w h eth er the power should be exercised o r not; if so, at w hat m o m en t an d by whom ; m aking a clear
decision an d co m m u n icating it; coping w ith the in-rush an d the loss o f control a n d o f segregation it may
cause. I f the power h ad to be exercised, the schem e would be discredited at th a t place on th a t day an d perhaps
generally.

Relaxation in an Emergency
   400. I said in the last paragraph th a t the Act “seem s to include power” to relax the turnstile requirem ents
in an emergency. B ut the power is only to be inferred by im p lication from the four sub-sections I have cited.
N ow here is the power expressly given; n o r is it said who shall exercise it o r how “an emergency” is to be
interpreted. T h e adm ission o f authorised spectators only, a n d only by p rod u ctio n o f th e ir m em bership cards,
seem s to be fu n dam ental to the schem e. Yet there is no stipulation in the Act th a t cards have to be produced.
N o d o u b t this could be provided for in the approved schem e. But since anyone o th er th an an authorised
spectator com m its a crim inal offence by entering the ground, adm ittin g a non-authorised spectator is a
serious m a tte r a n d could a m o u n t to aiding and abetting a crim inal offence. It is therefore surprising th a t the
A ct does n o t in d icate who is to have power to declare an emergency so as to a d m it all a n d sundry an d in w hat
circum stances.

Tests
   401. W hat testing ;s envisaged? T h e IT T provides for a “system testing strategy” . T h is is divided into
“ laboratory" prototypes a n d p ilot system tests. Two clubs have volunteered an d been accepted to be the pilot
sites for the latter form o f testing. They are D erby C ounty an d Reading. It is envisaged th a t at least four
different levels o f test will be carried o u t at each o f the two clubs. T hese fo u r levels are likely to be:


                                                             69
    i     issue m em bership cards to existing m em bers;

    ii    issue cards to all hom e o r away supporters;

    iii   sm all all-ticket m atch (hom e an d away supporters);

    iv    large (near capacity) all-ticket m atch.

  402. T he IT T provides:

  “ Each test will try to sim ulate as close (sic) as possible the live situ atio n w ith problem cards being used at
  ra n d o m ”.

   403. I foresee two problem s w hich beset this testing procedure. First, the difficulty o f m aking the test
conditions truly sim ulate those which will obtain w hen the schem e is w orking nationw ide. For exam ple, only
two clubs are to be used for th e tests “w ith problem cards being used a t ra n d o m ”. U nless the com puters at the
two clubs have to search a referral list (w hether real o r sim ulated) as long as the national referral list m ay tu rn
o u t to be, they will n o t have been adequately tested for capacity an d speed. T he estim ated volum e o f
“b a n n e d ” cards, according to the SO R, is betw een 5,000 an d 20,000 p er annum . T he estim ate o f stolen an d
lost cards is betw een 20,000 an d 80,000 p er an n um . It is n o t clear w hether “p e r a n n u m ” refers to the
num bers on the referral file in any given year o r to the n u m b er o f fresh bannings, losses an d thefts each year.
T aking the m ore conservative approach, however, they could jo in tly am o u n t to 100,000 per annum .
Accordingly, for a realistic test, the com puters at th e two clubs w ould have to be able swiftly to pick o u t the
“problem card s” from a list o f up to 100,000 - som ew hat different from the L uton list o f six.

  404. T he size o f the referral list m ay have an im p o rta n t bearing o n the speed a t w hich the technology can
work. I repeat th a t key objective n u m b er 5 in the IT T stip u lates:-

  “K eep w ithin m anageable lim its the size o f the referral file containing b a n n e d m em bers to ensure th a t
  speed o f access to it is acceptable etc”.

   How is the referral file to be k ept “w ithin m anageable lim its41? Its size will surely d ep en d u p o n the n u m b er
o f cards b ann ed, lost o r stolen. T here can be no m anagem ent control o f the n u m b ers lost an d stolen an d the
n u m b e r b an n ed will d ep en d on the n u m b e r o f convictions o r acts o f m isbehaviour m eriting a ban. T h e only
way o f keeping the n u m b er b an n ed “w ithin m anageable lim its” w ould be n o t to b an all those who may
deserve it, w hich w ould bring the schem e into disrepute.

  405. T he SO R estim ates th a t the n u m b e r o f cards w hich are u nreadable o r otherw ise require investigation
m ay be up to 3% o f the cards being checked. So at a capacity m atch w ith 50,000 present, the test would
require 1,500 m alfunctioning cards to be random ly issued. Presum ably, th e n u m b e r o f unreadable cards
w ould ten d to grow d uring the first two years o f th e schem e as the first issue o f cards accum ulates dam age
from rough treatm ent.

  406. Again, w ith pilot tests at only two clubs, th e hooligans’ response will b e unpredictable. They m ay try
to sabotage the schem e at the pilot clubs w hich w ould really p u t the technology to th e test. They may,
however, prefer to m isbehave at som e o th e r g round w here n o tests are in progress. W hen the schem e is
im plem ented generally, they will be unable to go to any such “o th er gro un d ” an d m ay only th en m ake th eir
attem p ts to sabotage the scheme.

H um an G uinea-pigs
   407. T he second problem is th a t tests can only be carried o u t by using real spectators. B ank com puters an d
o th er co m p u ter technologies can be tested by pu ttin g through figures, d a ta an d print-outs. T his system can
only be tested by pu ttin g through people. So in the very testing o f w hether the system m ay cause danger,
danger may be caused.

D isruption and Sabotage
  408. T he whole raison d ’etre o f the schem e is the perceived need to elim inate from football a hooligan
elem ent so substantial, an d so d eterm in ed to m ake trouble, as to justify this enorm ous undertaking. Since the
schem e seeks to defeat such d eterm in ed hooligans, it m ust be assum ed th a t the hooligans will seek to defeat


                                                              70
the schem e. T hey will see it as a challenge. W recking o r circum venting it will ad d a new piquancy to the
perverse pleasure they derive from th e ir activities. M r R idley recognised th is on the launch o f the Bill, in the
passage I have quoted, w hen he sa id :-

  “O f course there will be attem pts to abuse the system b u t if the schem e is effective, those attem pts will
  fail”.

  409.       Accordingly, the technology will n o t only have to be capable o f fulfilling the requirem ents o f the
schem e w ith o u t m alfunction, in all w eathers a n d at the stipulated speed. It will also have to be resistant to the
ingenuity a n d d eterm in atio n o f those who m ay seek to sabotage it o r fin d a way ro u n d it. It will need to do
these things n o t ju s t m ost o f the tim e, but all o f the tim e. T his is a very tall order, an d for the reasons I have
set o u t above, I have the gravest do ub ts if it can be m et. Should it n o t b e m et in full, the safety im plications
w ould be serious indeed.




                                                            71
                                                       C H A P T E R 16

                                 WILL THE SC H EM E W EED O U T HOOLIGANS?

  410. Even assum ing th a t the technology can be m ad e to w ork reliably an d is n o t d isru p ted o r sabotaged,
two questio n s still arise on w hether the schem e is likely to achieve its objects, (i) Will the schem e in fact weed
hooligans o u t o f the ground a n d (ii) will they also be d eterred from causing trouble outside the ground o r at
places en route?

(i)    Exclusion from the Ground

   411. T he strategy d ep en d s first upon the court b an n ing the hooligan after conviction o f a relevant offence
o r the FM A b an n in g h im after som e m isbehaviour. B ut to im pose a ban is one thing; to enforce it is another.
True, the b an n e d hooligan will n o t lawfully be able to enter by presenting a valid m em bership card o f his
own, once he is on the referral list. B ut he m ay still e n te r by o th e r m eans.

   412. A serious defect in the schem e is the acceptance th a t the entry procedure will n o t involve checking
the p h otograph on the card against its presenter. Such checking is precluded by the need for speed. But the
m ain ratio n ale o f having a photograph o f the m em b er on his card is defeated if it can n o t be relied u p o n to
exclude som eone else from using the c ard an d will be checked only should the u ser later be ap p reh en d ed for
an offence. So i f a b an n e d hooligan can get hold o f a valid card he could gain entry. N o t being scrupulous by
nature, he m ay steal one, borrow one o r even buy one, for it is not unlikely th a t a black m arket in cards will
develop. D espite req uirem en ts in the IT T to prevent such abuses, m ultiple ap p lication s an d forgeries may
also be successfully m ade.

   413. It is nothing to the point to say th a t if a b an n ed hooligan enters the g round by using a stolen o r
borrow ed card a n d is there arrested for an assault, he will have co m m itted n o t one b u t two offences, the
assault an d the unlaw ful entry. H e could be charged w ith the assault even w ithout the 1989 Act, an d w ithout
his com m ission o f the assault, the unlaw ful entry is likely to go undetected. N o r does it seem sound to say
th a t if he so enters a n d is n o t seen to co m m it an offence in the ground, all is well. A t the very least, th e system
is b rought into d isrepute w hen he brags to his m ates th a t he has beaten it. Police evidence suggests, moreover,
th a t th e m ore sinister m em bers o f hooligan gangs often do not use violence them selves, but, from a vantage
p o in t in the ground, direct the activities o f others.

  414. I refer again to the subm ission from ACPO, a body w ith special knowledge o f the hooligan problem
an d o f how hooligans are likely to react:-

      T h e success o f the proposals will eventually be judged at two levels.

  First, there is the question as to w h ether this legislation w ill:-

      (a) progressively rem ove hooligans from the football grounds and

      (b) deter the allegiance o f those w ho are involved in trouble an d violence b u t do n o t necessarily a tten d
          m atches.

  Second, an d in a sense m ore fundam entally, the question rem ains w hether o r n o t th e sim ple m echanics o f
  processing m em bership cards through turnstiles can actually be achieved.

  T h e police view over a long p eriod o f tim e has been th a t these provisions are, to a great extent, m arginal to
  the problem , if for no o th e r reason th a n they c an n ot exclude the possibility o f frau d by people w ho are, by
  definition, hell b en t upon defeating the system, an d because it will take a very long tim e before a significant
  n u m b er o f po tential hooligans are excluded by the scheme. T here are som e countervailing advantages:

      (i) the d eterren t effect m ay be considerable;

      ( 11) the club disciplinary system m ay well be able to take strong action on the evidence o f CCTV alone;

      (iii) the gam e will be able to exclude m any o f the very w orst offenders.

  N onetheless, the police view is th a t m any o f the m easures th a t we have already taken . . . are having a
  significant effect a n d are fa r m ore critical to the problem o f hooliganism ”.


                                                             72
(ii)   Elim ination from the Area a nd Routes Near the Ground
  4 1 5 . 1 have already no ted th a t hooliganism inside the ground has been reduced, largely by CCTV, b u t has
been tran sferred outsid e the ground. I refer again to the subm ission o f ACPO:

     Two aspects o f control have d one m uch to change the n atu re o f hooliganism . T he legislation which
   p rev en ted th e general supply o f alcohol in tra n sit an d the universality o f CCTV have m ade a m ajo r im pact.
   T aken together the effect has been th a t displays o f w ild aggression from hordes o f dru n ken supporters are
   m uch less frequent. T h e hooligan has m oved o u t o f the cam era’s range an d in a word, there has been
   “ disp lacem en t” away from the terraces to the d ark er confines o f the stadium o r to o th e r venues such as
   public houses a n d to the tra n sit system ”.

   416. T his, together w ith o th e r police evidence I have received, shows th a t although football generally and
a m atch in p articu lar p rovide the occasion an d the focal p o in t for hooligan activity, m any hooligans do not
regard it as essential to be able to enter the ground. T hey need th e converging crowds an d the inter-club
rivalry o r enm ity o f a m atch to set the scene for th eir violence. They do n o t need the football itself. M r Ridley,
in his observations q u o ted above (paragraph 338) s a id :-

     I f hooligans know th a t they will n o t be allowed into football m atches, they will have no incentive to travel
   to th e m ”.

  However, exclusion from the ground does n o t necessarily remove the incentive for hooligans to tu rn up
there.

   417. I fear it m ay be m erely w ishful thinking to assum e th a t football hooligans, b an n ed from inside
grounds, will not, if they are free to d o so, tu rn u p a n d cause trouble outside, in public houses o r in the town.
It w ould be surprising if hooligans o f M r Justice Popplewell’s group I (paragraph 48 supra) were totally to
a b an d o n th e ir activities o f attacking an d baiting away supporters ju s t because they could n o t them selves get
into th e ground.

   418. It is argued by advocates o f the schem e th a t elim inating hooligans from outside the ground, as well as
inside it, has been achieved at L utcn. However, the success at L uton does n o t in my view b ear directly upon
the likely outcom e o f the n ation al schem e. T h e m ain factor in L uton’s success has been the ban on away
supporters w hich removes the focus for violence. T here are also the o ther factors already noted, the
geographical p osition o f L uton, the com paratively sm all atten d an ces a n d the fact th a t the L uton schem e has
o p erated a t only one club.

  419. I therefore have grave dou b ts w hether the schem e will achieve its object o f elim inating hooligans
from inside the ground. I have even stronger doubts as to w h eth er it will achieve its fu rth er object o f ending
football hooliganism outside grounds. Indeed, I do n o t th in k it will. I fear that, in the short term at least, it
m ay actually increase trouble outside grounds.




                                                           73
                                                    C H A P T E R 17

                                               POLICE RESOURCES

   420. T he schem e envisages th a t the checking procedure at turnstiles will let valid card holders through b ut
will produce the three types o f failure already described. Each o f those three types o f failure m ay involve an
offence by the person presenting the card a n d the first type is quite likely to do so. T here will therefore have to
be police presen t to ap prehend the suspect, investigate the circum stances and, it m ay be, m ake an arrest. I
have already q u o ted the estim ated failures o f types (1) an d (2) an ticip ated in the SOR. Even assum ing the
estim ates are correct for the grounds as a whole, there will be no m eans o f knowing how m any “problem
card s” will be presented a t any p a rtic u la r bank o f turnstiles. T here will need to be enough police to be able to
m o n ito r each turnstile th roughout the adm ission period. If a b an n ed card is presented, the e n tra n t will need
to be taken by an officer to “an investigation area” . T he SO R anticipates there will need to be one
investigation area at each side o f the ground. Presumably, staff there will be eq u ip p ed w ith the m eans to
investigate the problem card fully. It m ay th en be necessary for the suspect to be arrested an d processed.
W hilst the officer w ho has app rehen d ed him is away from the turn stile through w hich the suspect came,
fu rth er card holders should be com ing through the sam e turnstile at a rate o f abo u t 1 p e r 8 seconds o r faster.
T here will therefore need to be enough officers to cope w ith fu rth er problem cards. Even if the apprehending
officer m erely takes the suspect to an investigation room an d hands h im over to officers station ed there
before retu rn in g to his post, the turn o v er rate at the turnstiles w ould need a substantial n u m b er o f officers.
R equiring stew ards to do the jo b m ay be in ap p ro p riate since arrests m ay have to be m ade. Again, if the
suspect realises he m ay be ab o u t to be arrested, he m ay seek to rush o ff an d lose him self in the crowd. So
dealing w ith presenters o f “problem cards” m ay have to be done solely by the police. If the schem e showed,
after an initial period, th a t the incidence o f “problem cards” had settled down to a m odest num ber, the police
co m m itm en t could be reduced. But initially, considerable num bers will be needed to perform these functions
in a d d itio n to those habitually undertaken.

  421. Police anxiety ab o u t this co m m itm en t o f resources is sum m arised as follows by ACPO:

  “T he second level at w hich the technology causes concern relates to procedures following a “red light” at
  the turnstiles. Policing at turnstiles at present is very selective an d the Police Service could not
  countenance providing the sort o f cover w hich w ould allow for a quick response to each tu rnstile in the
  event o f a problem . T he only powers conferred in the Bill are on the police an d on the face o f it every
  a tte m p t to en ter w hich activates a “red light” suggests an offence is being com m itted. A t M anchester
  U n ited for exam ple 30,000 people will pass through the turnstiles in ju s t over 20 m inutes before kick-off.
  T here are ab o u t 100 turnstiles an d the prospects o f policing this system are absolutely d au n tin g ” .

  422. T he exam ple o f M anchester U n ite d in th a t passage is confirm ed by the club itself in a p ap er on the
national m em bership schem e en titled “A U n ite d Perspective”. A t page 3, the club says:

   “We have yet to be shown the co m p u ter hardw are th a t will d o the w ork successfully. M anchester U n ited
   has ru n a co m puterised box office for m ore th an 15 years now an d it is well know n th a t w hat is p rom ised by
   co m p u ter com panies rarely, if ever, perform s to anything like its supposed potential in “real” situations
   w here they m ay have had no experience. Average attendances at O ld T rafford are aro u n d 40,000 b u t on
   occasions th is figure can go as high as 56,000. Experience shows th a t aro u n d 50% arrive in the last 30
   m inutes before kick-off an d this n u m b er increases substantially for evening m atches. ”

  423. T here is a risk therefore th at, at big m atches, police control o f procedures at the turnstiles during the
last 20 m inutes before kick-off, in a d d itio n to th e ir present duties, m ay create serious problem s. A part from
the n um bers o f officers needed, space will have to be found for investigation room s. It is doubtful w hether
one “ investigation area” at each side o f a ground like O ld T rafford will suffice. I therefore have strong doubts
ab o u t the p racticality o f policing the schem e effectively.
                                                     C H A P T E R 18

                        STRATEGIES AGAINST H O O L IG A N ISM - C O N C LU SIO N S

   424. I fully u n d erstan d an d respect the reasons w hich p ro m p te d the prom o tio n an d e n actm en t o f the
Football Spectators Act 1989. However, it follows from m y com m ents in the last three chapters th a t I have
grave do u b ts ab o u t the feasibility o f th e national m em bership schem e an d serious m isgivings ab o u t its likely
im pact o n safety. I also have grave doub ts ab o u t th e chances o f its achieving its purposes an d am very anxious
ab o u t its po ten tial im pact on police co m m itm ents an d control o f spectators. For these reasons, I cannot
su p p o rt th e im plem en tatio n o f P a rt I o f the Act.

Suggested Strategy
  425. As has been said m any tim es, there is no single m easure w hich will defeat football hooliganism and
even a package o f m easures will take tim e to have effect.

  426. T h a t said, the strategy I w ould suggest is to consider relying u p o n a com b inatio n o f all or som e o f the
following m easu res:-

    (i)   D eveloping th e detection a n d evidential po ten tial o f C C TV an d the new N atio n al Football
          Intelligence U nit;

    (ii) Prohibiting, by creating crim inal offences, three specific activities in th e ground:

          (a) throw ing a missile;

          (b) chanting obscene o r racialist abuse;

          (c) going on th e pitch w ith o u t reasonable excuse;

    (iii) E xtending th e courts’ pow er to m ake attendance centre orders, in conjunction w ith exclusion orders,
          for football related offences on occasions o f specified m atches so as to keep hooligans away from
          football grounds;

    (iv) U sing electronic m on ito rin g (tagging) for th e sam e purpose.

   427. T hese four m easures are all aim ed solely at the hooligans a n d will im pinge only on them . Moreover,
(iii) an d (iv) are th e only m easures, o th er th a n im p rison m en t, aim ed not only at b a n n in g hooligans from the
ground b u t also at preventing th e m from getting into it or n ea r it during m atches. P u t together w ith progress
towards all-seating, im proved acco m m odation, b e tte r facilities, im proved arrangem ents for crowd control
an d better trainin g o f police an d stewards to achieve it, I believe these m easures would give th e best chance of
elim inating o r m in im isin g football hooliganism .




                                                             75
                            PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS

All-Seated Accommodation
  1. The Secretary of State should ensure that spectators are admitted only to seated accommodation at
matches played at sports grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in accordance with
the timing set out in Recommendations 2 to 4 below.

  2. Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the 1993/4 season at high-risk matches as
defined under the UEFA Regulations set out in paragraph 82 above.

  3. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 above should apply with effect from the start of
the 1994/5 season to all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the Football League, the
Premier Division of the Scottish Football League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension of
time in the case of a club promoted to the second division of the Football League or the Premier Division of the
Scottish Football League. Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 20% of the
present standing capacity (such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8
below), the first 20% deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1994.

  4. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the
1999/2000 season to all matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing capacity
(such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8 below), the first 10%
deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1999.

Advisory Design Council
  5. The Football Association and the Football League should establish an Advisory D esign Council whose
functions should be:

    (a) to conduct and marshal research into the improvement and design of football stadia;

    (b) to disseminate regularly such information and expertise as they acquire in this field to members of the
        Football League and, on request, to other football and sports clubs in England, Wales and Scotland.

National Inspectorate and Review Body
  6. (a) If Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 is implemented, section 13 should be brought into force
giving the Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein specified (power to review the
discharge of functions by local authorities). If Part I of the Act is not implemented or is substantially delayed,
other arrangements should be made for the discharge of the functions and powers in section 13 of the Act by the
appointment of a body to exercise them.

      (b)       In either event, the body exercising those functions and powers in relation to association football
should also be entrusted with similar functions and powers regarding the discharge by local authorities of their
certifying and licensing functions in relation to other sports grounds and sports entertainments pursuant to the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and Parts III and IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987.

 Maximum Capacities for Terraces
   7. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
 should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

 A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
 another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

   8. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide
 (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

     (a) the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide (when the terrace
         or viewing slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54;


                                                        76
    (b) the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 (when the terrace or viewing slope materially
        deviates from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely
        packed) should be 0 not 27;

    (c) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density including those specified in paragraphs 220 to 224
        inclusive of the Green Guide.

  9. Arrangements should be made:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.

  10. The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass through a turnstile should be 660 persons per
hour, not 750 per hour as stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide. The maximum rate for any particular
turnstile must take full account of all circumstances including those given as examples in paragraph 47.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
  11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the police, setting out their
respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or
other standing area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
variation of the document in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

  12. (a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other standing
area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are
monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress
throughout the period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any
other steward or police presence. H e should have ready access to a police officer who can authorise access
through gates to the pitch under Recommendation 20 below.

      (b)       This Recommendation need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do not exceed one third of the area’s
maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


Gangways
  13. Gangways should be kept clear, in accordance with paragraphs 97 to 99 of the Green Guide. Gangways
should be painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not. The Safety Certificate should require
that no standing is allowed in gangways and that they be painted.


Fences and Gates
   14. A ll spikes or similar constructions on perimeter or radial fences, and any sections overhanging or
returning inwards towards spectators, should be removed.

  15. Perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres, measured from the top of the fence to the lowest
point at which spectators may stand, and including any wall or other foundations forming part of the perimeter
boundary.

  16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and especially those with
duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different
crowd densities.

  17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained area sufficient gates of a
minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for
an emergency evacuation of that pen or area.


                                                         77
   18. A ll gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.

  19. Where there is a perimeter fence in front of a pen or enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully
open during the period when spectators are in the pen Or enclosure, wherever those in command feel that this
can safely be done. Whether they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should be kept unlocked
throughout the period when the pen or enclosure is occupied.

   20. Each gate in a perimeter fence affording access to the pitch from a pen or enclosure should be manned by
a steward or by a police officer when the pen or enclosure is occupied. Whether such manning should be by a
police officer or by a steward should be decided by the Police Commander. In either event, the Police
Commander should appoint one or more police officers with power to authorise access through gates to the
pitch immediately in the event of an emergency.

  21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there are
perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
   22. All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be
affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

   23. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen or
terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
   24. The Secretary of State should exercise his powers under either section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so as to make mandatory in Safety Certificates those conditions specified in the
original section 2(2) of the 1975 Act. So far as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned “shall” should be
substituted for “may”.

  25. In assessing these mandatory requirements in the Certificate for a particular ground, the local authority
should follow the Green Guide criteria. Once that is done, the resultant figures and terms for that ground
should be specified in the Safety Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other than by
formal revision.

  26. Where a local authority incorporates any provision of the Green Guide into the Safety Certificate, other
than one within the scope of Recommendation 25 above, it should make clear whether that provision is to be
complied with absolutely or with discretionary flexibility.

   27. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate (if this has not already been done
following the Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club in respect of
which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the building authority.
Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its object should be to ensure that the operative
conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a
matter of urgency following the findings and Recommendations in this Report.

 28. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports ground designated under the 1975 Act for
which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

  29. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
Certificate should require to be renewed annually.

  30. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
amending and renewing Safety Certificates (if this has not already been done following the Interim


                                                        78
Report). Such review should require that there exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively supervised by senior officers and
elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local authority’s rules.

   31. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group (if this has not
already been done) consisting of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire
and ambulance services and of the building authority. The Advisory Group should consult representatives of the
club and of a recognised supporters’ organisation on a regular basis. The Advisory Group’s terms of reference
should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority, and an effective
procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular written reports for
consideration by the local authority.


Duties of Each Football Club
  32. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured (if this has not already been
done following the Interim Report). Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile
remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate anticipated.

   33. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such as
to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the turnstiles
within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly. Since
this Recommendation includes terms and conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 it should be given effect in the Safety Certificate (see Recommendation 24
above).

  34. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be reached
and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile operators for this
purpose.

  35. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before, throughout and at the end of a
match.

  36. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively reviewed (if
this has not already been done following the Interim Report). It should, in relation to the arrangements for each
match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of
spectators to their appropriate viewing areas. Any redundant signs should be removed.

  37. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with the
information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs should
contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

  38. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed (if
this has not already been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure
that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

  39. Clubs should consider maintaining a record on computer of ticket sales before the day of the match, for
season tickets and tickets for all-ticket matches for seated areas, containing the names and addresses of those
purchasing tickets.

  40. All-ticket matches should be confined to those at which a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected.
When a match has been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the match and should take steps to
advise the spectators of both clubs accordingly.

   41. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
 entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

    42. Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient competent stewards. They should be fit, active and robust, and
 preferably between the ages of 18 and 55. Clubs should ensure that stewards are fully trained, aware of their
 duties under Annex B of the Green Guide and under the statement of intent (see Recommendation 11) and able
 to perform them.


                                                          79
 43. The club should provide a police control room which is:—

    (a) well placed, so as to command a good view of the whole pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;

    (b) of sufficient size for the commander, his deputy and enough officers to operate the radios, telephones
        and CCTV screens. There should be space for others who may need from time to time to visit the room
        eg other senior officers, club management or a member of the emergency services;

    (c) well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities and, where necessary, sound-proofed against
        excessive crowd noise.

  It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipment to the satisfaction of the chief officer
nominated under Recommendation 44 below.


Police Planning
  44. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated sports ground or more
should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

  45. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground, and the pre-match briefing of all
officers on duty there, should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is
detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

  46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should enable the police to cope
with any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

  47. Police planning should provide that ticketless fans should not be allowed to enter a designated sports
ground except in an emergency.

  48. Arrest procedures inside and outside designated sports grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the
minimum the period during which an arresting officer is away from his post.

  49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

  50. Consideration in consultation with the club should be given, especially for high-risk matches, to the
possibility of an early kick-off or a Sunday fixture.

  51. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television monitoring
outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles
or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled in the
interpretation and use of these data.

    52. Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training course for senior officers presently
 acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course should include training in the basic
 strategy of policing football matches.

   53. Police authorities should review the charges they make to clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so
 as to ensure that realistic charges are made. The Home Office should take steps to ensure consistency of
 practice, subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to local circumstances.


 Communications
   54.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
 received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
 priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be used,
 where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.


                                                         80
  55. There should always be a command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to communicate
with his senior officers round the ground.

   56. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines with
telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

  57. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual areas
outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important announcements should
be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This
arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.

  58. U se should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
   59. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
liaison concerning crowd safety at each designated sports ground.

  60. Before each match at a designated sports ground the police should ensure that the fire service and
ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of spectators
expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the
control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
emergency services.

  61. Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency calls can be made
instantly.

  62. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports ground of emergency vehicles from all three
services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility within
the ground itself.

  63. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for the
arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why they are
required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
  64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.
The club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

  65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms
and the equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking
professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

  66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a
medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be
trained and competent in advanced first aid. H e should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in
the police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

       (b)        At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make
arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal with any medical exigency
at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be
known to those in the police control room.

  67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate ambulance authority should
be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

   68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should be
specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a requirement
of the Safety Certificate.


                                                        81
  69. A “major incident equipment vehicle”, designed and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be
deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties
 70. Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football
match without authority from the home club to do so.

  71. Each of the following activities at a designated sports ground should be made a specific offence:-

    i.    throwing a missile;

    ii.   chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

    iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

  72. Consideration should be given to extending the courts’ powers to make attendance centre orders for
football related offences on occasions of designated football matches. The provision should be capable of
imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an offender aged
17 or over.

  73. Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders
convicted of football related offences.


Green Guide
  74. As a matter of urgency, the Home Office should set up a body to revise the Green Guide in accordance
with this Report, these Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party (Appendix 3).

  75. In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be achieved by way of percentage recovery after the
required loading tests on crush barriers should be specified. Acceptable values for various materials should be
specified.

  76. When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion should be
specifically mentioned and emphasised.
APPENDICES




     83
                          A P P E N D IX 1

OR GANISATIO NS SU BM ITTIN G EVIDENCE TO TH E INQUIRY

       A bbott M ead Vickers PLC
       Access C om m ittee for England
       A DT Check-In L im ited
       A m ateu r A thletic A ssociation
       A ssociate M em ber Clubs o f the Football League
       A ssociation o f C h ief A m bulance Officers
       A ssociation o f C hief Police Officers o f England, Wales & N o rth ern Ireland
       A ssociation o f C h ief Police O fficers (Scotland)
       A ssociation o f C ounty C ouncils
       A ssociation o f D istrict C ouncils
       A ssociation o f L ondon A uthorities
       A ssociation o f M etropolitan A uthorities
       A ssociation o f Scottish Police Superintendents
       B J A u ditorium Design
       Ballast N edam
       Bath City FC
       BBT G argini
       Bechtel Lim ited
       Bedfordshire C ounty C ouncil (Fire & Rescue Service)
       B ettersound Systems
       Blackburn Rovers FC
       B radford M etropolitan C ouncil
       British A m ateur A thletic Board
       British C onstructional Steelwork A ssociation Lim ited
       British G reyho und R acing Board
       British Sports an d Allied Industries Federation
       Building Research E stablishm ent
       Professor D av id C anter
       C entral C ouncil o f Physical Recreation
       Ceresco Ltd
       Chelsea FC
       C h ief & A ssistant C h ie f Fire Officers’ A ssociation
       C hristian Science C om m ittee on Publication for South Yorkshire
       Cleveland C onstabulary
       C onvention o f Scottish Local A uthorities
       C rem er & W arner
       D e p artm e n t o f the E nv ironm ent
       D erby C ounty FC
       D erbyshire C ounty C ouncil
       DES Electrical Systems Ltd
       Ernst & Young
       Feedback
       Fire Brigades U nion
       Football A ssociation
       Football G ro u n d s Im provem ent Trust
       Football League
       Football Supporters’ A ssociation
       Football Trust
       Football W riters’ A ssociation
       Foster & P artners Ltd
       G w ent A m bulance Service
       H ealth & Safety Executive
       H ellm uth O bata & K assabaum Inc Sports Facilities G roup
        H ercules Security Fabrications Ltd
        Hillsborough Family Support G roup
        Hillsborough Steering C om m ittee
        H o m e Office


                                  85
Institute o f Building C ontrol
Institu te for C onsum er Ergonom ics
In stitu tio n o f Structural Engineers
Interm ediate T reatm ent F und
In tracard
Jockey Club
Jo h n Leighton Consultancy
Keith M onks Lim ited
K enrick & C om pany
K ent Institu te o f A rt & Design
K errypak L im ited
K olara L im ited
Lancashire C ounty Council
Lancashire C ounty C ricket Club
Larne Branch, Liverpool FC Supporters’ Club
Lawn Tennis A ssociation
 Leeds U nited AFC
 Liverpool City C ouncil
 Local G overnm ent Review
 London Borough o f Brent
 London Borough o f H am m ersm ith & Fulham
 London Borough o f R ichm o nd upon T ham es
 London Boroughs Association
 London D istrict Surveyors A ssociation
 London Fire an d Civil D efence A uthority
 L othian Regional C ouncil
 Luton Town FC
 M ab if In ternational
 M aidstone U n ite d FC
 M anchester U n ite d FC
 M cG regor Associates
 M edics at H illsborough W orking Party (U niversity o f Liverpool)
 M erseyside A rea Student O rganisation
 M erseyside Pensioners Association
 M erseyside Fire & Civil Defence A uthority
 N ational A ssociation o f Fire Officers
 N ational Council for Civil Liberties
 N ational Federation o f Football Supporters’ Clubs
 N ational U n io n o f Public Employees
 N G R C Racecourse Prom oters Ltd
 N orfolk C ounty C ouncil
 O rder o fS t Jo hn
 P arliam entary All-Party Football C om m ittee
 Police Federation o f England & Wales
 Police Superintendents’ A ssociation o f E ngland a n d Wales
  Pool Prom oters A ssociation
  Q ueen’s Park Rangers FC
  RAC M otors Sports Association
  RAN Internation al
  R D S Technology Ltd
  R ecreation a n d Leisure Trades Association
  Regional A m bulance Officers’ G roup
  Royal & A ncient G o lf Club o f St Andrews
  Royal A ssociation for D isability an d R ehabilitation
  Royal Institu te o f British Architects
  Royal In stitu tio n o f C hartered Surveyors
  Royal Society for the Prevention o f A ccidents
  Royal Town Planning Institute
  Rugby Football League
  Rugby Football U nion
  S & P Safety


                           86
                               Saltcoats Branch o f the L abour Party
                               Scottish E ducation D ep artm en t
                               Scottish Football Association
                               Scottish Football League
                               Scottish Police Federation
                               Scottish Rugby U nion
                               Scottish Sports C ouncil
                               Selhurst Park Stadium
                               Sheffield City C ouncil
                               Sheffield Trades U nion Council
                               Sim m ons PR C om m u nications D esign L td
                               Sir N o rm an C hester C entre for Football Research
                               Sound & C om m u nication s Industries Federation
                               South Yorkshire C ounty Fire Service
                               Sou thend U n ite d FC
                               Southw ark Borough C ouncil
                               Spectacor M anagem ent G ro u p Intern ation al
                               Sports Council
                               Sports C ouncil for Wales
                               Sports W riters a n d C om m entato rs
                               St A ndrew ’s A m bulance A ssociation
                               St W illiam ’s Foundation
                               Stadiasafe
                               S tad ium Technology In tern atio n al Ltd
                               Strathclyde Police
                               Sum m it G rou p pic (with T he G eneral Electric C om pany pic)
                               Synchro Systems L td
                               Tavistock Institute o f H u m an R elations
                               TC Team C onsult AG
                               T h o rb u rn Associates
                               T ottenham H o tspur FC
                               T rent Regional H ealth A uthority
                               T V AM
                               U nion o f Shop, D istributive & Allied W orkers
                               U niversity o f O xford, C entre for Crim inological Research
                               Welsh Office
                               Welsh Rugby U n ion
                               Welsh Sports Association
                               W embley Stadium L td
                               W est Yorkshire Fire Service
                               York City FC
                               8 8 -C o n su ltb v (io )

D iscussions were also held w ith representatives o f G overnm en t D epartm ents, m unicipalities, police,
sporting authorities, the m anagers o f sports stadia a n d football clubs, architects a n d stadium designers in
France, H o lland a n d Italy. Additionally, the C onsular D e p artm e n t o f the Foreign a n d C om m onw ealth Office
ob tain ed inform ation ab o u t sports stadia a n d sporting events from British C onsular officials in C anada,
W est G erm any, Portugal, Spain a n d the U n ite d States.

Som e 90 letters were received from M em bers o f the H ouse o f C om m o ns an d three from M em bers o f the
H ouse o f Lords. Some 1610 letters were received from the general public.




                                                           87
          A P P E N D IX 2

S P O R T S G R O U N D S V IS IT E D

  Football
  Arsenal
  Blackburn Rovers
  Blackpool
  Chelsea
  Liverpool
  M anchester City
  M anchester U nited
  M iddlesbrough
  Millwall
  N ewcastle U n ited
  Preston N o rth E nd
  Sheffield W ednesday
  Sunderland
  T ottenham H o tsp u r

  Glasgow Celtic
  Glasgow Rangers
  St John ston e

  International Stadia
  H am p d en Park
  W embley Stadium

  Overseas Stadia
  Stade des Costieres, N im es
  Stadion G algenwaard, U trecht
  Stadio Flam inio, R om e
  Stadio Olim pico, R om e
  Stadio San Siro, M ilan

  Cricket
  T h e Oval

  Golf
  T he Belfry, S utton C oldfield

  Lawn Tennis
  W im bledon

  Rugby League
  Salford

  Rugby Union
  C ard iff A rm s Park
  M urrayfield
  Tw ickenham




                 88
                                                   A PP E N D IX 3

                            REPORT OF TH E TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

                                                                                                  22 D ecem ber 1989


D e a r Sir Peter

You invited th e Technical W orking Party “to review technical aspects o f the guide to Safety at Sports
G rounds; identify areas requiring clarification o r am en dm ent; an d recom m end accordingly.” I have pleasure
in subm itting its R eport, which has been agreed by all m em bers. D etailed supplem entary notes dealing w ith
certain o f the technical features will be available for your use in due course.

We note th a t th e G u id e is not confined to football grounds an d stadia b u t includes guidance on all sports
grounds, an d we have b orne th is in m in d in o u r considerations. Although not w ithin o u r term s o f reference,
an d for th a t reason no t addressed in o u r R eport, we recognise th a t efficient and effective stewarding is an
integral elem ent o f crowd control an d safety. O u r recom m endations com plem ent, rath er than supplant, the
need for such stewarding.

T h e Technical W orking Party m et first on 18 O ctober an d held five form al day-long m eetings supplem ented
by m any w orking papers an d inform al discussions during th e period available for report. T he heavy pressures
o f th e tim etable could n ot have been accom m odated w ithou t the fullest co-operation o f those concerned, and
I record m y thank s to all m em bers o f the Technical W orking Party an d to its Secretary for the integrity,
c o m m itm en t an d enthusiasm with w hich they approached the task.

                                                                                           LEONARD M AUNDER



                             REPORT OF TH E TECHNICAL W ORKING PARTY

The Green Guide
   1. T he Technical W orking Party recognises the valuable co ntrib utions o f successive editions o f the G uide
to Safety at Sports G ro und s, com m only known as the G reen G uide. Its scope and status are described in its
introdu ction as follows: “T his booklet provides guidance to ground m anagem ent, local authorities and
technical specialists such as engineers on m easures for im proving spectator safety at existing sports grounds.
It is a voluntary guide an d has no legal force” .

   2. In view o f th e variability o f existing sports grounds in function an d in scale, there are serious difficulties
in establishing com prehensive an d general regulations, backed by legal force, to cover all the com plex details
o f design an d construction. A dherence to the stand ards set by Building Regulations should provide a
m easure o f uniform ity in respect o f new w ork at sports grounds. Nevertheless, the Technical W orking Party is
strongly o f th e op in io n th a t a m uch higher degree o f stan dardisation th an presently prevails should be sought
in practice.

  3. It considers th a t a revised issue o f the G reen G uide should form the basis on which a designated ground
or stand is certified by th e certifying authority, an d recom m ends th a t any departures from its guidance on
technical provisions th a t m ay arise from local circum stances should be fully defined and should be subject to
approval in w riting by the certifying authority.

A Centre of Expertise
   4. T he G reen G u id e covers a w ide range o f m aterial, m uch o f which concerns the physical characteristics
o f grounds. Its successive issues have been published in response to a n u m b er o f serious accidents at football
grounds. T h is process has led to increm ental advances in the G uide as experience has grown, bu t the
Technical W orking Party does no t believe th a t such a process, although essential, is by itself sufficient to cope
w ith present-day requirem ents.

   5. M any British football grounds were first constructed a long tim e ago, and im provem ents have been
 introduced largely o n an individual basis. A central body o f knowledge applicable to the com plex design o f


                                                           89
such grounds has been conspicuously absent although a start has now been m ade. As a result, progress has
been piecemeal.

   6. T he Technical W orking Party considers th a t this is a serious defect. A c ontinu ous an d expanding body
o f public knowledge, draw n from the relevant professional fields, is required to provide a basis for good
individual designs at m odern standards. At a tim e w hen substantial im provem ents are u n d e r consideration,
including a higher propo rtio n o f seated acco m m odation, it is im perative to establish an d to dissem inate
rigorous stand ard s o f design if expectations are to be fulfilled. T he work o f organisations in o th e r countries,
including the C om itato O lim pico N azionale Italiano (CON I), can provide a valuable reference. T he
Technical W orking Party recognises, too, the im p o rta n t w ork undertaken in this country by the Sports
C ouncil. Its recent guide to the planning, design an d m anagem ent o f in d o o r arenas is a notew orthy a ttem p t
to draw together a considerable body o f research an d practical experience. Similarly, o th e r w ork on o u td o o r
stadia has taken place an d is currently proceeding u n d e r the C ouncil’s aegis. It is im p o rta n t th a t resulting
publications should be widely dissem inated and th a t any guidance on o u td o o r stadia should m ake p articu lar
reference to the structural aspects o f safety, com fort a n d crowd control.

   7. T he Technical W orking Party therefore recom m ends the form ation o f a central body, u n d e r a title such
as the A dvisory C ouncil for Sports G rounds, to provide an authoritative source o f knowledge for all those
involved in the design an d construction o f o u td o o r stadia. A detailed specification o f its structure an d
funding is not proposed at this stage but, as envisaged, its m em bers w ould be draw n from the relevant
professional fields an d w ould com m ission specialist advice w hen necessary. It w ould be in depen dent o f any
Inspectorate. T h e relationship o f such a body to o th e r organisations is a m a tte r for fu rth er discussion, b ut it
is suggested th a t the Football A ssociation and the Sports C ouncil m ight wish to play leading roles.

Seating and Standing
  8. T he Technical W orking Party notes th a t FIFA has agreed regulations on seating for certain classes o f
football m atches, an d th a t the regulations are to be im posed w ithin a short time-scale. It also recognises th at
the British tra d itio n o f standing on terraces runs cou nter to these internatio nal requirem ents.

   9. It is clear th a t if British clubs are to continue w ithin the international com m unity, they will be obliged
to close th e ir standing accom m odation for m atches th a t fall w ithin the FIFA definition. For o th er m atches,
the Technical W orking Party recognises that, whilst standing accom m odation is n ot intrinsically unsafe, the
benefits to spectator com fort and crowd control brought ab out by all-seater stadia are likely to accelerate the
move towards such venues. T he Technical W orking Party accepts, however, th a t although the in tro ductio n o f
all-seater stadia for leading, w ell-supported football clubs may be both beneficial a n d practical, clubs in the
lower divisions may find it less so and the rem oval o f all standing accom m odation at these grounds may
affect th e ir viability. A lterations to seating from standing arrangem ents at existing grounds may have both
design an d cost im plications through the im pact on such m atters as spectator sight-lines an d crowd density.

   10. In addition , it m ust be recognised th a t there are m any sports (horse, greyhound, m o to r racing and car
rallying for exam ple) where the nature o f the sport favours the m obility o f large sections o f the crowd and
where viewing from standing areas is an essential elem ent. Any recom m endations tow ards all-seater stadia
m ust therefore be carefully worded.

Capacities
    11. T h e Technical W orking Party recognises th a t the safe allowable capacity o f any viewing area, w hether
seated or standing, is the least o f (i) its holding capacity, (ii) the n u m b er o f persons who can leave through a
norm al exit system w ithin a prescribed tim e at the en d o f an event, (iii) the n u m b er o f persons w ho can leave
through an emergency exit system w ithin a prescribed tim e, and (iv) the n u m b er o f persons w ho can be
a d m itted through the turnstiles serving th a t area w ithin one hour.

   12. T he theoretical holding capacity o f a seated viewing area is sim ply the n u m b er o f seats in good
c ondition w hich com ply w ith the relevant G reen G u ide recom m endations including those relating to
distance from exits an d gangways an d size an d spacing. D eterm ination o f the holding capacity o f a viewing
terrace o r slope is not so simple; factors th a t m ust be taken into account include the strength and spacing o f
the crush-barriers, the position o f gangways, the dim ensions an d physical state o f the steps, the effective
standing area, an d the acceptable packing density.

   13. A packing density o f 5.4/m 2 is recom m ended in the cu rrent G reen G uid e as the m axim um allowable
figure for terraces an d viewing slopes th a t m eet all the specified guidelines. A reduced figure o f 2.7/m 2 is


                                                             90
presently recom m ended for areas deviating m aterially from the guidelines. T he Technical W orking Party sees
no p o in t in retaining reference to the lower figure an d recom m ends th a t there should be no lower lim it to the
reduction; ie if the enclosure h ad such p o or safety standards th a t it was totally unfit as a viewing area the
figure should be zero.

   14. As to the m axim um figures, the Technical W orking Party concludes th a t a uniform ly distributed
density o f 5.4 /m 2 should be safe in static co ndition s where the terraces are in full com pliance w ith the G reen
G uide. It recognises, however, th a t there will be variations o f density w ithin a given enclosure, an d allowance
should be m ad e to accom m odate this factor in the final determ ination.

   15. T h e Technical W orking Party recom m ends th at the m axim u m allowable average packing density
d eterm in ed by th e Inquiry should establish a general reference for certifying authorities. For an individual
ground, the packing density applicable to a given standing area should be derived from this figure, the full
figure for areas in good co ndition and reduced figures for areas in poorer condition. D etailed calculations o f
holding capacities should then be determ in ed on the basis o f the agreed packing density for th a t specific
enclosure o r o th e r relevant factors. These calculations should take into account specific features o f the
crush-barriers a n d fences an d o f step dim ensions as illustrated in the G reen G uide. T he Technical W orking
Party recom m ends a thorough review o f the exam ples currently co ntain ed in C hapter 16 o f the G reen G uide,
and the inclusion o f app ro priate diagram s.

Structural Elements
   16. It is a fund am ental requirem en t o f safety th a t structures at grounds should provide spectators with
safe accom m o dation an d safe m eans o f ingress and egress. They should also enable police and stew ards to
exert pro p er control over crowd m ovem ents. If a conflict should occur between these objectives, a substantial
re-arrangem ent may be required; in no circum stances should safety standards be com prom ised. The
Technical W orking Party recom m ends th a t references to sub-divisions in C hapter 14 o f the G reen G uide be
reviewed w ith these considerations in m ind, and th a t the C h ap ter as a whole should reflect these principles
m ore positively.

Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch
   17. T h e Technical W orking Party recognises the im portance o f physical barriers as d eterrents to pitch
invasions. It also recognises th a t n o t all viewing areas present the sam e risk, a n d recom m ends th at
con sideration be given to differentiating those areas requiring higher levels o f security from o th er areas, such
as seated acco m m odation an d m em bers’ enclosures, where a lesser degree o f security m ight be acceptable.

   18. T he general principle o f separation endorsed by the Technical W orking Party is th a t the m eans
ad o p ted should provide sufficient security against pitch incursions to enable the police to take tim ely and
effective action should such incidents occur. Clearly a balance has to be struck between crowd control and
safety.

    19. A configuration recom m ended for w ider consideration consists o f a perim eter b a rrie r on the
pitch-side backed by a parallel an d co ntinuo us crush-barrier on th e terrace-side, set back from the perim eter
b a rrie r so as to provide a clear walk-way betw een the two; except in emergencies, spectators would no t be
allowed to enter the walk-way. Such an arrangem ent would reduce the risks associated with a com m on feature
o f British grounds, nam ely th a t the front steps o f terraces are substantially lower than the level o f the pitch:
im m ediate atten tio n should be given to the elim ination o f th is hazard.

  20. T h e Technical W orking Party recom m ends th at the m axim u m height o f perim eter fences should be
determ in ed in relation to the UEFA stand ard o f 2.2m. It also recom m ends the removal o f overhanging
sections a n d spiked or barbed-w ire attachm en ts at the tops o f fences.

   21. A form o f separation increasingly ado pted in new stadia is the dry moat. To be effective, a dry m oat
m ust be sufficiently wide an d deep, an d should be protected by fences on bo th sides to ensure th a t spectators
a n d players do n o t fall into it. W here enough space is available, a m oat may offer an attractive solution, b u t
its app lication to older grounds is likely to be restricted by lim itations o f space.

Emergency Access to Pitch
  22. T he Technical W orking Party recom m ends th at emergency access to the pitch should be provided
from all ad jacen t viewing areas. It considers the provision o f gates o r gaps in any form al barrier to be in all
cases advantageous for the evacuation o f adjacent enclosures and essential except where adequate, safe


                                                          91
alternative arrangem ents exist. W here fences, barriers o r m oats are installed the m ajority view o f the
Technical W orking Party is th a t there should be clear gangways leading to emergency exits on to the pitch.
Such gangways m ust be properly identified an d kept clear at all tim es. T he exit gates o r gaps should be at least
1.1 m etres w ide or as wide as the gangways feeding into them , w hichever is the larger and should be sufficient
in dim ensions an d spacing to allow evacuation o f the enclosure w ithin a prescribed tim e. T he W orking Party
recorded a m inority view th a t the need to police gangways exacerbated friction on terraces, an d th at
gangways were no t always essential for pro p er crowd control and safety.

Crush Barriers
  23. A review o f the procedures for inspection an d testing o f barriers is recom m ended. T he Technical
W orking Party considers th a t greater em phasis should be given to thorough recorded an d certified annual
visual inspections o f all crush barriers. Particular a tten tio n should b e given to the developm ent o f corrosion.

  24. It is fu rther recom m ended th a t 25% o f barriers, evenly spaced through each enclosure as designated by
a com petent engineer, co ntinue to be tested each year. In addition , all barriers which the inspection has
identified as o f possibly sub-standard con ditio n should also be tested.

   25. T h e ado pted test m ethod should be capable o f applying to b a rrie r rail, post a n d fou ndation anchorage,
a loading equivalent to a uniform ly d istributed load 1.20 x the design load o f the b a rrier as at present.

    26. T he test procedure should be revised in line w ith current practice for structural testing to incorporate
(i) a detailed visual inspection o f the barrier, (ii) a bedding-in cycle taken to a percentage o f the design loading
a n d (iii) a single cycle o f p ro o f testing taken as at present to 1.20 x the design loading. D eflections at all
significant points should be recorded.

  27. A fter the full p ro o f load has been held for a m inim um o f five m inutes the deflections should be
recorded prio r to release o f loading an d the p erm an en t residual unloaded deflections recorded after the load
has been released.

   28. T he Technical W orking Party recom m ends the adoption o f two criteria for acceptable structural
perform ance (i) th at no significant defects, including corrosion, are revealed by inspection an d (ii) th a t the
percentage recovery o f deflections after release o f the load during proof-testing achieves acceptable values.
T he specific values required will depend on the m aterials o f construction.

  29. T he Technical W orking Party recom m ends th a t the distinction currently draw n in the G reen G uide
between “peak” an d “non-peak“ viewing areas for the purpose o f assessing b a rrier spacing should be
abolished. All areas should com ply w ith the peak viewing specifications.

Stands
   30. A substantial p art o f C hapter 10 o f the G reen G uide, ‘Roofed Stands w ith Seated A ccom m odation’,
deals w ith tem porary structures. It is recom m ended th a t this m aterial should be placed in a separate Chapter,
a n d th a t it should give explicit references as required to British Standards an d to applicable regulations.

  31. T h e rem ainder, which m ight be called ‘Covered Standing an d Seated A ccom m odation’, should clarify
the special requirem ents for safety th a t are involved, noting th a t fire risk is no t the only hazard an d th at
statutory control o f the requirem ents m ay be vested in different authorities. A ppropriate references to
Building Regulations should be m ade. It is im p o rta n t to ensure th a t all spectators can be cleared into safe
protected escape routes w ithin prescribed tim es, although such routes need not be exits from th e stand as a
whole.

Ingress/Egress
   32. T he current C hapters on Ingress an d Egress in the G reen G uide (C hapters 5 an d 6) contain m uch
useful inform ation, b u t are nonetheless in need o f som e revision. C onsideration was given by the Technical
W orking Party to the possible am algam ation o f features com m on to b o th ingress an d egress, b u t despite the
c om m on ground it is recognised th a t em phases m ight well differ. T he W orking Party does not therefore
recom m end am algam ation o f the individual Chapters.

Ingress
  33. T h e Technical W orking Party felt th a t C hapter 5 needed expansion to incorporate ad ditional clauses
on (a) the positive counting an d recording o f those passing through each turnstile; (b) the location o f


                                                           92
am enities inside the ground to avoid obstructing o r d isrupting the flow between turnstile an d enclosures; (c)
the sub-division o f enclosures; (d) the adequacy o f well d istribu ted entrances into large enclosures to
facilitate even packing; and (e) the design o f entrances so as to avoid local pressure o n spectators caused, for
exam ple, by dow nward ram ps. Inform ative diagram s should be ad opted an d general principles laid down,
w herever possible. T he Technical W orking Party w ould n o t favour the introduction o f num erical examples
w hich m ight, in any event, be difficult to establish. It views the cu rrent m axim um notional flow rate per
tu rn stile o f 750 persons per ho u r (as set ou t in paragraph 47 G reen G uide) as too high, and recom m ends a
figure o f 500 as the m edian for a norm al turnstile. F urtherm o re, it recom m ends th a t variations up or down
be approved by the certifying authority, subject to a m axim um u pper lim it o f 660 persons per hour.

Egress
  34. G reater cross-referencing w ith o th er C hapters is required, an d the Technical W orking Party favours
expansion or am en d m en t o f a n u m b er o f paragraphs. In particular, the density figure set ou t in paragraph 54
in respect o f reservoir areas is felt to be too high, an d the m em bers o f the Technical W orking Party
recom m end that, where reservoir areas cann ot be rem oved from egress routes, a lower density o f 35-40
persons per 10 sq m etres be substituted. T he Technical W orking Party favours greater em phasis on
networking, and believes th at the G reen G uide should include a stipulation th a t each ground produce proper,
netw orked plans, delineating all aspects o f ingress/egress.

Enclosures/Turnstiles
   35. T h e Technical W orking Party strongly recom m ends th a t there should be a direct one-to-one
relationship betw een banks o f turnstiles an d enclosures in o rd e r to m aintain accurate counts o f entries. A
review o f the current state o f League grounds had shown th at sub-divisions such as had occurred at
H illsborough were uncom m on, an d had generally been initiated by police for crowd control. W here such
sub-divisions do exist, it is im perative th a t the total n u m b er o f spectators entering each sub-division should
be counted separately.

Stairw ays and Ram ps
   36. T h e Technical W orking Party notes the dangers presented by stairways a n d ram ps, particularly those
used by the public in large num bers, an d recom m ends extensive redrafting o f the G reen G uide to present
m ore sharply the hazards involved. It recognises th a t the stand ard s o f safety required for stairways and ram ps
w hich form part o f the access betw een enclosures an d an exit and those which exist as gangways w ithin
enclosures differ an d recom m ends th a t the differences be explained in m ore detail. Particular attention
should be given by certifying authorities to acceptable u p p er lim its on the gradients o f ram ps and stairways.
T h e m axim u m g radient for ram ps set ou t in the current G reen G uide was felt acceptable.

   37. Similarly, the W orking Party believes th a t the channelling o f flows by the provision o f handrails should
be given greater em phasis. T he recom m ended w idth o f channel for b o th stairways and ram ps should not
exceed three persons (u nit w idths) in line abreast, an d the w idth o f up to 1.8 m etres p erm itted by paragraph
76 should therefore be reduced accordingly. H andrails should extend, by at least 300m m beyond the top and
b o tto m o f any stairw ay o r ram p.

  38. T h e difference betw een handrails, balustrades a n d barriers on o r near the top an d b o tto m o f stairways
an d ram ps, and th e ir ap propriate strength requirem ents, needs to be clarified.

  39. T he Technical W orking Party recom m ends the inclusion in the G reen G u ide o f a greater num ber o f
diagram s illustrating the potentially hazardous situations in relation to stairways an d ram ps an d o f the
principles b eh in d the provisions.

Inspections and Tests
   40. Inspection an d tests o f all equ ipm ent and structures at grounds are vital features o f good operation.
T h e ir range is wide, extending from visual inspection before an d after each event to regular testing o f
structural com ponents. It is a m a tte r o f serious concern th a t the in terp retation o f requirem ents by those
responsible is unacceptably variable. T h e Technical W orking Party considers th a t action should be taken to
ensure th a t co m m on high stan dard s o f inspection an d test are realised, an d m akes the following
recom m endations.

   (i)   T he G reen G u id e should include a com prehensive tabulation o f inspections an d tests covering the
         essential technical features o f grounds. It should prescribe the m inim um frequencies at which the
         inspections an d tests should be conducted.


                                                           93
  (ii) T he required levels o f com petence o f those carrying o u t the inspections a n d tests should be defined.

  (iii) R ecords o f the results o f inspections and tests, including the identification o f defects an d th e rem edies
        adopted, should be certified by those carrying o u t the work.

  (iv) A national Inspectorate should be established to oversee the ado p tio n o f co m m on stan d ard s o f
       inspection an d test. Its term s o f reference should include the com pilation and m ain ten an ce o f a
       national register o f organisations em ployed to carry o u t inspections an d tests; central recording o f the
       extent a n d type o f the inspections an d tests ado pted at individual grounds; an d the provision o f advice
       on inspection and test for those responsible for carrying o u t the work an d for certifying authorities. It
       w ould be in the interest o f co m m o n standards if an Inspectorate o f this kin d dealt w ith the grounds of
       all relevant sports, an d consideration should be given to its form ation through an association o f th eir
       governing bodies.

Fire Safety
  41. T here is general recognition am ongst Technical W orking Party m em bers th at the curren t C h ap ter on
Fire Safety (C h ap ter 11) is well-defined. It contains m uch useful advice o n egress an d m eans o f escape,
application o f which is not restricted to fire risks an d which would b ear repetition in o th er C hapters.

   42. T he Technical W orking Party considers th a t it is essential to m ain tain simple, clear lines o f authority
a n d com m un ication; independ en t in p u t from individual bodies is to be avoided. W ith th a t in m ind, its
m em bers believe th at consultation on all safety m atters should be directly with the certifying a u th o rity who,
in turn , w ould consult with the fire, police, and o th er authorities.

Emergency/Auxiliary Power
   43. T he Technical W orking Party considers th at the curren t G reen G u id e contains insufficient
in form ation on auxiliary power. It recom m ends a separate ch ap ter on the topic w ith a requ irem en t th at
em ergency pow er should be sufficient to m ain tain an ad eq uate level o f lighting, an d public address system
an d to operate any electronic gates, alarm s etc for a period o f three hours from the tim e o f failure o f the
norm al supply.

Communications
  44. T he Technical W orking Party considers th a t too little weight has in the past been attached to th e need
for a com prehensive com m unications system, capable o f reaching both inside an d outside the ground.

   45. C h ap ter 12 o f the G reen G uide therefore requires substantial am e n d m e n t to reflect the im p o rtan ce o f
effective com m u nications systems, the need to m ake use o f high-technology equ ipm ent, an d the value o f
closer co-operation between club and police personnel. T he Technical W orking Party considers th a t Interim
R ecom m en dation s 31-34 should be retained perm anently and incorporated into the G reen G uide.

Disabled Spectators
  46. T he cu rren t G reen G uid e fails to address the specific problem s encountered by disabled spectators
and the Technical W orking Party recom m ends the in trod uction o f a C h ap ter to cover these aspects. It should
deal in p a rticu lar w ith Ingress and Egress and with the provision o f self-contained viewing areas.




                                SU M M A R Y OF M A IN R ECO M M EN D ATIO N S

The Green Guide
   1. A higher degree o f stand ardisatio n in stadia design an d construction is required. An up d ated and
revised G reen G u id e should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is certified. It should
incorporate ap p ro p riate diagram s an d refer to relevant Building Regulations.

Advisory Body
  2. There should be a single, central body (called perhaps the Advisory C ouncil for Sports G roun ds) to
provide an auth o ritativ e source o f knowledge for all those involved in th e design and construction o f stadia.


                                                            94
S eating/Standing
   3. W hilst standing accom m o dation is not intrinsically unsafe, all-seater stadia bring benefits to spectator
com fort, safety and crow d control. T he im p lem en tatio n o f higher prop ortio ns o f seated accom m odation
should be governed by com m on high stand ard s o f design an d construction.

Capacities
  4. C apacity depends on standards o f ingress, egress an d safety generally as well as the acceptable packing
density an d the effective area o f the accom m odation. T he current m axim um packing density o f 5.4/m 2
recom m ended in the G reen G u id e for standing terraces should be safe in static cond itio ns where the terraces
are in full com pliance w ith the G reen G uide. It should be recognised, however, th a t densities norm ally vary
over an enclosure, an d an allowable average figure should reflect this consideration. T he reduced figure o f
2.7/m 2 should be abolished an d there should be no specified lower lim it. If an enclosure has such p oor safety
stan d ard s th a t it is totally unfit as a viewing area, th e figure should be zero.

Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch
  5. C o nsideration should be given to different perim eter arrangem ents appropriate for different areas o f a
ground.

  6. T h e m eans o f separation ad opted should provide sufficient protection against pitch incursions w ithout
com prom ising spectator safety. T he m axim um height o f fences should be d eterm ined in relation to the UEFA
sta n d a rd o f 2.2 m etres. O verhanging sections an d spiked or barbed-w ire attachm ents should be removed.

  7. A tten tio n should be given to the elim ination o f spectator viewing from front steps o f terraces which are
substantially lower th a n the level o f the pitch.

Emergency Access to the P itch
 8. Emergency access to the pitch should be provided from all adjacent viewing areas.

   9. Exit gaps o r gates should be at least 1.1 m etres wide or as wide as the gangways feeding into them ,
w hichever is the larger. All gangways m u st be clearly identified an d m ust be kept clear o f spectators in norm al
circum stances.

 C rush Barriers
    10. A review o f the procedures for inspection an d testing o f barriers is recom m ended. G reater em phasis
 should be given to thorough recorded and certified an nual visual inspections o f all crush barriers, an d to the
 establishm ent o f an unam biguous testing procedure.

 Stands
    11. T he G reen G u id e sho uld con tain a separate C h a p te r on tem porary structures, w ith ap p ro p riate
 references to applicable regulations an d British Standards.

 Ingress
    12. T he c urrent m axim u m notional flow rate per turnstile o f 750 persons per h o ur is too high. A figure o f
 500 should be ad o p ted as the m edian w ith a m axim um u p p er lim it o f 660 persons per hour. V ariations from
 the m edian m ust be approved by the certifying authority.

 Egress
   13. W here reservoir areas can n o t be rem oved, a lower density o f 35-40 persons per 10 sq m etres should be
 adopted. Each g round should produce netw orked plans delineating all aspects o f ingress an d egress.

 Enclosures/Turnstiles
   14. T here should be a direct one-to-one relationship betw een banks o f turnstiles an d corresponding
 enclosures. W here sub-divisions exist, it is im perative th a t the totals entering each sub-division are counted
 separately.

 Stairways and Ram ps
    15. T he recom m en ded w idth o f channels should not exceed three persons (unit w idths) in line abreast.
 H andrails should extend by at least 300m m beyond the top an d bo ttom o f any stairway o r ram p. T he design
 an d strength o f handrails, barriers an d protection on o r near stairways or ram ps should be clearly defined.
 R am ps should no t produce dangerous crowd pressures.


                                                           95
Inspection and Tests
   16. A ction should be taken to ensure th a t com m on high standards o f inspection a n d test are realised. A
national Inspectorate should be established to oversee the ado ptio n o f such standards. Its term s o f reference
should include com pilation an d m ain tenance o f a national register o f organisations em ployed to carry out
inspections an d tests; central recording o f the extent an d type o f inspections and tests at individ ual grounds;
an d the provision o f advice.

Communications
   17. T he G reen G u id e should be am end ed substantially to em phasise the im po rtan ce o f effective
co m m unication s systems capable o f reaching both inside an d outside the ground.

Disabled Spectators
   18. T h e G reen G uide should contain a separate C hapter to cover this subject.



                           M E M B E R SH IP OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY

Professor L eonard M aunder, OBE, BSc, PhD , ScD, FEng, FIM echE (C hairm an)
Assessor to the H illsborough Stadium D isaster Inquiry

M r L N Bush FRICS, CEng, M IStructE, FIAS
C ity Building Surveyor, C ity o f Liverpool

M r W H C arter MSST
G eorge C orderoy & Co, Q uan tity Surveyors
(N o m in ated by th e Football A ssociation)

M r M G T D ickson BA, MS, CEng, M IStructE
Buro H ap p o ld C onsulting Engineers
(N o m in a te d by the In stitu tio n o f Structural Engineers)

D r C E N icholson PhD , CEng, M IM
D eputy Director, Research & L aboratory Services D ivision
H ealth a n d Safety Executive

M r B A Stickley CEng, FIStructE
D irectorate o f Works, H o m e Office

M r J C Sweet (Secretary)
H illsborough Stadium D isaster Inquiry




                                                              96
                                                    A P P E N D IX 4

                      FINAL REPORT O F M R JU STIC E POPPLEW ELL’S INQUIRY

                             CHAPTER 2: HISTORY OF PR EV IO US IN Q U IR IES

  2.1 W hen my Interim R eport was published, it m ight have been thought by som e th at th e suggestions
w hich I set o u t h ad only recently been considered. It was said to be unfair to expect the football clubs to have
taken earlier steps to arrange th e ir affairs. It was urged th a t they should now be entitled to m ore tim e and
m ore m oney in o rd e r to deal w ith the problem s o f crowd control and safety at th e ir grounds. T he problem o f
crowd control and safety had, so it was said, suddenly arisen. I have to say th a t alm ost all the m atters into
w hich I have been asked to inqu ire and alm ost all the solutions I have proposed have been previously
considered in detail by m any distinguished Inquiries over a p eriod o f sixty years.

The Shortt Report
   2.2 O n 11 June 1923, th e then Secretary o f State for the H om e D ep artm en t asked the R t H o n Edward
S hortt KC to form a C om m ittee to inquire, am ongst o th er things, into arrangem ents m ade to deal with the
abnorm ally large attendances on special occasions, especially attendances at athletic grounds. T his arose
from d iso rder w hich occurred at W embley S tadium on the occasion o f the first C up Final on 28 A pril 1923.
T he C om m ittee rep orted on 13 M arch 1924. T he R eport was presented to Parliam ent an d published as
C o m m an d P aper 208 8 at the princely sum o f 6d.

  2.3 A bout responsibility for control inside grounds the R eport had this to say:

  “As regards the general question of the apportionment of responsibility inside the ground as between the
  police and the ground authority, the principle to be followed should, in our judgment, be that the police should
  be responsible for all matters appertaining to the preservation of law and order and that for arrangements for
  the convenience of the public the ground authority should be responsible. It is, however, most important not
  only that the police arrangements should be under the control of a single officer, but also that the duties for
  which the ground authority is responsible should be assigned to a definite individual, who should be
  competent to give instructions and to deal with any incident which arises. If responsibility is definitely
  allocated in this matter it appears to us that, in ordinary circumstances, there need be no difficulty in this
  division of duties and that no disadvantage need result from the existence of dual control so long as the closest
  co-operation is maintained between the two authorities at all times. We are of the opinion, however, that if any
  emergency arises or there appears to be the slightest probability of a disturbance, it is essential that control
  should pass into the hands of one individual, and we recommend that, in the case of grounds providing
  accommodation for more than 10,000 persons, on all occasions when specially large attendances are
  anticipated or for other reasons unusual excitement is to be expected, arrangements should be concerted
  beforehand by which one individual can at any moment take control of the situation.”

   2.4. T h a t paragraph o f the rep o rt continued:

   “The question in such circumstances would have become one of the preservation of law and order and we
   therefore have no doubt that the control should then pass into the hands of the senior police officer present,
   and we consider that such officer would be justified in any circumstances, whether in accordance with a
   pre-arranged scheme or not, in assuming control if he considered it necessary for the purpose of the
   restoration of order. As part of the arrangements for this purpose we think that, in the very large grounds,
   there should be a central control box in telephonic communication with all parts of the ground and that the
   principal police and ground officials should be stationed there so that they may be in constant touch with the
   situation.”...(Paragraph22).

   2.5 A bout stewards the R eport said:

   “We understand that there is no uniform practice with regard to the employment of stewards at sports
   grounds, that in some cases they are only used to show spectators into the seating accommodation, and
   that, in cases where stewards are employed for packing of the standing room, they are only employed when
   there are specially large crowds. We consider it desirable in the interests of safety that, for the purpose of
   handling a crowd, stewards should be employed in any case where the crowd is likely to approach the capacity
   of the ground. For seating accommodation stewards should always be employed. It is in the highest degree
   important that any such stewards should be properly trained in their work and intimately acquainted with the



                                                            97
  part of the ground placed under their charge. We doubt whether it is practicable to secure suitable men for
  this purpose unless they are given continual experience in the work, and we therefore recommend that every
  ground with a capacity' exceeding 10,000 which provides terraced accommodation for its spectators should
  maintain, or have a call upon, an adequate staff of efficient stewards, and should ensure that they keep
  proficient by requiring them to perform duty at frequent intervals. Stewards should be organised as a
  disciplined body and should act under the control and supervision of their own officers. They should wear a
  distinctive badge of authority, which they should not be able easily to discard.” (Paragraph 27).

  2.6 T he R eport had this to say ab out precautions against fire:

  “We have been somewhat surprised to find that in many cases little or not precaution is taken against the risk
  of fire in stands. We do not suppose that either the risk or the consequences of fire would be so serious in an
  open stand as in a closed building, but we consider it most important that adequate arrangements should be
  made to deal with any outbreak which might occur.” (Paragraph 40).

b u t concluded generally:

  “We are assured that these governing bodies are only too anxious to secure that their sport is carried on under
  conditions which will promote the public safety, and we feel that at this stage it is safe to leave the matter to
  them.” (Paragraph 47).

The Moelwyn Hughes Report
  2.7 T he next rep ort (published as C m n d 6846) arose out o f the disaster at Bolton W anderers’ Football
G ro u n d on 9 M arch 1946. M r R Moelwyn H ughes KC was app ointed by the then H o m e Secretary to conduct
an enquiry into the circum stances o f the disaster which arose by the presence o f som e 85,000 spectators.
50.000 h ad been expected. Because o f the press o f people in an enclosure two barriers collapsed a n d 33
people were killed.

   2.8 It is interesting to observe that the previous best attendance at Bolton in the 1945-46 season had been
43.000 an d it was am ply policed by a force o f 60. O n this occasion there were 103 police to control 85,000
spectators, which is abo ut 1/10th o f the present ratio o f police to spectators at football grounds both inside
a n d outside the ground.

   2.9 M r Hughes m ade a n u m b er o f recom m endations. H e said:

  “Burnden Park is typical of most home grounds of the leading football teams in the country. They have grown
  stage by stage from humble beginnings on sites acquired when the large gates of these days were not
  anticipated, or when the clubs had not achieved eminence. It would be idle to suggest that the grounds, or
  large sections of them, should be rebuilt, but if they are to be made reasonably safe and if the risk of repeating
  the tragedy of Burnden Park is to be avoided, then, I have formed the clear view that the following steps must
  be tak en . . . ” (Page 10).

   2.10 T h e recom m endations included inspections o f th e enclosures, scientific calculation o f the m axim um
n u m b er to be allowed entry, counting those entering the ground by m echanical m eans an d central
co-ordination o f the system, all to ensure the adm ission o f a safe n um b er o f spectators.

   2.11 So far as future regulation was concerned th e R eport said:

   “The preceding safety measures cannot be secured without legislation. A Departmental Committee reporting
   on Crowds to a previous Home Secretary in 1924 (Cd 2088) anaemically recommended that adequate
   provision for safety be left to the pressure of the governing bodies in sport. The most important of these was,
   of course, the Football Association, which had not deigned to appear before the Com m ittee. . .

   The legislation should empower the Home Secretary to issue general regulations for different kinds of
   grounds and the broad conditions necessary for safety.

   N o ground of any considerable size should be opened to the public until it has been licenced by, I suggest as an
   appropriate licensing authority, the local authority. The issue of the licence would depend upon satisfying the
   authority as to the construction and equipment of the ground, its compliance with regulations and the
   proposed maximum figures of admission to the different parts.”



                                                          98
  2.12 Mr Hughes went on to say:

  “Compliance with the recommendations of this Report will cost money. They will involve grounds in a loss of
  gate money on popular d ays. . . The insurance for greater safety for the public demands a premium.”
Mr Hughes ended his report by saying:

  “I earnestly hope that, if the proposals I have made in this Report, or similar suggestions, commend
  themselves to you, Parliament will not be slow in granting you the necessary powers.” (Pages 11-12).
The Chester Report
  2.13 Mr Hughes’ words fell on deaf ears. It was another 22 years before there was a further report
com m issioned by the Government on the problems o f football. In June 1966, the then Secretary o f State for
Education and Science appointed Mr Norman Chester CBE, as he then was (Warden o f Nuffield College,
Oxford), to chair an Enquiry. His terms o f reference were:

  “To enquire into the state of Association Football at all levels, including the organisation, management,
  finance and administration, and the means by which the game may be developed for the public good; and to
  make recommendations.”

  2.14 Mr Chester made this observation about crowd behaviour:

  “In recent years there has been an increase in disorderly behaviour by spectators. During the period
  1946-1960 there were 195 cases brought to the attention of the FA, an average of 13 per season. In the
  following six seasons 148 cases were reported, an average of 25 per season. The matter was discussed some
  time ago at a meeting between representatives of a number of police forces (including the British Transport
  Police), the Football Association and the Football League. Both these governing bodies have been very
  concerned at this development.”

  2.15 The Report continued:

  “We have not been able to devote the time and resources to the study of this problem which its complexity
  deserves. We very much welcome the initiative of the Birmingham Research Group, of which Dr J A
  Harrington is Research Director and have been fortunate enough to see the Group’s preliminary report. We
  are sure that its findings will be of value to all concerned.” (Page 97).
The Harrington Report
  2.16 This was made to the then Minister o f Sport.1It observed:

  “Some spectators carry knives, hammers, sticks and spikes, choppers, and other offensive weapons like
  powdered pepper which are not necessarily used for violent purposes but may be used in threatening displays.
  There is also the problem of singing or chanting bawdy or obscene songs and phrases some of which are also
  threatening and provocative.” (Page 8).

  2.17 About riots the Report said:

  “W hile such riots must be regarded as almost unknown accompaniments of football in this country, their
  potential seriousness and danger were exemplified recently by football riots in Turkey, where many people
  were reported killed. W hile comparable riots seem unlikely here, it would be foolish to rule out the possibility
  of much more serious crowd disturbances at football matches than we have yet experienced.” (Page 9).
  2.18 The Report regretted inactivity thus far:

  “The question of public safety and crowd control at football matches was dealt with by a departmental
  committee report published in 1924 (Cond. 2088) and the inquiry into the disaster at the Bolton Wanderers
  Football Ground in 1946 (Cond. 6 9 4 6 ) Unfortunately the most helpful suggestions in these reports have
  often been ignored, though the committee’s recommendations do carry some weight with boards of football
  clubs”.
  2.19 The Report went on:

  “The absence of national legislation outlining minimum standards of safety and amenity at football grounds
  means that some club managements do not feel obliged to put their grounds into a state considered by the
  police to be necessary for crowd control.” (Page 33).

'“Soccer Hooliganism: A preliminary Report.” Bristol: John Wright and Sons Ltd 1968.



                                                            99
 2.20 A nd continued:

 “We feel that improved ground facilities would not only help to deal with the hooligan problem but do
 something towards its prevention. Clubs often seem keener to spend money on the purchase of players than to
 undertake any major spending on ground improvement which would increase safety and make hooligan
 control easier. The loss of revenue which a club may suffer from alterations may be the determining factor.
 There is of course no obligation on a club to convert a ground which can accommodate 50,000 to one which
 takes a smaller number in conditions of greater safety and comfort. Letters from members of the public
 suggest that already some are staying away because of their dislike of poor facilities,^ overcrowding, and
 disturbances, so that the neglect of ground improvement may ultimately be self defeating. (Page 34).

 2.21 So far as responsibility is concerned, the R eport said:

 “We think that those responsible for club management and the governing bodies of football should accept far
 more responsibility for keeping their crowds in order. This applies not only within the stadium itself but to
 club supporters travelling in groups to and from matches. One gets the impression that some clubs disclaim
 any responsibility for the behaviour of their supporters and if the atmosphere of a Roman holiday is not
 deliberately fostered it is looked on with considerable tolerance. Football matches are commercial enterprises
 conducted for profit on private premises and clubs have therefore a heavy responsibility for keeping order and
 safety for the public on their premises.” (Pages 35-36).

  2.22 In its sum m ary the R eport concluded:

  “The solution of the problem of hooliganism in the football stadium is ultimately the responsibility of
  individual clubs who must each deal with it in the light of local circumstances. W hile a few clubs are
  exemplary in their attitude to the problem others are laissez-faire and need persuasion to take a more active
  role in trying to control hooliganism in their own grounds. This laissez-faire attitude does not help the police
  in their attempts to deal with the matter.” (Page 56).

The Lang Report
   2.23 Shortly thereafter, a W orking Party u nder the chairm anship o f Sir Joh n Lang G C B an d including a
n u m b er o f distinguished m em bers, was appo inted by the then M inister w ith special responsibility for Sport
to exam ine the problem s involved in football crowd behaviour to w hich attention h a d been called a few
m on ths previously by the H arrington R eport. Sir Jo hn’s R eport was presented on 21 N ovem ber 1969.

  2.24 By way o f introdu ction it said:

  “The Working Party was dealing with a subject which has been discussed almost ad nauseam during recent
  years. Not unexpectedly the Working Party has not found a single simple solution for a problem which is
  often due to a combination of factors — ” (Page 3).

     2.25 T he m em bers o f the Inquiry w itnessed the dem on stratio n o f CCTV equ ipm en t and reported.

     “. . . the view was formed that closed circuit television could be of value in the general subject of crowd
     control a n d    would be an important factor in preventing misbehaviour by spectators at grounds. It was a
     refinement which most of the top class clubs could be expected eventually to have as a matter of course.
     (Page 9).

   2.26 A bout alcohol the R eport said:

   “There can be no doubt that consumption of alcohol is an important factor in crowd misbehaviour, both
   because it stimulates quarrelsomeness and because empty bottles are dangerous m issiles. There would be no
   advantage in refusing licence facilities to football club grounds - this would merely stimulate spectators to
   bring their supplies from outside.” (Page 14).

 The Wheatley Report
   2.27 O n 4 February 1971 the R t H on Lord W heatley was asked by the then Secretary o f State for the
 H om e D e p artm e n t and the then Secretary o f State for Scotland to m ake an ind ep en dent ap praisa o t e
 effectiveness o f existing arrangem ents for crowd safety at sports grounds in G reat B ritain, a n d o t e
 im provem ents w hich could be brought ab out w ithin the present fram ew ork o f the law, an d to consider the
 nature o f any alterations in the law w hich appeared to be needed. T his arose from the disaster at Ibrox Par
 where 66 spectators died.


                                                         100
  2.28 O n 16 M arch 1972 L ord W heatley com pleted his R eport an d it was presented to Parliam ent and
published by H M SO as C m nd. 4952.

   2.29 T he R eport co ntained a technical A ppendix. Following the R eport, the Safety o f Sports G rounds Act
1975 was passed. A licensing system involving the issue o f a safety certificate for designated grounds was
in trodu ced an d supporting guidance (the G reen G uide) was published. In his R eport Lord W heatley said:

  “I recognise that a decision to introduce a licensing system for grounds along the lines I have recommended
  may cause anxiety to some football clubs and football administrators. As I see it, their misgivings are
  associated with a fear that such stringent conditions might be attached to the granting of a licence that
  many clubs may not be able to afford the cost and some may have to go out of business.” (Paragraph 66).

  2.30 “M y answer to that is this. M y task was to consider the problem of crowd safety at the grounds. Clubs
  which charge the public for admission have a duty to see that their grounds are reasonably safe for spectators.
  That is a primary consideration. It is accordingly necessary that some standards should be imposed and
  observed. This has been recognised by the football authorities themselves — I have canvassed all the
  alternatives that have been proposed or which I personally thought were reasonable to consider, and the one
  which I decided was best to meet the situation in the interest of the public is the licensing system by a local
  authority. There is nothing new in this proposal. It has been mooted for almost fifty years. It can come as no
  surprise to the football world, and in the light of happenings over the years the demand for an independent
  appraisal and determination of the safety of grounds becomes almost irresistible. I certainly cannot resist it.”
  (Paragraph 67).

  2.31 L ord W heatley ended his R eport by saying:

  “I trust that this Report may be of assistance to you in deciding what should be done to solve this
  important question of crowd safety in football grounds. One thing is certain. The public demand for
  something to be done has been growing over the years. I am sure I am reflecting public opinion when I say
  that something must be done now. The evidence certainly supports that view.”

The M cElhone Report
  2.32 In O ctober 1976 the then Secretary o f State for Scotland asked M r Frank M cElhone M P to chair a
W orking G ro up on Football Crow d Behaviour.

  “to consider the problems caused by some Scottish football supporters and to make recommendations to
  the Scottish Football Association and other organisations concerned.”

  A m ong the m em bership o f the W orking G roup were representatives from the football authorities, from the
football clubs an d the Strathclyde Police.

   2.33 In the introdu ction to the R eport2, M r M cElhone said:

  “There is no simple solution to the problem; it is but one of the manifestations of anti-social behaviour
  besetting society in general today. We have however in our findings arrived at a number of conclusions and
  recommendations which we hope, given a commitment to implement them on the part of all those most
  closely concerned, will go some way towards reducing the problem of hooliganism at football matches and
  by so doing turn football grounds once again into places of entertainment where parents can take their
  children to enjoy, in relative comfort and safety, the pleasures of our national game.”

   2.34 T he Report observed that:

   “A hooligan is a hooligan no matter where he operates and the fact that his behaviour is conspicuous at a
   football match has very often nothing to do with the game itself.” (Paragraph 4).

    M r M cElhone saw the problem as one o f trying to reduce, or at least contain, the incidence o f hooliganism
 at football m atches w ithout restricting the pleasure o f the m ajority o f supporters.


 2Report of the Working Group on Football Crowd Behaviour: Scottish Education Department/HMSO 1977.


                                                          101
   2.35 So far as drink was concerned, the R eport recom m ended th at it should be an offence for a spectator
to carry or attem p t to carry alcohol into a football ground; th a t is should be an offence to be in possession of
alcohol w ithin the ground or to a ttem p t to gain adm ission while drunk. T he R eport recom m ended th at more
people w ho were physically capable o f carrying out the duties o f enforcem ent would have to be recruited and
suggested that, in their recruitm ent o f stewards, clubs should look to their supporters clubs to assist in
providing the kind o f m en required for the job. So far as tran sp o rt was concerned, the R eport recom m ended
th a t it should be an offence for anyone to be in possession o f alcoholic liquor on a vehicle hired specifically
for the purpose o f carrying passengers b o u n d for a football m atch; or to allow any alcoholic liquor to be
carried on a public service vehicle being used for the purpose o f carrying passengers to football m atches, or to
allow the carriage o f any drunken person on such a vehicle b o u nd for a football m atch.

  2.36 So far as the separation o f supporters was concerned the R eport recom m ended:

  “That in the interests of crowd control and safety, separation of rival supporters at turnstiles should be
  carried out if the police, in consultation with the club, consider such a step to be necessary; that for matches
  where larger than average attendances are expected, sufficient turnstiles should be opened timeously in order
  to achieve speedy admission.” (R ecom m endation 13).

  “In order to protect players, match officials and the pitch, access to the playing area should be made as
  difficult as possible. To prevent an invasion of the playing area by spectators ... the erection of a physical
  barrier in the form of a fence not less than 1.8 metres in height with access points to allow the pitch to be used
  if necessary for the evacuation of spectators in an emergency.” (Paragraph 53).

   2.37 A further recom m endation was that:

   “the Courts should make full use of the higher fining powers under the Criminal Law Act 1977 in respect of
   common law offences which include malicious mischief, breach of the peace and assault, these being the most
   common offences associated with football hooliganism, and in respect of persistent offenders, should
   normally impose imprisonment without option.” (R ecom m endation 19).

   2.38 T he R eport recom m ended that:

   “The police should have statutory powers to search for any containers ... in the possession of any person
   entering or attempting to enter football grounds.” (R ecom m endation 24).

 b u t went o n to point out th at the clubs m ust bear th e ir share o f the responsibility for the beh aviou r and
 conduct o f th eir staff at all levels:

   2.39 A m ong oth er observations the R eport says this:

   “We recognise that many football grounds in Scotland are very old; some could even be described as primitive
   in that not only do they lack any kind of comfort for spectators but they also lack basic amenities including
   adequate toilet accommodation. This primitive environment encourages some people to react in a primitive
   manner. Moreover there is a strong case for more seating accommodation. In our view it would go a
   considerable way towards reducing hooliganism; potential trouble spots could be more quickly recognised and
   identification of troublemakers by police would be made that much easier.”

 T he R eport therefore recom m ended:

    “that clubs should consider the provision of additional seating accommodation. In addition clubs must
    provide adequate toilet facilities for men and women and generally improve amenities for spectators.
    (Paragraph 88).

    2.40 T his R eport also recom m ended that:

    “players should be encouraged by the clubs to extend their voluntary public relations work in the community
    including personal appearances at youth clubs etc and coaching sessions in schools with the objects of
    promoting the game and the concept of good sportsmanship.” (R ecom m endation 37).

  CCTV was recom m ended a n d supporters’ clubs encouraged. T he Scottish Football A ssociation was
  recom m ended to take appropriately firm action against clubs.


                                                           102
Department of the Environment Working Group
  2.41 T h e m ost recent G overnm ent publication on the subject o f football is the R eport o f an Official
W orking G ro u p on Football Spectator Violence set up by D ep artm en t o f th e E nvironm ent, which was
published by H M SO in 1984. T he W orking G ro u p was set up following incidents o f violence involving
British supporters at England’s soccer m atches in Luxem bourg an d France in N ovem ber 1983 an d February
1984 respectively. It dealt party with problem s arising out o f internation al football.

  2.42 However, as regards dom estic football the R eport said:

  “the Group reaffirmed the importance of consistent planning, preparation and co-ordination; of building on
  experience; and o f the need to consider afresh all possible measures, including those previously thought to be
  impractical or unnecessary.” (Paragraph 5.1).

  “We recommend therefore that the FA reviews and better defines its powers and procedures and the
  responsibilities of the clubs. If their powers prove to be inadequate, the Association should consider
  enhancing them.”

The R eport w ent on:

  “This would better equip the FA to implement some of the recommendations.” (Paragraph 5.5).

  2.43 T he Football A ssociation h a d issued a “blu ep rin t” detailing the precautions which league clubs
should take against violence, which was circu lated to clubs at th e beginning o f the 1983-84 season. The
W orking P arty R eport said that it:

  “... has not been rigorously adopted by all clubs. Since it represents the collective wisdom of football clubs,
  many of whom have successfully countered serious threats of violence, its implementation should have
  prevented some of the violence in grounds last season.” (Paragraph 5.7).

  2.44 T h e R eport observed th a t the enforcem ent by the Football A ssociation o f its “b lu eprint” occurs after
the event w hen the deficiencies in a club’s planning has becom e apparent. T he R eport recom m ended that:

  “improved means should be found for ensuring that clubs adopt the provisions of the “blueprint” in a way
  appropriate to their own grounds and matches.” (Paragraph 5.7).

T he R eport w ent on to recom m end th at each club should produce a detailed set o f plans to be subm itted to
the football autho rities for endorsem ent. T his w ould prevent som e clubs from avoiding th eir responsibilities
an d m ight ensure also a m ore co-operative an d com m itted response.

   2.45 T h e R eport recom m ended th at m atches betw een high risk clubs should be program m ed so th a t the
risk o r threat o f violence could be reduced. T h e R eport said:

  “It is more likely to take place at the beginning and end of the season and at holiday periods, particularly at
  seaside fixtures when other groups of young people sometimes also clash with football supporters.”
  (Paragraph 5.13).

   2.46 T he R eport w ent on to recom m end the introd uction o f club m em bership, the in trodu ction o f CCTV
a n d closer links w ith the com m unity. It d id not recom m end th at alcohol should be b an n ed in grounds and
concluded th a t in the absence o f clear evidence th a t the introdu ctio n o f legislation along the lines o f the
C rim inal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 w ould reduce violence at English soccer matches, it could not
recom m end such action. Furtherm ore, said the Report:

  “legislation of this kind would be unwelcome to many; the majority of football clubs are untroubled by
  violence and would unnecessarily be penalised financially and the vast majority of non-violent spectators
  would suffer for the actions of the few.” (Paragraph 5.34):

T he W orking G rou p did not recom m end ad ditional m easures for banning alcohol on trains o r on football
coaches.


                                                         103
Conclusion
  2.47       A study o f all these reports (and there are num erous reports a n d discussion papers by o th er bodies)
shows th a t the following are m easures w hich have been frequently recom m ended:

  1.   Closed C ircuit Television
  2.   M em bership Cards
  3.   Segregation
  4.   M ore seating at football grounds
  5.   E ncouragem ent o f supporters’ clubs
  6.   A b an on alcohol
  7.   Involvem ent o f th e clubs w ith the com m unity
  8.   H eavier penalties

I to o shall argue for these a n d related m easures. It is to be ho ped they will be m ore vigorously pursued by the
a ppro priate bodies th a n in the past.




                                                           104
A p p e n d ix 5   Stadion Galgemvaard, Utrecht.
A p p e n d ix 6:   Perimeter fences at Liverpool (Anfield)
The moat at Utrecht.
A p p e n d ix 8:   The perimeter gates at Nimes (Stade des Costieres).

                                 109
            P r in t e d in (he U n i l e d K ingdo m for H M S O
D d 0 5 0 3 3 1 0 1/90 C 7 0 O / N o . 8 4 1 1 2 5 8 (3840)         4509
ngjSMKrr
  HMSO publications are available from:

  HM SO Publications Centre
  (Mail and telephone orders only)
  PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
  Telephone orders 01-873 9090
  General enquiries 01-873 0011
  (queuing system in operation for both numbers)

  HM SO Bookshops
  49 High Holbom, London, WC1V 6HB 01-873 0011 (counter service only)
  258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
  Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
  9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
  80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
  71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181

  HM SO’s Accredited Agents
  (see Yellow Pages)
  and through good booksellers

  From 6 May 1990 the London telephone numbers above carry the prefix
  ‘071’ instead of ‘01’.




        %




  ISBN 0 10 109622 4
                IN THE MANNER
                AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF
                THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




Instructions to Counsel to advise in conference.



Counsel will receive herewith:



1}   The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 SI 1985   No 518



2)   The Complaints & Discipline files in respect of Chief Superintendent

     Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray



3)   Memoranda and accompanying letter of 28 March 1991 from ACC

     Mr Anderson to Brigadier Pownall of the PCA



4)   Home Office Guidance to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and

     Discipline Procedures



5)   The summing up of Doctor Stefan Popper, Coroner for South Yorkshire



6)   Correspondence:



     a)   letter from Police Complaints Authority dated 7 May 1991

     b)   letter from Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria

          dated 16 May 1991

     c)   letter from DPP dated 30 August 1990
i




        d)    letters of 10 April 1991 from PCA to ACC Mr Anderson and reply



    Instructing Solicitor acts in this case for Assistant Chief Constable

    Mr Graham Moore of the South Yorkshire Police and Counsel is instructed on

    his behalf.   As Assistant Chief Constable he is_the disciplinary authority

    for officers below the rank of Assistant Chief Constable having been

    delegated that responsibility by the Chief Constable (See enclosure 1 and

    Regulation 15 in particular).



    These instructions are concerned with possible disciplinary proceedings

    arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster, many aspects of which Counsel is

    already well acquainted.     The police officers   concerned are Chief

    Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent      Murray of the SouthYorkshire

    Force.



    Arising out of the disaster a number of public complaints were made against

    a number of police officers including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

    Superintendent Murray.     The complainants and the nature of their complaints

    are detailed in schedules A and B of the complaints file for Chief

    Superintendent Duckenfield and the Complaints against Police form, page 1

    of the file relating to Superintendent Murray (see enclosure 2 for both

    files).



    Those complaints were referred to the Chief Constable of West Midlands for

    investigation under the terms of the Police Discipline Regulations 1985

    (the discipline regulations) (enclosure 1) and his investigation was

    supervised by the Police Complaints Authority      under the provisions of S89

    of the Police & Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE).




                                        - 2 -
On the retirement of Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands the

papers were passed to Mr Leslie Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, to

complete the investigation.   For ease of reference he is referred to as the

Investigating Officer and the Police Complaints Authority, the PCA.



It will interest Counsel to know that once the Investigating Officer was

appointed and the PCA decided to supervise the investigation, neither ACC

Mr Anderson nor any of his subordinates took any further part in the

investigation.   The files only came back to Mr Anderson after the

investigation had been completed to enable him to consider what if any

charges should be levelled against any officer this being his responsibility

under Regulation 8 of the discipline regulations.   More about this later.



Only the Complaints and Discipline_files associated with the investigation

into the complaints have been supplied to Counsel and this is for the sake

of brevity.   Other files including all the statements taken from witnesses

and considered as part of that investigation are available if Counsel wishes

to see them but at this juncture it is not felt that they will add anything

to Counsel's consideration of the issues.



When an investigation is completed the disciplinary authority, in this case

ACC Mr Anderson, is required to complete a memorandum to the PCA in

accordance with the provisions of s90(5) of PACE.   The memoranda touching

upon the complaints against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray are attached as enclosure 3 together with a letter

of explanation dated 28 March ljgi from ACC Mr Stuart Anderson to the PCA.

It is perhaps noteworthy here to mention that the contents of the memoranda




                                    - 3 -
 are based solely upon the evidence contained in the Investigating Officer's

 report.     In other words because of the serious public interest involved in

    these matters Assistant Chief Constable Stuart Anderson did not see fit to

 put any further gloss on what could then be said to be a totally independent

 investigation and report.     Counsel will see from the Complaints & Discipline

 files that the Investigating Officer's conclusion is that no disciplinary

 offence is made out against either officer.



 After the memoranda had been submitted to the PCA there then transpired

 correspondence between the Authority and ACC Mr Suart Anderson (enclosure

 6(d).     Ultimately the PCA wrote on 7 May disagreeing with the view that no

 discipline proceedings were justified against Chief Superintendent

 Duckenfield or Superintendent Murray.          In this letter they explain why they

 come to this view and identify four charges of neglect of duty and one of

    discreditable conduct against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and one charge

    of neglect of duty against Superinendent Murray.       These charges are laid

    down in the Discipline Code for police officers below the rank of Assistant

 Chief Constable and which is Schedule 1 to the Discipline Regulations

    (enclosure 1).   Counsel will note that the letter is couched in terms of

 recommendations to ACC Mr Graham Moore, who has now succeeded ACC Mr

 Anderson, under the provisions of s93(l) of PACE.          The letter also provides

    the necessary degree of consultation under s93(3) so that if the disciplinary
|
I authority is still unwilling tQ ,prefer-..char.ges the PCA can direct him to

|^do so.    It is as part of this consultation process that Counsel is

    instructed.



 ACC Moore's first response to the letter of 7 May was to ask the

    Investigating Officer for his views.    These have been provided in some detail




                                        -   4   -
 in the letter of 16 May (enclosure 6(b) and in which the Investigating

 Officer justifies his conclusions contained in the two reports.   It will

 be noted that he is to consider the PCA's letter further in consultation

 with an officer of the West Midlands Force who was an integral part of the

 complaints investigation and a further response is awaited from him.     Mr

 Sharp's letter in itself requires no additional comment from instructing

 solicitor but it may be helpful to Counsel to say a few things by way of

 addendum.



 When instructing solicitor spoke to Counsel a few days ago about the issues
                       /


 Counsel asked to see a copy of the Coroner's summing up in the inquests into

 the 95 deaths at Hillsborough and this is enclosure 5 to these instructions.

 The Investigating Officer's reports do not include particular evidence or

 views expressed at the inquests but clearly what took place there is relevant   [f
I because it can and should be used in any discipline proceedings which are      J
I brought against any officer.



 As Counsel has already said much of what happened at the inquests helped

 in no small way to redeem a balance which had hitherto weighed heavily in

 criticism of the actions of some officers at Hillsborough, not least being

 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray.   Counsel will

 I am sure remember much of what was said by the Coroner about these two

 officers but a number of comments made by him are worthy of particular

 mention and emphasis in connection with the justification for disciplinary

 charges recommended by the PCA.



 What follows is extracts from the Coroner's summing up and the page

 references are to the transcript at enclosure 5.




                                   - 5 -
Thursday 21 March 1991




Page 52



At this point in the transcript the Coroner is discussing breach of duty

as one of the three gates, as he puts it, which the jury must pass through

before they can even consider recklessness as a constituent of unlawful

killing.



At Paragraph D/E he says "In an emergency the fact that in the event a wrong

decision is taken need not constitute a breach of duty provided that a

decision was not unreasonably taken in the circumstances which prevailed

and taking all of the aspects into account.



Page 97



Here the Coroner discusses the principle of "finding own level" as a policy

for dealing with the distribution of fans on a terrace and the Coroner makes

the point that no-one criticised this as a policy.



Page 99



The Coroner refers to a number of supporters making the statement that in

a kig match they expect to be crowded, they expect to be crushed, they

expected to be uncomfortable and that it will sort itself out once kick off
has taken p la c e .



Monday, 25 March 1991



Page 25



At Paragraphs E/F "All you can do is put yourself as near as you can into

the shoes of the people who were there on 15 April and say given that

situation was that a reasonable thing to do?      Would a reasonably skilled

officer have done the same?    All the evidence would seem - not all but

virtually all the evidence would seem to point to that direction, that the

decision to open the gates was a reasonable one in the circumstances."



Page 42



Here the Coroner is dealing with the time when pens 3 and 4 became

overcrowded and relates thisto the opening of Gate         C.He says atparagraphs

B-D "I'll try to look through some of these witnesses whom we had and in

summary although quite a lot of witnesses describe discomfort at an earlier

stage than what I am now going to tell you, the vast majority of the

witnesses in that pen (pen 4) indicated that they did not become distressed

until the players came on to    the    pitch or after and          infact while Iamon

that subject that is exactly    the     same in pen 3 >"



Page 44



The Coroner then went on to discuss the evidence of Robert Knowles who went

into pen 4 with two boys after gaining entrance to the ground through gate




                                      - 7 -
C.   He describes how pen 4 was full but he didn't think that was in itself

unusual.     Indeed he worked his way down to the front and right at the front

there was a gap near the fencing which he was able to walk along almost

unimpeded.    Then at Page 45 the Coroner remarks on Knowles' evidence that

he was perfectly satisfied with his position when the players were already

on the pitch.



Page 55



When dealing with the question of monitoring pens and appreciating serious

overcrowding, the Coroner says that the distressing situation did not occur

until the players came on to the pitch or later or from there onwards.     He

also deals here with a number of witnesses who were reasonably happy in pen

3 rifht up to kick off and probably beyond.



Page 58



The Coroner says "So you had some people who even within this pen (3) and

even relatively late in the day had not appreciated the enormity of the

situation which was deyeloping in front of their very eyes."



Page 66/67



The Coroner deals with the evidence of Mr Wright who was positioned in the

corner of the North West terrace almost opposite the police control box.

In his evidence Mr Wright said that as the match was in play he looked at

the Leppings Lane terrace and said, "Wish I was there."    Mr Wright's evidence

was that he would have been quite content to go into that crowd at the time




                                    - 8 -
that he assessed it.   The Coroner also deals with evidence from others

outside the Leppings Lane terrace, all of whom could see nothing seriously

untoward until at least kick off time.



Page 71



The Coroner deals here with evidence of BBC commentator John Motson who did

not describe pens 3 and 4 as being overcrowded.



Page 108



There is evidence that "Chief Superintendent Mole had selected his support

team and had allocated supervisory men to the different parts of the stadium.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield had the understanding from Mr Mole and

others that the plan which he was operating and the operational order which

he was following was one which had been used in the past, which was in          ,
standard form and which had not presented any difficulties."                   I



Pages 108-129



It would be impossible for instructing solicitor to do justice to this

section of the transcript by being selective.     These pages should be read

in their totality as an expression of the Coroner's views on the actions

of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield as operational commander, leading up

to and during the day of 15 April.



So far these instructions have dealt with the evidence and the extent to

which it is sufficient to found any disciplinary action against Chief




                                     - 9 -
Superintendent Duckenfield or Superintendent Murray.     However Counsel is

also asked to address the legal as opposed to PUI*e evidential issues which

are in part broached by Mr Sharp in his letter of 16 May.     Is neglect of

duty co-terminus with a criminal offence of say culpable malfeasance such

that the decision of the DPP (enclosure 6 (c)) not to prosecute for any

criminal offence is relevant in deciding whether a disciplinary charge is

justified.   It is acknowledged as the PCA says in their letter of 10 April

(enclosure 6 (d)) that such a decision of the DPP does not preclude fresh

consideration by the PCA but its relevance appears axiomatic.     In this regard

Counsel is referred to the Home Office Guidance (enclosure 4).



Paragraph 9.22 makes it clear that the burden of proof is the same as in

a criminal matter but at paragraph 9 .3 the guidance states that for many

disciplinary offences the mental element necessary for a finding of guilt

is less than that for most criminal offences.     This begs the question what

degree of mens rea is required to secure a finding of guilt for neglect of

duty.   The views of the Investigating Officer expressed on the second page

                                                noteworthy in this respect.



It also must be said that to the knowledge of instructing solicitor the

standing of ^the guidance has never been tested and it does on the face of

it appear illogical to require the same standard of proof as in criminal

trials and not require the same degree of mens rea.     Is mens rea anything

but an absolute standard.



These are all questions which Counsel is asked to address in conference for

the following purpose.   The import of these instructions is to secure

Counsel's opinion on whether the charges recommended by the PCA are in




                                  -   10 -
reality supportable.     ACC Mr Moore has of course no principle objection to

taking disciplinary action against either officer and it may be the PCA will

direct him to do so but there is clear concern that the PCA's recommendations

fly so dramaticalljK,.jJX.,..the,»-fa&a,x(£.,the Investigating Officer's views.



If Counsel's opinion is that the PCA's views are supportable disciplinary

proceedings will be taken as recommended.            If however Counsel is of the

opinion that they are not supportable either in law or on the evidence it

is anticipated Counsel will be asked to prepare a written opinion which will

be submitted by ACC Mr Moore to the PCA as part of the consultation process

under S93(3) PACE.



It will be self evident that the instructions are not complete since further

correspondence from the Investigating Officer is awaited.            However, the

documentation which is available will enable Counsel to give some initial

thought to the issues and it will also ensure we can arrange the earliest

possible conference once that final piece of information is available.




                                          -   11 -
            4 -

         HOME OFFICE




GUIDANCE TO CHIEF OFFICERS

   ON POLICE COMPLAINTS

AND DISCIPLINE PROCEDURES




       1985 EDITION
                     RECORD OF AMENDMENTS


                            Date Entered    Officer's Signature
Amendment Lift No.
                                      Section 1
                                Statutory Provisions

General                                                         1~2

Complaints                                                              3-5

Discipline Appeals                                                             6

Reference to Chief Officer                                                     7


                                       Section 2
                     Responsibility within forces for handling of
                         Complaints and Disciplinary Matters


Delegation to deputy of certain functionsof chief officer                      1-6


                                      Section 3
                            Action on Receiving Coaplaint

Definition of a Complaint                                                      1-2

Immediate Action                                                               3

Preservation of Evidence

Determination of the ’Appropriate Authority*                                   5

Complaints received by Police Complaints Authority                             6

The Recording of Complaints                                                    7-11

Iteraisation of matters of Complaint                                          12-15

Statistical Returns - For HM Chief Inspectors Report                '         16

Statistical Returns - Police Authorities                                      17

Officers not on duty                                                          18-19

Special Constables and Police cadets                                          20

Complaints by Civilian Employees                                              21


                                       Section 4

Informal Resolution and Formal Investigation                                   1-3

Information Resolution of Complaints                                           4-13

Formal Investigation                                                          14-15

Integration of Complaint and DisciplinaryInvestigation                        16-19
Selection of Investigating Officer                                    20-24

Conduct of the Investigation                                          25-27

Timing of Investigations

          - Criminal Proceedings                                       28-29

          - Civil Proceedings                                          30

Reports                                                          31

Ill-Founded Complaints                                                32

Special Classes of Complaint

     (A) Withdrawn Complaints                                         33-35

     (B) Complaints where action may be
         waived by the Complaints Authority                            36-37

                                   Section 5                                      f
              Consideration of and Action on Investigation Report

Action by Chief Officer                                                    1-6

Report on Cases not arising out of Complaints                           7

The Role of the Director of Public Prosecutions                         8-11

The Relationship between Criminal and Disciplinary Proceedings         12

Where Criminal Proceedings have already taken place                    13-15

Where the Director has decided that Criminal Proceedings should
 not be brought                                                        16-18

Attitude of Complainant                                               19

Further Considerations where Criminal Proceedings have beenbrought    20-24
                                                                                  c
                                   Section 6
                  Functions of the Police Complaints Authority

(A) Supervision of Investigations

      - Mandatory and Discretionary Referral                               1-1*

      - Complaints received by the Police ComplaintsAuthority           5

      - Matters already the subject of Criminal or Disciplinary
         Proceedings                                                    6

      - Approval of Investigating Officer                               7

      - Conduct of Investigation                                       8-11
(B) Disciplinary Role

     - Summary of Procedures

     - Memorandum and Information to be submitted to the
        Complaints Authority

     - Requests by the Complaints Authority for additional
        information

     - Powers of the Complaints Authority in relation to the
        bringing of charges

      - Advance warning or Urgent "Jases

      - The Complaints Authority's Power to direct that a matter
         be referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions

      - Withdrawal of charges before the hearing

      - Confidentiality

      - Cases covering more than one matter of complaint

      - Power of the Complaints Authority to direct that charges
         be heard by a disciplinary tribunal

      - Hearing of related charges by a disciplinary Tribunal

      - Change of admission or denial before the hearing of charges

      - Special Reports by the Complaints Authority

      - Delegation of functions of the Complaints Authority

      - Accused officer ceasing to serve

                                                                /

                                    Section 7
                   Information and assistance for complainant
                           and officer complained of

Leaflet for members of the public

Notification of the outcome of a complaint

      - To the complainant

      - To the officer concerned

Copies of complaints

Confidentiality of Documents prepared in the Course of Investigation


                                    Section 8
                          )
Roles of HM Inspectors of Constabulary and Police Authorities in
 relation to complaints
Informal Resolution                                                  7

Disclosure and confidentiality                                       8

Information concerning the Police Complaints Authority               9


                                      Section 9
                    Disciplinary arrangements for officers up to
                         and Including Chief Superintendent

General                                                              1 -2

Discipline Code                                                      3

      - Discreditable conduct (discipline code, Paragraph 1)         4-7

      - Disobedience to orders (discipline code, Paragraph 3)        8

      - Falsehood or Prevarication (discipline code, Paragraph 5)    9

      - Racially discriminatory behaviour (discipline code,
         Paragraph 9)                                               10 -1 1

      - Loss or damage to Police Property (discipline code,
         Paragraph 12)                                              12

      - Unfitness for duty through drink (discipline code,
         Paragraph 13)                                              13

      - Alternative charges                                         14

      - Schedule 2 to the Police Regulations 1979                   15

Disciplinary Proceedings

      - Responsibility for arranging the hearing                    16-17

      - Disciplinary hearing                                        18-19

      - Hearing before a disciplinary tribunal                      20-21

Standard of Proof                                                   22

Evidence                                                            23-24

Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 197^                                25

Punishment                                                          26-28

      - Punishment in •remitted* cases                              29-30

Criminal Conduct: Timing of Disciplinary Hearing                    31

New Tenancies while awaiting Disciplinary Hearing                   32

Medical Treatment                                                   33-34
Information to the Police Complaints Authority as to the Outcome
 of Disciplinary Proceedings                                            35

Suspended Officers                                                      36-37

Probationers                                                       38

Records of Police Officers* Finger Prints                               39


                                     S ectio n 10
                                     V, •*
Complaints and discipline arrangements for Senior Officers
 (above the rank of Chief Superintendent)                                   1-3

Action on receipt of a Complaint                                        4-5

The Investigation of Complaints and other matters involving
 Senior Officers                                                        6-7

Conduct of Investigations                                               8-9

Investigating Officer’s Report                                          10

Action on receiving investigating officer’s report                      11-15

Rights of the accused officer                                           16-18

Responsibility for arranging the hearing                                19

Hearing by a Tribunal (Regulation 12)                                   20

Procedure at hearing                                                    21-22

Evidence                                                      23

Standard of Proof                                              /        24

Adjournments                                                       25

Conclusion of hearing                                                   26-27

Medical Treatment                                                       28-29

Suspension (Regulations 23 and 24)                                      30-32


                                     S ectio n 11

Disciplinary Appeals                                                    1

Notice of Appeal                                                        2-5

Notification to officer concerned of right toAppeal                     6

Withdrawal and amendment of noticeof Appeal ETC                         7-8
Respondent

      - Senior Officers                                                       9

      - Other officers                                                       10-12

Appeal Tribunals

      - Remission of Cases by Home Secretary                                 13-14

      - On Written or Oral Evidence                                          15-16

Documentation to be sent to Appeal Tribunal                                  17-18

Statements in lieu of Oral Evidence                                          19

Giving of Reasons                                                            20

Taxing of Appellants Costs                                                   21


Annex A -Notes     on Part 1X of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984

Annex B -Notes     on the   Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985

Annex C -Notes     on the   Police (Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985

Annex D -Notes     on the(Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals etc) Regulations 1985

Annex E -Notes on the Police (Anonymous, Repititious etc Complaints)
          Regulations 1985

Annex F - Timing of Investigations of a Complaint where there are pending
          Criminal Proceedings

Annex G   -     Disciplinary Procedure in cases where     CriminalProceedingsare to be
 ->
  *
              instituted against the Police Officer
                                                                      '
Annex H - Notes on disciplinary hearings before the Chief Officer and before a
          tribunal

Annex J - Form and notes for annual return of statistics on complaints,
          discipline and commendations

Annex K   -    Form and notes for statistical return      toPoliceAuthorities

Annex L   -     Leaflet •Complaints against the Police*
                                                                   Sections 1.1-1.5
                                      sEcno* 1
                                 STATUTORY PROVISIOi

GENERAL

1.1 Provision for the handling of complaints, for disciplinary matters and for
appeals is made in the following legislation:

    The   Police   and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (Part IX)
    The   Police   (Discipline) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Discipline) (Senior Officers) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Complaints) (Informal Resolution) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals Etc.) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Anonymous, Repetitious Etc. Complaints) Regulations 1985
    The   Police   (Appeals) Rules 1985

1.2 Explanatory notes on the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and on the
Regulations made under it are at Annexes A to E.

COMPLAIHTS

1.3 Where a chief officer receives a complaint against an officer of his force
who is of the rank of chief superintendent or below, he is required by section
85 of the 1984 Act to record it and to arrange for it either to be resolved
informally or, if it is not suitable for informal resolution, to be formally
investigated.   Where the complaint is against a senior officer, the relevant
police authority are required by section 86 of the Act       to record it and
investigate it, though if they are satisfied that the conduct complained of,
even if proved, would not justify a criminal or disciplinary charge they   may
deal with it according to their discretion.

1.4   The 1984 Act abolished the Police Complaints Board established under the
Police Act 1976 and set up in its place a new Police Complaints'Authority. The
Authority are required to supervise the investigation of the most serious cases
and may also, of their own volition, supervise the investigation of any other
complaint case where they consider that independent supervision of           the
investigation is desirable in the public interest. Subject to certain specified
exceptions, the Complaints Authority receive and consider the report of the
investigation into a complaint against a police officer up to the rank of chief
superintendent, whether or not they have supervised the investigation, together
with a memorandum indicating the outcome of the consideration given to the
report by the officer to whom a chief officer’s functions under Part IX of the
1984 Act have been delegated. Where that officer considers that no disciplinary
charges should be brought against the officer concerned in respect of the
conduct complained of, the Authority, if they disagree, are empowered to
recommend, and in the last resort direct, that such charges should be brought.
The case of an officer who is the subject of disciplinary charges and who denies
them will be heard by a disciplinary tribunal where the Authority have used
their powers to direct the bringing of charges or where the Authority consider
that a tribunal hearing would be desirable because of exceptional circumstances.
The tribunal will consist of the chief officer, as chairman, and two members of
the Authority not previously concerned with the case.

1.5 Section 95 of the 1984 Act requires police authorities and HM Inspectors of
Constabulary to keep themselves informed as to the manner in which complaints
from members of the public are dealt with.

                                           1
Sections 1.6-1.7

DISC1FLHB AID APPEALS

1.6 Disciplinary procedures are governed by the Discipline Regulations which
are made under section 33 of the Police Act 1964 and section 101 of the 1984
Act. A right of appeal to the Secretary of State against the decision of the
chief officer in disciplinary proceedings is provided by section 37 of the 1964
Act (as amended by section 103 (1) of the 1984 Act) and the procedures are
governed by Schedule 5 to the 1964 Act (as amended by section 103(2) of the 1984
Act) and by the Appeals fules.
                /' w• -? ‘^i/v>;
REFERENCE TO "CHIEF OFFUQgB"
1.7   For ease of reference, the text of the guidance refers throughout to the
chief officer.    These references should be read with due regard to the
provisions in the various Regulations for delegation of the chief officer's
functions in complaints and discipline matters to the deputy chief constable or
assistant chief constable or to similar provisions in relation to the
Metropolitan and City of London forces.




                                                                    /




                                                                                       (




                                                                                   %




                                                                                       C
                                       2
                                                                Sections 2.1-2.3

                                   SECTION 2

RESPONSIBILITY WITHIN FORCES FOR HANDLING OF COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINARY MATTERS

DELEGATION TO DEPUTY OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS OF CHIEF OFFICER
2.1   As permitted by section 100 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984,
Regulation 16 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 provides for a chief
constable at his discretion, to delegate his functions in relation to hearing -
disciplinary charges to a deputy chief jjo’nsfcable or equivalent. Matters which
may be delegated include jointly the conduct of the hearing, the determination
of guilt or innocence and, where appropriate and subject to certain limitations,
the imposition of a punishment.   Regulation 15 of the same Regulations provides
for the delegation of the duty of deciding whether a member of a police force
should *be charged with a disciplinary offence to a deputy or an assistant chief
constable.    It is clearly desirable that, in the great majority of cases in
which disciplinary charges are eventually brought, the officer presiding at the
hearing of the charges should have no knowledge of the case prior to the formal
hearing.    Accordingly, delegation of the conduct of the hearing to a deputy
chief constable may take place only where the function of deciding that a
disciplinary charge should be brought has been delegated to an assistant chief
constable.

2.2 Where a deputy chief constable has a delegated responsibility for hearing a
discipline charge and a finding of guilt is reached, the Regulations provide, as
required by section 101 of the 1984 Act, that the only punishments available are
a reduction in the rate of pay, a fine, a reprimand or a caution. Accordingly,
an assistant chief constable who considers that a discipline charge should be
brought against an officer must also consider whether, if the facts alleged in
the charge are found to be proved, the offence could merit a punishment which a
deputy chief constable does not have the power to impose, in which case the
assistant chief constable should direct the charge to be heard before the chief
constable.   In reaching his decision, which should normally be made personally
by the assistant chief constable, (but see also paragraph 2.4 below), he will
wish to have regard to the nature and circumstances of the offence as revealed
in the investigating officer's report and to the level of punishments awarded
within his force in the past for similar conduct.     If during the course of a
hearing before a deputy chief constable, evidence is disclosed which would, in
the opinion of the officer conducting the hearing, suggest that a penalty which
it is not within his power to impose might be called for, he should immediately
bring the proceedings to a halt and refer the case to a hearing before the chief
officer (Regulation 14). The fact that an assistant chief constable or a deputy
chief constable might decide that a charge should be heard before the chief
constable in no way fetters the latter's consideration of the appropriate
punishment should the charge be proved.    In such circumstances, it remains for
the chief constable alone to decide the appropriate form of punishment after
considering the full circumstances of the offence, mitigating factors and the
officer's record of police service.

2.3   Where an officer has been dealt with by a deputy chief constable for an
offence against discipline, the officer may appeal to the chief constable
against the finding and punishment imposed, or punishment only, and on such an
appeal, the chief constable may not impose a punishment greater than that
imposed by the deputy chief constable (Regulation 26).




                                       3
    S M tio os 2 .4 -2 .6
    references where officer o o n d d c t u g h e a r u g   HAS OOWLEDGS OF CASE
                                                                                       —


    2.4 It is recognised that in certain circumstances the chief constable will of
    necessity have at least some knowledge of a case while it is still under
    consideration.   For example, where the matters raised are prlma facie serioua
    and would amount to a substantial criticism of the force or where officers of
    higher rank are involved, the chief constable should keep himself informed of
    the progress of the investigation. There may also be other cases where a deputy
    or assistant chief constable may wish to consider seeking the views of his chief
    constable, for example, where he is considering calling for an investigating
    officer from another force (paragraph 4.21), or if he is in disagreement with
    the Complaints Authority about the bringing of disciplinary charges (paragraph
    6.30), the reference of new material to the Director (paragraph 6.32) or the
    holding of a tribunal (paragraphs 6.37 to 6.39).

    2.5   Where a chief constable has been involved in a case in any of these
    circumstances and a disciplinary hearing is thereafter to be held, he will no
    doubt wish to consider availing himself of the provisions of Regulation 14(7) of
    the Discipline Regulations which enable him (where he is not himself a material
    witness) to refer the case to another chief constable for hearing, for decision
    on finding and for recommendation as to the punishment where the accused officer   ^
    is found guilty.   (This Regulation could also be used to provide for a single
    hearing when officers from more than one force, e.g. members of a crime squad,
    are Jointly charged). Regulation 14(7) is to be distinguished from Regulation
    14(2) which provides that a case in which a chief constable is interested
    otherwise than in his capacity as chief constable, or in whicji he is a material
                                                                    t
    witness, must be referred to another chief constable who will be in every sense
    the disciplinary authority for that case.

    2.6    In the same way, circumstances might arise in which a deputy chief
    constable who would normally be expected to hear a discipline charge against an
    officer where delegation of such matters has taken place, has himself had some
    previous involvement with the case.     Where his happens the charge should be
    heard by the chief constable and if he is in the same position as the deputy
    chief constable, the chief constable should remit it to another chief constable
    in the normal way under Regulation 14(2).

^             2.5A          Regulation 14(2)(a) of the Discipline Regulations
                            provides for a chief officer, where he is interested in
                            the case otherwise than in his capacity as chief officer,  {
                            to remit a case to another chief officer for hearing.   In "
                            such a case, the officer to whom the case is remitted
                            will impose punishment in the event of a finding of
                            guilt. The Regulations do not define the circumstances
                            that would require remission under this provision. They
                            would, however, typically arise where the chief officer
                            has a connection with the accused officer or with someone
                            connected with the case which goes so far beyond the
                            purely professional that suspicion of bias might arise.
                            A family or close, out of office, social relationship are
                            examples of such a connection




                                                      4
                                                                     Sections 3.1-3-4

                                     section   3

                            ACTIO* 01 RECEIVING COMPLAINT

DEPIMTTION OF A COMPLAINT

3.1 Fof the purposes of the procedures set out in Part IX of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984, section 84(4) of the Act defines 'complaint' as any
complaint made about the conduct of a police officer which is submitted either
by a member of the public or on behalf of the member of the public and with hla
written consent. It is therefore not necessary for the complainant to register
the complaint personally with the force concerned.      It may be referred to the
force by a third party including, for example, a Citizens Advice Bureau or a
Member of Parliament or by any other individual or organisation. No form of
consent is prescribed and any words which can be reasonably taken asindicating
the complainant's willingness -jfpr .his complaint to be passed on should be taken
as sufficient for the purpose. <discretion should be exercised before asking a
third party for evidence of the original complainant's written consent to his
passing on a complaint.       In particular, where a solicitor indicates in
forwarding a complaint that he is doing so on instructions from a client, the
complaint should be treated without challenge as having been made by the clieat
direct to the chief officer.      Section 84(5) of the Act states that, for the
purposes of part IX of the Act, the definition of a complaint does not extend to
complaints relating to the direction or control of a police force by its chief
officer or the person performing his functions. Moreover, by virtue of section
84(6) none of the procedures set out in or under Part IX apply to any conduct
which forms the whole or a part of a complaint where that conduct has already
been the subject of criminal or disciplinary proceedings.

3.2   Where the Complaints Authority express a view on whether a particular
matter which comes to their attention in the report of an investigation should
or should not be treated as a complaint as defined by section 84 of the 1984
Act, chief officers will, no doubt, have regard to this.       Subject to any
determination by the courts, the decision remains, however, one for the chief
officer concerned.
                                                                 /

DMBDIATE ACTION

3.3   The following immediate steps are required to be taken upon receipt of a
complaint:

          (a) preservation of evidence - see paragraph 3.4}

          (b)determination of the appropriate authority - see paragraph 3 «5 *

          (e)recording of the complaint - see paragraph 3.7»

          (d)determination whether the complaint is required to be referred to
              the Police Complaints Authority - see paragraphs 6 .1-6.6.

PRESERVATION OF EVIDENCE
   3.4      Section 84(1) of the 1984 Act places on chief officers
             the duty to take whatever preliminary steps are necessary
             to obtain or preserve evidence.    This duty must be
             carried out whether or not the complaint appears prima
             facie one of which the investigation should eventually be
             supervised by the Police Complaints Authority and whether
             or not it appears that the chief officer will be the
             appropriate authority in respect of the complaint.    The
            duty to preserve evidence should be broadly defined to
             .include for example, any immediate searches or
            observations which may be necessary. Where there might
            be a long delay, for example in a case which is sub
            judice, consideration should be given to the need to
            preserve relevant records which might otherwise be
            destroyed as a matter of force routine.     (The duty to
            obtain or preserve evidence exists whether or not the
            complaint is considered sub judice within the guidelines
            set out in Annex F.) Where the allegation is one of
            assault by a police officer it is advisable to make
            immediate arrangements to have the victim and the officer
            medically examined, with their consent.    The examination
            should, whenever possible, be carried out by a police
            surgeon or at a hospital if medical attention is required
            urgently.    In addition, a note should be made of the
            general condition of the victim and the officer and this
            should include references to any visible signs of injury
            or discomfort.    Photographs of both parties can also be
            useful.
Sections 3-5-3-7
duty should\be broadly defined tTvinclude, for example, any^immediate searches
or observation which may be n e c e s W y .   In particular, wherfev^the complainant
alleges that h ^ has been the v i c t i m s ^ an assault by the p o H ^ e officer,
immediate arrang^ents should be made r<*r the complainant          and tro^sOfficer
<*tocerned to be medically examined with thefr^consent.     (The duty to obtajjior
preserve evidence exists whether or not the cofcpilaint is considered sub jufrteg
within the guidelines set out in Annex F).

DETERMINATION OP THE "APPROPRIATE ADTHORITT"
                   :   S'.   ;   =   -b-->ok5       1,                '

L3«5    The Act and the peievant Regulations place certain duties on the
 "appropriate authority" for^an officer against whom a complaint is made. These
 duties are discussed fully below. After taking any action necessary to preserve
 evidence, the chief officer who has received a complaint       should determine
 whether he is the appropriate authority in relation to the officer concerned.
 The determination of the appropriate authority is made by reference to the rank
 of the officer against whom the complaint has been made. Except in the case of
 officers of the Metropolitan Police, where the Commissioner of Police of the
 Metropolis is invariably the appropriate authority, if he is above the rank of
 chief superintendent the appropriate authority will be the police authority for
 the officer's parent force. In all other cases, the appropriate authority will
 be the chief officer of the parent force.

 COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BT POLICE COKPLAIHTS AUTHORITY
3.6   Where the Complaints Authority receive a complaint which has not been
submitted to the appropriate authority, they are required by Regulation 3(1) of
the Police (Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985 to transmit it to that
authority, unless the complainant does not wish it to be transmitted. Where a
complainant has indicated that he does not wish his complaint to be transmitted
to the appropriate authority, the Complaints Authority will explain to him that
this would prevent it from being investigated, and that the Authority would
consequently be unable to exercise their power of supervision.         It will
nevertheless be open to the Authority, where they are satisfied that the public
interest so requires, to transmit the complaint to the appropriate authority
under Regulation 3(2) even if the complainant does not wish ,it to be
transmitted. Where the appropriate authority receives a complaint by way.of the
Complaints Authority, it should be treated as if it had been received by the
appropriate authority direct from the complainant.

 THE RECORDING OF COMPLAINTS
 3 .7  The appropriate authority in relation to the complaint should record the
 complaint as soon as possible after it is received. An entry should be made in
 a general register of complaints, which should be kept under the following
 headings:

           i.   date, time and place complaint was received, and by whom;

          ii.   name and address of.complainant;

         iii.   date, time, place and nature of incident or conduct complained of;

          iv.   particulars of officer complained of;

           v.   name of investigating officer or appointed officer in a case
                disposed of by informal resolution;



                                                6
                                                                   Sections 3-8-3.9

        vi.     date of informal resolution and details of outcome;

        vii.    date of any referrals to the Complaints Authority under section 87
                of the 1981* Act and whether referred under subsection 1(a)(1) or
                 1(a)(ii) or 1(b) or 2;

       viii.     date of any reference to the Complaints Authority under Regulation
                 3 of the Police (Anonymous, Repetitious Etc. Complaints)
                 Regulations 1985 > specifying whether the complaint was anonymous,
                 repetitious or incapable of investigation;

         ix.    whether -Investigation supervised by Complaints Authority under
                section 89 of the 1984 Act and, If so, whether supervision was
                under subsection 1 or 2;

                x.  date on which investigating officer's report submitted to the
                 chief officer/police authority/Complaints Authority;

               xi.   (for officers other than senior officers) date on which chief
                  officer's memorandum sent to the Complaints Authority under the
                  provisions of section 90 of the 1984 Act;

          xii.      result of disposal of complaint (where formallyinvestigated),
                 including particulars of any punishment awarded;

         xiii.      means by which complainant has been told of result. (In most
                 cases this will be done by the Complaints Authority -       see
                 paragraph 7.3).

Where information comes to light which indicates that the nature of a complaint
is different from that recorded in the register (eg if the injury suffered by
the complainant turns out to be more or less serious than was first thought) an
appropriate addition should be made to the register as soon as possible. Chief
officers will probably find it most convenient to keep the record centrally, but
they will no doubt wish to consider how far it will be useful to keep
corresponding records on a divisional basis.

3 .8 Section 85 of the 1984 Act provides for complaints against officers other
than senior officers to be dealt with by means of informal resolution, where
this is appropriate.   In fulfilling their duty under section 95 of the Act to
keep themselves informed as to the manner in which complaints are dealt with
police authorities and the Inspectorate of Constabulary will be expected to pay
particular attention to the informal resolution procedures.     It will not be
their function to interfere in cases already being dealt with or completed.
They should, however, be able to form a view of the appropriateness of informal
resolution for the complaint in question and of the means by which it was
conducted.   It is important, therefore, that cases dealt with under those
procedures should be easily found in the register and that the register should
be complete enough to enable a person inspecting it to form a view on such
matters.

3 .9 It is not always immediately clear from initial contact by a member of the
public with the police whether the matter of concern amounts to a complaint for
the purposes of Part IX of the 1984       Act (see paragraph 3.1)«     In these
circumstances it may be appropriate forhim to be seen by a supervisory officer
for purposes of clarification.     Where as a result it is apparent that a
complaint within the meaning of section 84 was intended but that the complainant
wishes to withdraw it or does not want it to be pursued the complaint should
Sections 3-10-3-13
still be recorded and be shown as having been withdrawn or not proceeded with.
Paragraph *1.3*1 draws attention to the need for a signed written statement by a
complainant before a complaint can be regarded as withdrawn.

3.10 Regulation 29 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations requires a record to
be kept at force headquarters of every formal disciplinary charge against an
officer and the result.    This record should include, but need not distinguish
between, both the charges brought as a result of a complaint from a member of
the public and charges arising from purely internal force procedures.

3.11 The Secretary of Stat§ is aware that some chief officers find it useful to
keep divisional disciplinesbQQks- This is a long established practice which has?;
some advantage in that it enables minor matters to be disposed of without formal?
disciplinary hearings and that comparative information is provided to the chief*
officer and to Her Majesty's Inspectors about the operation of different
divisions in a particular force.     If a divisional discipline book is kept,
however, the Secretary of State considers that an officer about whom an entry is
made should be informed at the time of what that entry will be. Any such book
should be distinguished from (a) the complaints register containing the records
required to be kept under section 85 of the 198M Act and (b) the chief officer's
discipline book required to be kept at force headquarters under Regulation 29 of
the Discipline Regulations.

ITEMISATIOH OF MATTERS OF COMPLAIMT

3.12   It is desirable that, so far as possible, complaintsshould be recorded   on
a common basis in all forces for two main reasons.

     a.   Significance is attached in Parliament and elsewhere to the published
          figures on complaints. It is obviously desirable to ensure that these
          figures, particularly those relating to substantiated complaints, are
          accurately compiled.

     b.   The powers of the Complaints Authority in relation to the bringing of
          disciplinary charges, when a complaints case is referred to them,
          operate in respect of "the conduct which was      the subject of the
          investigation".   Where disciplinary charges have not been brought in
          respect of any particular matter (whether this represents /the whole or
          only part of a complaint), the Complaints Authority may recommend that
          charges should be brought.    It is thus desirable to distinguish, to
          the extent possible, the individual matters of complaint referred to
          the Complaints Authority.

3.13 Whether a complaint is substantiated or unsubstantiated does not depend on
proceedings being taken against an officer or the outcome of any such
proceedings, but on the extent to which evidence has been forthcoming to support
the complainant's allegation. There will be circumstances in which a complaint
is shown to have been justified but disciplinary proceedings are not possible
(because, for example, the conduct complained of cannot be attributed to a
particular officer or officers, or the officer concerned has left the force) or
are inappropriate (because, for example, the conduct complained of is not
sufficiently serious to warrant formal proceedings, or the officer's youth or
inexperience or other extenuating circumstances makes advice a more suitable
course).   In such cases the complaint should be recorded as substantiated and
shown within that category in statistical returns as having been dealt with
other than by criminal or disciplinary proceedings.




                                       8
SECTION 3 14-3.17
3 14   In deciding how many matters of complaint should be recorded in cases
of doubt, and in considering what matters have been complained of in any
particular situation, it is suggested that chief officers should have regard
to the following principles:

     a.   Where a complainant makes, on one occasion or in one letter, sev^ al
           complaints of different kinds (for example that an officer assaulted
          him and was at the same time uncivil) this should be recorded as two
          ■atters of complaint.         The main  object  of distinguishing     and
           separately recording different matters in this way is to enable the
           figures   for  substantiated   and unsubstantiated    complaints  to be
           properly given.    If it were established that a police officer was
           uncivil but did not assault the complainant,       this would make one
           substantiated and one unsubstantiated comjrJaint:      if the matters o
           complaint were not recorded separately, there would be no satisfactory
           way of arriving at the number of substantiated complaints.

     b.   Where a person complains of a series of like actions whether or not
          involving more than one officer, in the course of one contlnulnf
          incident (for example, assault on arrest and again in the car on the
          way to the station) this should be recorded as a single complaint,
          which will be recorded as substantiated if investigation establishes
          that any one of the alleged actions in fact took place.

     c.   Where a group of people make similar complaints of the treatment they
          have received, on a single occasion,      (for example, where a nu™J*
          of persons are arrested in a single operation and several of them
          subsequently complain separately that they were assaulted), each
          person's complaint should be recorded and counted separately.

     d    Where several complaints are made by different people           about one
          S e n t    (for . x i p l e ,  in .ddition to the vleti* * « » • • • • • ■•»
           independently make      complaints regarding an assault   by • P®11®*
          officer) this should be recorded and counted as          one matter of
           complaint, since only one action is complained about.

     e. Where a complaint is couched in general terms, and         the subsequent
         investigation reveals a number of breaches of discipline, all * h
         breaches which arose directly from the incident which gave rlse
         the complaint, and which affected the complainant     should_ be
         as separate items of complaint and so recorded and deait
         regardless of whether they have been      identified by the complainant
         in the    context  of  his   complaint,  unless   the  complainant( has
         specifically expressedwishes to the     contrary.   Any other anci“ * ^
         ■atters and breaches of discipline arising from theJnc 1<J*"t “**
         did not affect thecomplainant and are discovered during the course
         of the investigation need not be recorded.

 i       linne of this implies that a number of matters complained of cannot
 be dealt with together so far as investigation, consideration of disciplinary
 £   c r i l a a c t i o n « d reference to the Director of Public Prosecutions or
 Z  the L p l a i n t s Authority are concerned, but if
 action relate to a number of separate matters complained of. it is desirable
 that the documents sent to the Complaints Authority should make this clear.
 For exanple, the Complaints Authority will need to know (see section 90 of
 the 1 9 $ Act) whether or not disciplinary charges have been preferred in
 respect of each of the matters complained of.          The guidance in Paragraph
 5!7 provides        that  the   outcome  of each complaint   should be recorded
 separately.

 STATISTICAL RETURNS

 For HM Chief Inspector s Report                      annual   statistical   return   of

                                                rtrj* Thfrrrto Z                      £


 public against members of the force concerns
S ectio n s 3-18-3-21

dealt with, including reference to and action by the Police Complaints
Authority, should be placed before the police authority at their meetings. A
suggested form, with notes, is at Annex K (For other information to be supplied
to the police authority see also paragraphs 8.3-8.5).

OFFICERS NOT 01 DUTY

3.18    The nere fact that the investigation of an incident, eg a traffic
accident, reported by a member of the public shows that the other person
involved is a police officer will not normally be a sufficient reason to Justify
the matter being recorded .,as a complaint against a member of a police force.
Whether such a matter should- be so recorded will be very much a matter of
judgement in the light of the circumstances of the particular case, the more
relevant considerations being what may appear to be the purpose of the member of
the public in reporting the incident and the nature and substance of his report.
Usually such a report relating to off duty conduct will need to be recorded as
'against a member of a police force' only if the fact of being a police officer
is essential to the burden of the complaint.

3-19   There will be other cases which do not involve any allegation of a
criminal offence nor arise out of an officer's duty, eg, complaints arising from
domestic quarrels, matrimonial difficulties, disputes between landlord and
tenant and other civil disputes, but which may fall within the provisions of
part IX of the 1984 Act. The procedure set out in the Discipline Regulations,
however, applies only to complaints 'from which it appears that a member of a
police force may have committed an offence*; and it should not normally be found
necessary to invoke this procedure to deal with complaints arising out of civil
disputes.

SPECIAL CONSTABLES AND POLICE CADETS

3.20 Complaints against special constables and cadets do not come within part
IX of the Police Act 1984 since they are not members of a police force.
However, chief officers may well consider it appropriate to investigate
complaints against special constables as if they were section 84 complaints. In
a case where a complaint containing allegations against a regular and a special
constable jointly, or against a police officer and a cadet Jointly, has to be
referred to them, it is recommended that the Complaints Authority should be sent
the whole of the investigation report even though that part of it'dealing with
the conduct of the special constable or cadet is not their direct concern.

COMPLAINTS BY CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES

3.21 Whether a complaint by a civilian employee should be treated as a section
84 complaint will depend largely upon its nature and circumstances. There may
be occasions on which the status of a civilian employee is irrelevant to the
subject matter of the complaint and this will apply particularly where the
complaint arises from an alleged incident which occurred outside work.
Conversely, an allegation arising from everyday working relationships between
civilian employees and police officers should normally be treated as an internal
matter (and frequently one for resolution by management and industrial relations
techniques) since the civilian is not then in the same position as a member of
the public but is one employee among others.
      3.22      It is emphasised that theinvestigation   of any matters
                 drawn to the attention of the chief officer is not
                 precluded by the mere fact that they do not fall to be
                 recorded as complaints made under section 85 of the Act.
                 The Discipline Regulations (Regulation 6) set out
                 arrangements for inquiry into any allegation or report,
                 whatever the source, where such inquiry seems
                 appropriate. Furthermore, Section 88 of the 1-984 Act
                 permits the reference of such matters to the Police
                 Complaints Authority at the discretion of the chief
                 officer for them to consider supervising the ;
                 investigation (see also para 6.1).
                                                                      Sections H.1-4.H

                                     SBCTIOR »

                    INFORMAL RESOLUTION AMD FORMAL INVESTIGATION

U 1   This section sets out the standard procedure to be followed where an
officer of the rank of chief superintendent or below is the subject of a
complaint, report or allegation requiring investigation. For the procedure in
respect of senior officers see section 10 .

k'p   Reeuliation 6 .of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 provides that in
the case If any complaint, report or allegation jfrom which it appears that a
member of^ia police force may have committed an offence against discipline, an
officer ihall be appointed to investigate the matter.                  Even wh®£®
investigation itself has to be delayed, the appointment of that officer,
hereafter *■;called the 'investigating o f f i c e r s h o u l d be made as soon as
Dracticabte (in some cases subject to the approval of the Complaints Authority -
see paragraph M. 15 ) so that the accused officer may be afforded the safeguards
laid down in the Discipline Regulations. As a preliminary s<tep, ^wcver, it has
to be borne in       mind that the less serious complaints might be suitable for
informal resolution. Section 85 of the Act of 198M provides that the first step
to be taken after the recording of a complaint is to consider whether informal
resolution might be appropriate, and that chief officers may appoint an officer
 (of not less than chief inspector rank) to assist them in determining that
mipstion      Chief officers may therefore care to consider the appointment of an
officer or officers       at that rank or above, whose task it will be, once
complaints have      been recorded, to address the i s s u e of informal resolution.
Complaints are only suitable for informal resolution if the conduct complained
of    even ifproved, would not justify a criminal or disciplinary charge, and if
 the complainant is content for the case to be handled in this way.             Ifthe
officer deputed to consider the case thinks that informal resolution
 nossibilitv. he     will therefore have  to see the complainant to establish the
 latter's views.      When the decision is taken that informal resolution is
 appropriate, the case might be referred to another officer to undertake it (ie
 to act as the "appointed officer" as defined in the Regulations), or the
 initially deputed to handle the question might himself act as appointed officer
 and seek an informal resolution.     The latter course may in many ceases prove the
 simpler and more straightforward way to proceed.          Section 85 provides that an
 officer who has started to act as appointed officer may not subsequently
 undertake the formal investigation of the case if that should become necessary;
 but there is nothing to prevent an officer who has been involved in the
 preliminary stages short of becoming the appointed officer from acting
 investigating officer latter.

 11.3  a complaint may not need      to be dealt with under either of the above-
 mentioned procedures where:

        (a)   it   is  clearly   directed  at   the  administrative     procedures   or
              instructions of the force (see paragraph 3*D> or

        (b)   it appears to be anonymous or repetitive (see paragraphs 4.36 - 4.37)*

 Preliminary inquiries may be of assistance in determining whether a complaint
 falls into any of these categories.

 IKFORMAL RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS
 4 .4 Informal resolution is intended to provide a flexible and simple procedure
 for dealing with complaints of a minor nature which would otherwise attract the

                                           11
  Sections 4.5-4.7

  full length and formality of the investigation process.         The procedure is
  appropriate where it is clear from the outset that any alleged criminal
  behaviour or breach of the discipline code is one which if proved to have
  occurred would probably be dealt with not by criminal or formal discipline
  charges but by an informal warning or by advice;           or where preliminary
  investigation reveals that the conduct was both lawful and reasonable. Examples
  of complaints of criminal behaviour to which the informal resolution procedures
  might be considered appropriate are those alleging trivial offences involving
  the use of motor vehicles and trivial non-traffic cases, such as the use of
  obscene language or the disciplinary offence of incivility, or an assault in the
  nature of a mere push without aggravating features such as an endeavour to
  obtain an admission.- In su&TMsfes if a civilian in similar circumstattcei-wokld
  not be proceeded against dr» fchei appropriate action would be wordi-£of advice
  administered at the time then informal resolution would generally be' aicceptable.
  Because flexibility is desirable in the informal resolution procedures, it would
  be inappropriate to set out detailed procedures either in this guidance or in
  regulations made by Statutory Instrument.   The following paragraphs outline the
  relevant statutory provisions and requirements.

  4.5     Regulation 3(3) of the Police       (Complaints)  (Informal Resolution)
  Regulations provides that, where the Complaints Authority are required, or
  determine, to supervise the investigation of a complaint, that complaint should
  not be dealt with by way of informal resolution.      Where, whilst attempts at
  informal resolution are being made, the Complaints Authority decide to supervise
  the investigation of the complaint, the informal resolution procedure should be
  discontinued forthwith and the procedure set out in paragraphs 4.14 - 4.32 below
  should be followed.

   4.6     Regulation 4(1) of the Police       (Complaints)   (Informal Resolution)
   Regulations requires that, as soon as practicable after the decision to attempt
   to resolve a complaint informally, the appointed officer should seek the views
   of both the complainant and the officer against whom the complaint has been
  made. He may at the same time or thereafter take any steps which appear to him
   to be appropriate to resolve the complaint.        It should be noted that the
  appointed officer’s task is to achieve a position in which the complainant is
  satisfied that his complaint has been dealt with in an appropriate manner. This
  will not necessarily require an apology on behalf of either the force or the
  officer concerned.    In some instances it will be sufficient to explain the law
/ or the procedures under which the officer was operating at the time of the
  incident which gave rise to the complaint.     In yet others it will be clear to
  the appointed officer that there is an irreconcilable difference in the
  complainant's and the officer's description of the incident which gave rise to
  the complaint.    In such a case it may be sufficient to explain the position to
  the complainant and invite him to accept that nothing further can be done. The
  only limit placed on the appointed officer's freedom to approach the resolution
 of the complaint in the most appropriate way is found in Regulation 4(2). This
 provides that the appointed officer shall not render any apology on behalf of
 the officer concerned unless that officer has admitted the conduct complained
 of.

4.7   Steps should be taken to ensure that an officer volunteering an oral or
written statement to the appointed officer is aware of the effect of the
provisions of sections 104(3) and (4) of the 1984 Act. Section 104(3) provides
that any statement made for the purpose of informal resolution will not be
admissible in subsequent criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings.    Section
104(4), however, exempts from the effect of section 104(3) any material which
consists of or includes an admission relating to a matter which does not fall to
be resolved informally. It thus follows that if an officer or a complainant


                                        12
                                                                           Sections 4.8-4.10

■           makes any statement in the course of an attempt to resolve a complaint
             informally then, whether or not the attempt is successful, provided the
a           statement contains only material concerned with matters which may be resolved
■           informally, no use may subsequently be made of that statement by either party in
             orlminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings.       If the attempt at informal
_          resolution fails and a formal investigation takes place, fresh statements must
I          be taken specifically for the purpose of the formal investigation if they may
■          eventually be required for criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings.       If,
             however, in the course of an attempt to resolve a complaint informally a
I           statement is made which consists of an admission relating to any matter which
I           does not fall to be resolved informally (for example because it falls within the
             provisions of Regulation 3(3) of the Police (Complaints) (Informal ResolutiqifiT
m           Regulations) or merely includes such an admission, then that statement i1£
I           admissible in subsequent proceedings.

_           4.8       Regulation 4(1) of the Police (Complaints) (Informal Resolution)
■           Regulations contains an important provision which allows a supervisory officer
*           of whatever rank to deal speedily with a complaint if it appears to him that it
              can be resolved informally at the time it is made.   The Regulation will, for
I           example, permit the supervisory officer to receive a complaint and, if the
■           officer concerned is present and willing to explain his understanding of the
 j          incident which has given rise to the complaint, to deal with it at the time if
*^ulobon the complainant accepts the explanation or, if appropriate, the apology as a
■C3^ of" "tv^ satisfactory outcome.   (Where this is done, the general guidance set out in
zA,ce.      paragraph 4.9 below should be borne in mind by the supervisory officer.) In a
-           \ case handled in this way, the supervisory officer should report the matter to
                   0fficer to whom the chief officer has delegated his functions under
mesvzrcxi) ^ Regulation H . If that officer is satisfied with the handling of the complaint,
 o^oicrttoo he may make a record in the complaints register and write to the complainant
I           recording briefly his understanding of the way in which the complaint was
I           handled and indicating his intention of recording it as having been informally
              resolved. It is recommended that criteria should be established in each force
■           as to the extent to which Junior officers may deal with complaints in this
|           manner.

_          4.9    Where it appears to the appointed officer that the resolution of a
I          complaint is likely to be assisted by a meeting between the complainant and the
m          officer concerned - or between those persons together with any other person
            considered appropriate - arrangements may be made. The accused officer shall,
I          however, not be obliged to attend such a meeting.      A meeting may provide an
■          opportunity for the complainant and the accused officer to exchange points of
            view and for any misunderstandings to be cleared up. It will allow the accused
■          officer, where he admits the conduct complained of, to apologise for it, or give
|          an explanation of it, to the complainant in person if he wishes to do so. If
            the officer concerned considers that his conduct was reasonable in all the
_          circumstances, a meeting will allow him to state his case to the complainant.
I          The appointed officer should do his best to ensure that a meeting is conducted
            in a civil and orderly manner. The parties concerned may find it reassuring to
            have a lay person or a 'friend' present at the meeting as an independent
■          presence and this should not be discouraged. Whilst there can be no objection
■          to the complainant's being accompanied by a solicitor, the officer concerned
            should normally be advised of this if it is known in advance of the meeting. In
■          such a case care should be taken that the meeting does not become over-
|          formalised in a way which might inhibit the resolution of the complaint.

«          4.10  If in the course of the informal resolution procedure (whether by reason
I          of a fresh allegation by the complainant, an admission by the officer concerned,
    i      or some other means) evidence comes to light of a more serious complaint which


                                                  13
  Sections 4.11-4.16

 might require a formal investigation, the procedures should be        terminated
 forthwith and the natter reported to the chief officer immediately.

  4.11   Where it appears to the chief officer, after attempts have been Bade to
  resolve a complaint informally, that informal resolution is lapossible, or that
  the coaplaint is for any other reason not suitable for informal resolution, he
  ■ust arrange for it to be formally investigated.

 4.12   Under Regulation 5 of the Police (Complaints) (Informal Resolutions)
 Regulations a complainant is entitled to obtain a copy of the record relating to
 the complaint if he applies for one within 3 months of the date on which either
 it was resolved or it ceased for any other reason to be dealt with by way of
 informal resolution.   The complainant should be informed of that right at the.
 conclusion of the Informal resolution procedure.     It is recommended that the
 officer concerned in the complaint should, if he wishes, be given a copy of any
 record handed to the complainant under the Regulation.

 4.13 No entry relating; to the attempted or successful informal resolution of a
 complaint should be made in the personal record of the officer concerned.

 FORMAL IMVKSTIGATK*

 4.14   Where the chief officer has decided that a complaint - or, indeed, any
 matter which indicates that a police officer may have committed a criminal or
 disciplinary offence - should be formally investigated, he should first consider
 whether it is necessary or desirable for reference to be made to the Police
 Complaints Authority for supervision of the investigation.     The criteria for
 referral and the guidelines to be observed in cases supervised by the Authority
 are set out in paragraphs 6.1 - 6.11.

 4.15   If the Complaints Authority supervise the investigation of a complaint,
 they may choose to exercise their right to approve the appointment of the
 investigating officer.   Therefore, in referring a ease to the Authority, the
 chief officer should indicate the name of the officer whom he proposes to
 appoint, giving the latter's rank and the force in which he serves. 'Where this
 information Is not immediately available, the Authority should be told that it
 will follow as soon as possible.   If the appointment has already been made (eg
 because of the need to begin the Investigation urgently) and the Complaints
 Authority are not satisfied with that appointment, they may ask the chief
 officer to propose the appointment of another officer.     The chief officer is
 obliged to comply with such a request and he should not formally make the new
 appointment until the Complaints Authority have approved it.

, DfTBGRATIO# Of OOHPLAHT AID DISCIPLHARI HVESTIGATIOB
      4.16      Since almost any well founded complaint which is the
                subject of formal investigation could lead to
                disciplinary proceedings, it is desirable that/the
                officer concerned should have an early opportunity of
                commenting on it. The Disciplinary Regulations,
                therefore, lay down procedures which will safeguard the
                officer concerned but which will not inhibit him should
                he so desire from making a candid statement which may
                establish that the complaint is unfounded or exaggerated.
                The courts have read Regulation 7 as conferring an
                important safeguard in giving an officer an opportunity
                to collect evidence and prepare his defence at as early a
                stage as possible, not merely to make a candid statement
                to refute the complaint or demonstrate that it was
                exaggerated. Where a complaint received and recorded
                under Section 85 is formally investigated under
                Regulation 6, the officer concerned should, subject to
                what is said below, as soon as practicable be served with
                a formal notice which complies with Regulation 7 telling
                him in writing of its nature and inviting him to make a
                statement. The statement will be voluntary and will be
                admissible in evidence should there be any disciplinary
                proceedings arising from the complaint. It must be made
                clear to the officer when he is invited to make the^
                statement that he is not obliged to do so and that it may
                be used in any disciplinary proceedings which arise from
                the investigation of the complaint (for statements made
                in the course of the informal resolution procedure - see
                paragraph 4.7) . An officer has the right to consult a
                ’’friend" at all stages of the investigation. He should
                be told of that right at the time a notice under
                Regulation 7 informs him of the complaint that has been
                made against him. The right to be informed of the nature
                of the complaint is subject only to the need to avoid
                prejudicing the investigation itself.
                The notice under Regulation 7 should be served on the
                officer as soon as practicable subject only to the
                                                                                 SECTION 4.16-4
proviso *et out in the Regulation that service of the n o tic e ahould not                          }
prejudice       the Inveatigatlng O ffic e r '* enquiry or any other in vestiga tion of
the a a tte r .   It i* recognised  that the primary r e s p o n s i b il it y for the tialng
of the aerviee of the n otice under Regulation 7 ia a « a t t e r for the
Investigating Officer and i t ia the Investigating Officer who «ay be asked to
account as may be appropriate to the Crown Prosecution Service (Headquarters),
the criminal courts or a d isc ip lin a r y authority for the timing of the aervice                 ^
of the notic e.      There may be occasions where i t i s not practic able to serve                 i
the Regulation 7 Notice at the s ta r t of the investigation or where aervice might                 *
prejudice the in vestiga tion .    In these circumstances the Secretary of State                    |
considers that it would be advisable for each force to have c lea r arrangementa                    \
under which service in such circumstances is subject to scrutiny and review                         ?
in order to avoid undue delay.                                                                      ^
* 16A     It i s not e s s e n t ia l to c o l l e c t and consider a l l the evidence before       £
service of the Regulation 7 Notice, and i t w ill sometimes be .a nticipa ted at                    *;
the time of service .that the description of the complaint, a lle g a t io n or report               ;
might la te r be made more s p e c i f i c or may otherwise change ( f o r example, because
the complainant or other material witness has yet to be interviewed).                 In such       .j
a case there is no objection to the subsequent service of a further or amended                      .*
Regulation7 Notice when the necessary information i s to hand.                                      ^

*.16B    Although interpretation of the Regulation i s a matter for the courts,
i t is the view of the Secretary of State that the notice i s required to be
served personally by the In vestigatin g o f f i c e r , by a membero f the Investigating
Team, or by another designated o f f i c e r of appropriate rank on his behalf.

*.17      Nothing in the Regulations or in the preceding paragraph Is intended
to change      the practice whereby i f an o f f ic e r is the subject o f information
coming to      attention by way of complaint or otherwise which suggests that he
may have committed a criminal offence, a normal criminal in v e stig a tion       w ill
take place.      In such cases, the o f f i c e r need not immediately be informed of
the allegations i f t h is might impede investigation of the alleged criminal                       j
offertce. Where in the course of the investigation the o f f i c e r         has been
cautioned in the customary manner (under the code of practice for the Detention,
Treatment and Questioning of Persons by Police O fficers) any statement made
under caution will be admissible in evidence in any d i s c i p l in a r y proceedings              ,
arising from the complaint (as well as in criminal proceedings). ,
                                                                                                    i
*.18     Wherever an o f f i c e r is alleged to have committed a criminal offence i t              .
i s essentia l that, as indicated in paragraphs 4.16 and *.17 above, he should
be cautioned or served with a Regulation 7 notice, as may be appropriate, at
the e a r li e s t possible moment.     The o f f ic e r should not in such circumstances           :
be required to make a duty statement.
*.19        Regulation  6 of the Discipline Regulations which deals with the
appointment of an in ve stiga tin g o f f ic e r (who may be appointed from another
force) makes i t cle ar that the procedure laid down in the Regulation is
applicable to a complaint which has been recorded under section 85 of the 198*
Act and which suggests that an offence has been committed which might lead to                       <
disciplinary proceedings, as well as to any other report or a lleg a tio n from
which i t appears that a member o f the police force may have committed an offence
against discip line.

 SELECTION OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER
 *.20    The investigation of a complaint should be clearly seen to be absolutely
 impartial.        It is important to ensure not only that an investigating o ffic e r
 of the appropriate rank and experience is always appointed and that he has a
 thorough knowledge of the relevant Regulations and the guidance thereon but
 also that the investigating o f f i c e r should have n o operational responsibility
 for or connection with the o f f i c e r s against whom the complaints a r e J 11™ ; [ f o ­
 under Regulation 6(5) of the Discipline Regulations the investigating ®JJjcer
 must be serving           in a d if f e r e n t sub-division or branch from the o fficer
 complained against.         Moreover i t is clearly in the i n te r e s ts of faIrnes*'
 chief o f f i c e r s , having regard to any representations made by the offic er
 concerned, should ensure                   that    there are noother grounds, for example recent
 service in the same sub-div ision or branch or previous connection with the
 complainant, on which the impartiality of the investigating o f f i c e r might.be
 questioned though there i s no objection to one investigating o f f i c e r dealing
 with successive complaints from a persistent complainant.
 *.21       Whether or not an investigating o ffic e r has been appointed under the
 Discipline Regulations, the c h ie f o f f ic e r (or the Police Complaints Authority)
 may request that an o f f i c e r from another police force should conduct the
 investigation.     It i s the Secretary of State's view that this power should be
 exercised in appropriate cases and he hopes that chief o f f i c e r s w ill have no
 diffic u lty in meeting such requests in accordance with the requirements of
 section 85(7) of the 198* Act.        In considering whether to c a ll in an officer

                                              15
 Seotioos 4.22-4.25
 from another force, the chief officer should take into account, not only the
 seriousness of the allegations and the rank of the officer or officers
 whoa they are made but also the extent to which the incident giving rise tothe
 complaint has beenor may be the subject of publicity. The procedure might be
 appropriate especially where a number of complaints allege widespread
 malpractice or where a particular complaint excites serious public concer“
 the area.     It is axiomatic that the officer concerned should have had no
 previous contact with the case and preferable that he should have had no recent
 contact with the requesting force such as might give rise to doubts^ as to his
 impartiality.    Nothing in this paragraph however debars an           wh° J * ®
 investigated a particular complaint froa being asked to investigate a second
 complaint arising from the same circumstances.

 4.22 Where an investigating officer is appointed from aether f°rce* pr°v^3^
 of the investigating officer should not be regarded a s ® i d '              the
 meaning of section 14 of the 1964 Act, and arrangements made ^ der s®ct^   1^ (:'
 do not therefore, apply. While strictly the cost of investigation should be
 borne by the force in whose area the investigation takes place, it is considered
 that it would reflect the general community of interest, and would also avoid
 ^ r k all round, if the force which supplied the investigating officer were
 normally to make no claim on the requesting force, except for
 expenses. Where, however, an investigation proves to be exceptionally long
 complex, possibly involving provision of a team of officers, it would seem right
 for the parent force to make a claim on the requesting force; the 3“ le of ^ ^ *
 claimed in such circumstances should be the same as for mutual aid and claims
 should be subjected by the parent force to the same standard of scrutiny that
 would be given to ordinary expenses claims.
 4.23 The Discipline Regulations provide that the investigating officer ^ l d
 be of a rank not lower than chief inspector. When dealing with                      ^ ^
 appear to have serious implications, whether by reason of the seriousness of the
 allegations or the number and standing of the o f f i c e r i n v o l v e d consideration
 should always be given to the appointment of an investigating officer
 rank of superintendent or above.
 4.24    Subject to the Police Complaints Authority's power to approve the
 investigating officer’s appointment (see paragraph 6.7), once an ipvestigat ng
 officer has^ been appointed he will normally b e r e s p o n s i b l e u n d e r the
 supervision, in some cases, of the Complaints Authority, Xor the whole of_the
 investigation covering both the original complaint by the “ember of the public
 (if there was one) and any criminal or disciplinary matters which may arise fro
 it or which may come to light in the course of his inquiries. It is important,
 however, that, whether the Complaints Authority are exercising          ^ P ervJthe
 function or not, the chief officer should maintain close oversight of the
 progress of each’ investigation. In particular, he should know at once if an
 investigation has met serious .difficulty or if 3®rlous.d. e     £ ^ [ ^ m e s
 This should ensure speedy progress and the quick resolutionof diflT:
 through central direction. The investigating officer should also          J|*tr^ e d
 to seek the advice of the chief officer - or, of the Complaints Authority, where
 they are sup«wising an investigation - if in the course of his inquiries more
 serious allegations are disclosed or if it appears that a greater number of
 officers may be involved in the allegations than at first seemed likely.

_ CONDUCT OF THE IHVKSTIGATIOH
  4.25    Inquiries should be carried out as expeditiously and thoroughly as
  reasonably practicable, due regard being had to the requirements of Justice and
  the law and practice relating to prosecutions (see also paragraph 4.28). The
  investigating officer should normally arrange to see the complainant without
                                                                Sections   4.25-4.28

delay at the outset of the investigation, unless the complainant specifically
refuses.   If there are special considerations which mean the investigation cannot
be started (eg where statements cannot be taken from the complainant straightaway
because of related judicial proceedings), the position should be explained to
him.   Such action, which enables the complainant to have an early and frank
discussion with a senior police officer, can do much to resolve ill-founded
complaints arising from misunderstandings.    In other cases, the complainant may
decided that he does not wish to pursue his complaint against an individual
officer if he is satisfied that something is being done (eg by changes in
administrative arrangements) to remedy the grievance.     Care should nevertheless
be taken to avoid any suggestion of improper pressure being exerted on a
complainant to withdraw his, allegations.   (For the procedure where a complainant
withdraws his complaint or agrees not to pursue it, see paragraphs 4.33 - **.35).

4.26    The purpose of an investigation is to establish the facts about the
incident or conduct complained of and, in the light of those facts, to enable
an objective assessment to bemade of the merits of the complaint.       It is
important that this should be seen to be so both by the officer complained of
and by the complainant; and also that it should be self-evident from the report
of the investigation that the investigation has been carried out impartially,
that the officer concerned has been afforded the safeguards provided in the
Discipline Regulations and that no pressue has been put on the complainant or
any other witness.

4.27   It is   important, both in the interests of the officer against whom the
complaint has been made and of the complainant, that the investigation should
be completed   as quickly as may be practicable.     It sometimes occurs that an
investigation may be unavoidably protracted for reasons beyond the control of
the investigating officer.    In this event, an early explanation should be given
in writing to the complainant with a copy going to the accused officer; they
should also be kept informed in writing of the reasons if the delay persists,
unless there are special considerations against doing so in a particular case.

4.27A    From time to time in the course of an investigation, it will be helpful
to take evidence from an officer who, as part of his normal duties, has been
assigned to a specialised area of police work in which he has acquired an expert
knowledge relevant to the particular investigation.     The questions that are put
to him must, naturally, be within his knowledge and competence and it is not
a matter for his discretion whether or not he will make available such expert
knowledge.   For the avoidance of suggestions of bias, it might sometimes be
inappropriate for an officer to give evidence if he has some relationship or
acquaintance with any person who might be affected by his statement, but, for
example, mere membership of the same force as an officer under investigation
should not of itself be taken to raise such a difficulty.

TIMING OF INVESTIGATIONS
Criminal Proceedings

4.28   Special considerations arise in regard to the timing of the investigation
of a complaint recorded under section 85 of the 1984 Act against a police officer
where the complaint is related to some aspect of pending criminal proceedings
against a member of the public, for example against the       complainant or his
friends.    There may also be difficulty in investigating a complaint where the
related trial has been completed but an appeal is pending.     It appears to the
Secretary of State appropriate that chief officers should adhere to the practices
set out in Annex F to this circular, which have the agreement of the Director
of Public Prosecutions. The practice of consultation by chief officers with
the Director of Public Prosecutions on any matter concerning the handling of
investigation in cases of special difficulty is unaffected by what is said in
the Annex.



                                17
SECTION 4.29-4.3*                                                                         -hen the investigation i.
« 29          There w i l l be r a r e «nd *i c e p t l ° ^ * ' 1.°CC^ re         m     progress.              “ here the
tikt. forward - M l * c r i m i n . 1 P ™ ' * ^ l n , s * H k e l y t o . . . 1 s t the c o . p l . i n . n t
i n v e s t i g a t i o n bring* to l i g h t m a t e r i a l        .. c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d in g * , o r which
  or I n J o t h e r p e r s o n ) i n d e f e n d i n g £ " « » « . g r o u n d e d . th e c h i e f o f f i c e r
                    t h . t .uch p ro c ee d in g , . r e u n . . f e or i n            a t t e n t i o n of the Crown
s         r
P rosecution
                             ,               *“
                    Service (H ead q u arters).
                                                                                                       ~                 r      r.
                                                                                             q u e s t i o n th e s a f e t y o f
              disposed o f .    Where t h e i n f o r m a t i o n c a l l s         i n i *                              have be#n
        i r t i o n in a c a s e where t h e p r o c e e d i n g s ,                   r e l e v a n t i n f o r m a t io n t o C3

                          JK2.                                                 —             s““ WT                            °n
273     3186    o r 071 273      3121)   •



 ».30        Where . member o f t h e p u b l i c h . s i n i t i . t e d c i v i l p r o c e e d i n g . **a l " s t
 f M * f o f f i c e r in r e s p e c t o f t h e c o n d u c t o f a member o f th e f o r c e o r
 ^ i n t e n t i o n to i n i t i a t e s u c h . c t i o n , th e m . t t e r s h ou ld not . u t o m . t i c . l l y be
 r e c o r d s ! *s * c o m p l a i n t .   I n s t e . d . e f f o r t , s h o u l d be made t o d e t e m i n , > w hether
 o r not th e p e r s o n co n ce rn ed w i s h e s t h e m . t t e r . I s o t o be t r e . t e d . s . c o m p l . i n t
 Zi is          w llH n g to c o - o p e r . t e in i t s i n v e s t i g . t i o n .     I f he wish es . c o - p l a l n t
 to be r e co rd e d b u t i s u n w i l l i n g t o c o - o p e r a t e in the i n v e s t i g a t i o n ,                     u
                 c l e . r t o him t h . t , >s c i v i l c o u r t p r o c e e d i n g s . r e o f t e n p r o t r . c t e d ,
 £ “ l i k e l y t h a t . s a t i s f a c t o r y i n v e s t i g . t i o n - i l l be P°‘ «l b l * “ h*"
 completed and t h . t the d e l a y may i n                                                                                      £
  ascertained          XZ        . T ^ n                     d.“ . t S J l T i n t      which      has been r e co rd e d ^ .n d

  zrsss                : r i re V .r .d v 1ivc1e1.

  S       ^ i g . ^ 1^              ^                                                                   h*r should bewarne<1
  as above o f the p o s s i b l e c o n s e q u e n c e s o r d e l a y .

  4 30A Where, however, t h e p e r s o n c o n c e r n e d a s k s f o r th e                                  to       r *COrt * j
  or    m ain tain e d . . a c o m p l a i n t and i n d i c a t e s w i l l i n g n e s s t o c 6 - o p e r . t e in1 th e
  i n v e s t i g a t i o n , t h e normal p r o c e d u r e , s h ou ld be r o llo w ed ^ " Cp ,                     c L Dl . i n t s
  o ^ t h e       r e p o r t t o the D i r e c t o r , i f a p p r o p r i a t e , . n d t o the P o l i c C o . p l . n t s
  A u th o r ity u nder the r e l e v a n t p r o v i s i o n s o f the 1981 A ct. The e x i s
  p roc ee ding s s h o uld be m en tio n ed t o t h e Crown P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e
  a n d t h e A u t h o r i t y . t the tim e th e c a s e i , s u b m i t t e d               The c h i e f o f f ! * r *hould
  i n d i c a t e a l s o w h e th er i t i s h i s vi ew t h . t                         Ip lln .r y • etlo n ^              \ [ vt
  a p p r o p r i a t e sh ou ld be d e l a y e d u n t i l th e p r o c e e d i n g s in the c i v i l c o u r t s              •
  tee™ f i n i s h e d .           In d e c i d i n g w h e th er t o d e f e r d i s c i p l i n a r y . c t i o n . the c h i e f
  £ n c e r will need t o have r e g a r d t o t h e e f f e c t o f d e f e r e n t on the maintenance
  o f f o r c e d i . c i p l i n e and t h e i n t e r e s t s o f the o f f i c e r c o n ce rn ed .

   H.30B            Nothing in the p r e c e d i n g p a r a g r a p h s s h o u l d be ^ ' " a s            p r e c lu d in g
   i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f th e m a t t e r s r a i s e d i n a c i v i l . c t i o n where t h i s i s n e c e s s .r y
   in o r d e r to p r e p a r e f o r th e l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g s .
                                                                                                                   /
   RETORTS
   ft.31        When th e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r has com p lete d the i n v e s t i g a t i o n . <»r■ h «
               i t as f a r as he r e a s o n a b l y c a n , he s h o l d subm it a r e p o r t
   o fficer          I f th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n has been s u p e r v i s e d by th e Complaints A u t h o r i t y ,
   the i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r s h o u l d i n s t e a d submit t h e r e p o r t t o the A u th o r ity and
   send a copy to the c h i e f o f f i c e r .                  Although th e r e p o r t w i l l * 0 ^ 1 ^      (because
   i t i s r e l e v . n t t o . n a s s e s s m e n t o f t h e m e r i t s o f t h e complain         ne               .
   background m a t e r i a l a bout t h e p e r so n c o n c e r n e d , which m.y bep o t e n t i a _ y _             g *
   to him, c a r e sh o uld be t a k e n n o t t o i n c l u d e i n f o r m a t i o n o r           comment which
   r e le v a n t t o th e c o m p l a in t .

    ILL-FOUNDED COMPLAINTS

      ft.32           Where i n the c o u r s e o f a fo r m a l i n v e s t i g . t ion i t           becomes^c l e a r to ^the
      i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r t h a t th e c o m p l a in t i s i l l - f o u n d e d o r tha
      involved in p u rsu in g i t would be d i s p r o p o r t i o n a t e , i t i s open t o hi                          P’ p
      r     e a r l y r e p o r t t o the c h i e f o f f i c e r ( o r t o t h e Com plaints Auth° ^ l y ; i r                     ~
      i n v e s t i g a t i o n i s being s u p e r v i s e d ) recommending t h a t i t i s not wo                      p
        ^ .V tte r T u rth er.               In suVh c a s e s t h e c o m p l a in t and the i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r ,
      r e n o r t w i l l s t i l l have t o be r e f e r r e d to th e C o m pla in ts A uth o rity under the
      p r o v i s i o n s o f s e c t i o n 90 o f th e 198<t Act and t h i s sh o uld be done: with the minimum
      o f d e la y so t h . t , i f th e A u t h o r i t y a g r e e , th e m a t t e r may be broug
      c o n c lu sio n .


       SPECIAL CLASSES OF COKPLAIXT
       A. WITHDRAWN COMPLAINTS
       4.33      R e g u la tio n 11 o f t h e P o l i c e ( C o m p la in ts ) ( G e n e r a l ) R e g u la tio n s p ro vid es
       f o r th e r e q u ir e m e n t f o r m a l l y t o i n v e s t i g a t e o r i n f o r m a l l y t o r e so lv e a complaint
       to be d isp e n se d w ith when . c o m p l a in t i s withdrawn.

       4 .311 A complaint i s t o be r e g a r d e d a s withdrawn when . sign e d w r i t t e n . t a t e m e n t
       i s r e ce iv e d from the c o m p l a in a n t o r h i . s o l i c i t o r o r o t h e r a u th o r i s e d agent t h . t
       he withdraws h i s c o m p lain t o r t h a t he d o e s n o t wish any f u r t h e r                       s t e p s t o be
       taken in r e g a r d t o i t .            To a void d o u b t and s u b s e q u e n t argument, the state m ent
       should be worded in u n e q u iv o c a l term s ( b u t I t I . s u g g e s t e d t h . t the use o f an
       e x p r e s s i o n such . . ’u n r e s e r v e d l y w i t h d r a w n ’ i s b e s t a v o i d e d ) . I t should be made
                                                              S e c tio n 4 . 3 5 - 4 . 3 6

clear to the complainant that this will normally bring action on his complaint
to an end.   If the case has been referred to the Complaints Authority, the
chief officer should inform the Authority that the complaint has been
withdrawn, enclosing a copy of the statement of withdrawal.    Where only part
of the complaint is withdrawn, the other parts must still be pursued in the
normal way.

4.35 There is nothing to prevent the chief officer, if he thinks it necessary
in the circumstances of a particular case, from pursuing inquiries into an
allegation Respite the withdrawal of the original complaint by the member
of the publ'ic concerned,  Tfiiis may well" be the case where the allegation is
of the commission of a crime.     In such a case, since the complaint has been
withdrawn, the effect of Regulation 11 is that the provisions of section 90
of the 1984 Act no longer operateto require reference to        the Director of
Public Prosecutions.      In decidingwhether the case should nevertheless go
to the Director it will be appropriate to apply the normal test applicable
where an allegation of crime is received against a police officer otherwise
than in a complaintfrom a member of the public.           Where a complaint is
withdrawn but the allegation is nevertheless pursued, the investigation
becomes a purely internal matter and the procedures described in section 5
of this guidance will not need to be followed (unless the chief officer
considers reference to the Complaints Authority under the provisions of
section 88 of the 1984 Act to be appropriate).

B.     COMPLAINTS WHERE ACTION MAY BE WAIVED BY THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

4.36   Regulation 3 and the Schedule of the Police (Anonymous, Repetitious,
etc Complaints) Regulations, as amended by the Police (Dispensation from
Requirement to Investigate Complaints) Regulations 1990, apply where a
complaint, which has    been recorded under Section 85 of the Act, appears to
fall into one of the following categories:

         i.   where a complaint bears no indication of the maker’s identity (or,
              where the complaint is in respect of conduct towards another person,
              of that other person's identity) or of how such a person can be
              contacted or where after reasonable inquiries it proves impossible
              to contact him or establish his identity within a reasonable time
              or by reasonable means.     If a waiver is sought, the Complaints
              Authority must be told what inquiries were made;

        ii.   where  investigation is not reasonably practicable because the
              complainant (or, where the complaint is in respect of conduct
              towards another person, that other person) refuses to co-operate
              with the police in their inquiries: for example, if after the
              completion of related criminal proceedings he fails to reply to
              requests asking him to see the investigating officer, or to provide
              other specified assistance and if any other steps detailed by the
              chief officer have also failed to secure an interview or the
              required assistance.    Wherever possible a letter should be sent
              to the complainant by recorded delivery explaining that a waiver
              will be sought from the Police Complaints Authority if he fails
              to provide further assistance within a specified time, normally
              21 days.    If a waiver is subsequently sought the chief officer
              should give the Authority details of the action taken to attempt
               to secure an interview or otherwise establish contact with the
              person concerned and forward a copy of any letter sent to him;




                                             19
   section 4.36-4.37
   iii. where the complaint repeats, without any additional grounds and
         containing no fresh allegations or evidence, the substance of a
         previous complaint which has     been either dealt with or withdrawn,
         or informally resolved in accordance with the provisions of Section
         85 of«the Act of 1984.        If a waiver is sought the chief officer
         should include a copy of the old complaint or a reference to
         previous correspondence    for purposes of comparison and, where
         appropriate, a copy of      the statement of withdrawal   or a copy of
         the outcome of the       informal resolution procedure made under
         regulation  5 of     the   Police   (Complaints)(Informal  Resolution)
         Regulations 1985;
               • a '.*   -   •   .   SkL>   '■

    iv. where ;the complaint -fs vexatious, oppressive or otherwise seeks
         to abuse tjis complaints >system or to harass a particular officer.
         If a waiver is sought, a full explanation must be given of the
         reasons for the request;

     v. where more than 12 months have elapsed between the incident which
         gave rise to the complaint and the making of the complaint, and
         it would be unjust     to   the officers accused    to initiate    an
         investigation after the    events concerned have faded   from memory.
         Where possible a letter should be sent to the complainant by
         recorded delivery explaining that consideration is being given to
         seeking a waiver from the Police Complaints Authority and inviting
         him to set out the reasons for the delay within 21 days.         If a
         waiver is subsequently sought the chief officer     should give the
         Authority details of any reasons which the complainant has provided.

Section 4.37

4.37    After establishing that the complaint falls into one or other of these
categories, the chief officer should send the Complaints Authority a copy
of the complaint and a memorandum explaining why he thinks the complaint falls
into the category it does, giving reasons for his view, and invite them to
agree that there is no need for any further action under part IX of the 1984
Act.   It should be noted that a request under this provision is not precluded
because an investigation of the complaint, or an attempt at informal
resolution, has already been started.    The Complaints Authority may ask for
further information before reaching a     decision, but if they agree to the
request, no further action need be taken except to record the outcome in the
complaints register.   If the Complaints Authority do not agree with the chief
officer’s view then, following consultation with him, investigation of the
complaint (or the attempt at informal resolution) and subsequent action may
proceed in the normal way.    It is, of course, open to the chief officer to
decide if he thinks fit that a complaint falling into one of these categories
does nevertheless merit investigation or other appropriate action.         For
example, an anonymous complaint may nevertheless contain allegations which
are serious enough to require investigation, possibly under the supervision
of the Complaints Authority.    In that event the investigation and subsequent
action will proceed in the normal way.




                                                 20
                                                                  Sections 5.1-5.4

                                     SECTICW 5

                CONSIDERATION OF AID ACTI08 OH INVESTIGATE01 REPORT

ACTIOS BI CHIEF OFFICER
5.1 TheJfollowing paragraphs set out the procedure to be followed by the chief
officer   cMm he receives an investig.dting tfffleer’s report submitted to him
under section 65(9)   o^the T984 Act or a copy thereof under section 89(6). For
the procedure to be followed when the police authority receives such a report in
respect of a senior officer see paragraphs 10.10 - 10.14.

5.2 On receipt of the report the chief officer should send a copy of it to the
Director of Public Prosecutions if this needs to be done (see paragraph 5.8
below).    Where:

     (a)    the report indicates to the chief officer that the officer who is the
            subject of the report may have committed a criminal offence and that
            the offence indicated is such that he ought to be charged with it, and
            the Director has dealt with the question of criminal proceedings; or

     (b)    the report does not indicate to the chief officer that the officer may
            have committed a criminal offence.

the chief officer may proceed to prefer any disciplinary charges he considers
appropriate (but see paragraph 5.4 below).     Under the provisions of section
90(5) and (7) of the 1984 Act, whether or not the chief officer prefers any
charges he should then refer the case to the Complaints Authority.    Paragraphs
6.16 - 6.25 set out the arrangements for referring a case to the Authority under
those provisions.   It will be seen that the chief officer is required to te,l
the Authority whether or not he has preferred charges and, if not, his reasons
for not doing so. It should be noted that if the chief officer prefers a charge
which is not admitted, he may not proceed immediately to a hearing sin<-®
Complaints Authority have to decide whether the case justifies a tribuna-
hearing (see paragraphs 6.37 - 6.39).

5.3 Where the report indicates to the chief officer that a criminal offence may
have been committed by the officer who is the subject of the report but he
considers that the offence is not such that the officer ought to be charged w**»
it, he is required by section 90(6) of the 1984 Act to refer the case to the
Complaints Authority, stating whether he proposes to prefer disciplinary
and, if not, his reasons for not proposing to do so. The Authority may
to exercise their power under section 92 (2 ) to direct that the case should u
referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions, and therefore the charges
proposed in the memorandum should not be preferred until the Authority have
indicated that they are content with the chief officer’s proposals.

5.4 Under the    provisions of section 89(12) of the 1984 Act, in a case in which
the Complaints    Authority have supervised the investigation, no disciplinary
charge may be brought before the chief officer has received the statement which
the Complaints Authority are required to submit to him under section 8 9 ( 7 )
the Act (see paragraph 6.8).    Similarly, under the provisions of section 89(13)
of the Act neither the chief officer nor the Director of Public Prosecutions may
bring criminal proceedings before the chiefofficer has received the Authority s
statement, but   subsection (14) disapplies this restriction where it appears to
the Director that there are exceptional circumstances which make it undesirab e
to wait for the statement to be submitted.


                                          21
Saetiooa 5.5-5*•

5.5 Except in cases in which section 90(6) applies, a case need not be referred
to the Complaints Authority under the provisions of section 90 of the 198H Act
if disciplinary charges have been preferred and the accused officer has admitted
the charges and has not withdrawn his admission.      In such a case, the chief
officer is required by section 91 of the 198H Act to submit to the Complaints
Authority at the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings a memorandum setting
out the particulars of the disciplinary charges preferred and of any punishment
imposed.

5.6    As indicated in paragraph 3-11* a complaint may cover several matters or
several complaints may relate to the same incident. It will be evident that one
complaint on one matter can raise varying issues and give rise to one or more of
several possible outcomes* it could lead to one or more criminal charges, to one
or aore disciplinary charges, to advice-to the .officer,.-concerned, to .c^vil
proceedings being brought against the police; or to no-'disciplinary action.
Equally/ if the chief officer decides to take disciplinary action, there. w.U^.
oft<R> be a range of possible charges or possible combinations of charges "'Vhi-ch
might be preferred against the officer concerned from whidh he' will have- to
choose the most appropriate in all the circumstances of the case. In the gr*eat
majority of cases, however, the chief officer should have little difficulty in
deciding what is the right thing to do.    In particular he can continue, as at
present, to select more important matters for formal disciplinary action and
dispose of smaller matters without recourse to a disciplinary hearing, ie, by a
word of warning or advice from a senior officer.   In a complaints case it will,
of course, be necessary for the chief officer to indicate, in referring the case
to the Complaints Authority, that he considers such a course to be appropriate
and why (see paragraphs 6.21 - 6.23)•

REPORTS CM CASES ROT ARISOG OUT OF COKPLAXSTS

5.7 The Police Complaints Authority's responsibilities in disciplinary matters
extend only to those cases in which an investigating officer's report was
submitted under the provisions of sections 85(9) or 8 9 (6 ) of the 198M Act, ie
where it relates to a case arising out of a complaint or out of a matter whose
investigation was supervised by the Complaints Authority after being referred
under section 88.    In all other cases the chief officer will decide whether it
would be appropriate to bring a disciplinary charge or charges under Regulation
8 of the Discipline Regulations against the officer concerned and, 'if he does
not bring such charges, whether any other action is appropriate to deal with the
matter.   He may then proceed with the preferring of any charges and with
arrangements for the hearing of those charges. The Complaints Authority are not
involved.

THE ROLK OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSBCOTIOBS

5.8 Under section 90(H) of the 1984 Act if a chief officer determines that a
report submitted to him under section 85(9) (or a copy thereof submitted under
section 8 9 (6 ) indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by a
member of his force, and if he considers that the offence indicated is such that
the officer ought to be charged with it, then he should send a copy of the
report to the Director of Public Prosecutions. This requirement extends to all
types of criminal offences but allows the chief officer's discretion to consider
whether any such offence is minor enough to be dealt with under the disciplinary
code rather than as a criminal offence. It should be emphasised, however, that
the requirement is not met by referring only those cases where, in the chief
officer's view, there is sufficient evidence to show that a criminal offence has
been committed: he must refer any case where such an offence may have been
committed (provided, of course, that he considers that, if the evidence is
sufficient, the officer concerned ought to be charged with the offence), .


Insert after final sentence "Moreover, it is not sufficient
for the chief officer to refer only those cases where he feels
that a criminal charge would be likely to succeed. Provided
the requirements of seption 90(4) of the Act are met, all such
cases should be referred to the Director of Public
Prosecutions regardless of whether it may appear that the
charge could fail: this is a judgement which only the Director
of Public Prosecutions has the authority to make."
                                  22
                                                                 Sections 5*9-5.1*

5 .9 Where information from a source other than a report submitted under section
85(9) or 89(6) of the 198M Act indicates to the chief officer that a member of
his force may have committed a criminal offence and that the officer ought to be
charged with it, he should refer the case to the Director for advice, even
though the circumstances of the offence have required a charge to be preferred
forthwith.

5.10 Where a criminal offence may have been committed it may sometimes happen
that in the course of an investigation the investigating officer will consider
it desirable to v seek the advice of the Director on whether, for instance,
further inquiries' should be undertaken or additional statements taken.   Where
the Complaints Authority are supervising the investigation the investigating
officer should, under Regulation 6 of the Police (Complaints)         (General)
Regulations, inform the Authority that he proposes to consult the Director and
of the outcome of the consultation.

5.11   The Director will himself inform a complainant direct of his decision
whether or not a police officer complained of should be prosecuted.          The
Director does not give reasons for his decision, but where the decision is
against prosecution, the replies sent to the complainant and the chief officer
will normally indicate whether he considers that the evidence is insufficient to
justify criminal proceedings or that criminal proceedings are not necessary in
the public interest.   The Director may sometimes indicate to the chief officer
that, although criminal proceedings are not appropriate, it is still open to him
to consider disposing of the matter by means of disciplinary action.

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CRIMINAL AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

5.12 A police officer Is .subject to the criminal law and to a discipline code.
As a result, alleged misconduct may render him liable to both criminal and
disciplinary proceedings.   It is necessary that where both these systems may
apply, they are operated in ways which are neither unfair to the officer nor
offensive to the public interest.   In deciding whether to prefer a disciplinary
charge the effect of any criminal proceedings which have already taken place has
to be distinguished from the effect of any decision by the Director of Public
Prosecutions that criminal proceedings should not be brought. ^

WHERE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS HATE ALREADY TAKEN PLACE

5.13 Here it has to be examined whether section 10^ of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 198H operates. The section provides that an officer brought before
the courts on a criminal charge should not, whether acquitted or convicted,
thereafter be charged with a disciplinary offence which is in substance the same
(save that criminal conduct itself constitutes a disciplinary offence). This is
because, since the required standard of proof in disciplinary proceedings is the
same as that in criminal proceedings, to bring a disciplinary charge following a
criminal charge would be in effect to try the officer twice for the same
offence.   This is the only statutory bar to disciplinary proceedings and the
sole situation in which it is appropriate to say that "double jeopardy" obtains.

 5.1M   In considering whether section 104 operates, close attention should be
 paid to the similarity in the elements of the criminal charge and the possible
 disciplinary charge.   In some cases they may not be as similar as appears at
 first sight: the mental element of the criminal offence may be lacking in the
 disciplinary offence, or the conduct involved may differ.     Where this is so,
 there is no bar to disciplinary proceedings, because the two offences are not in
 substance the same.     As examples, in criminal proceedings against a police
 officer for corruption it is necessary to establish that the officer agreed to


                                        23
   Sections 5.15-5.18

   show favour to the person from whom he agreed to accept a gift or consideration
   but this element is absent from the disciplinary offence of accepting a              £
   gratuity; a criminal charge of perjury involves proof that an allegedly false
   statement was material to the proceedings in which it was made, but a
   disciplinary charge of falsehood does not} and a Theft Act charge will require
   proof of an intention permanently to deprive a person of his property or
   permanently to evade payment of a debt, whereas these elements are ab®®nt fr°“
   disciplinary offences relating to the care of property or failure to discharge
   debts. By contrast, the criminal charge of assault and the disciplinary charge
   of unnecessary violence is the most common example of such charges being in
    substance the same.
                    .£             e-«   >   ,‘■                   i?         -' * *
’Day if 15 There will, also be cases where "an acquittal on a criminal charge may be-, ,
 Vj£ -Very relevant to the question whether to prefer a disciplinary charge,
      notwithstanding that the charges are not in substance the same so that section
 ^    10*1 of the 1984 Act does not operate.  This will be so, in particular, when a
      matter essential to the proof of the disciplinary charge was in issue in the
      criminal proceedings and was apparently resolved in the officer s favour.   In
      the first example quoted in paragraph 5.14, if the essential issue in a tria
      for corruption was whether the officer received a gift, rather than whether
      showed favour in return for a gift, it may not be appropriate to prefer a          ,
      disciplinary charge of accepting a gratuity following an acquittal in the
      criminal proceedings.

    WHERE THE DIRECTOR HAS DECIDED THAT CRIMHiAL PROCEEDINGS SBOOLD HOT BE BROUGHT

    5.16 Here section 104 of the 1984 Act does not operate and all cases fall to be
    considered individually on their merits.    However, account should be taken of
    such a decision by the Director if the criminal offence which he has considered
    is in substance the same as the disciplinary offence under consideration (ie the
    sort of examination outlined in paragraph 5.14 will be relevant here also) and
    his decision is on the grounds that the available evidence is insufficient: if
    the Director has decided that the evidence is insufficient for criminal
    prosecution it is for consideration whether it is sufficient for disciplinary
    proceedings.   Ultimately, however, having considered each case^ on its “eirUs,
    the disciplinary authority is free to bring proceedings if it thinks in all
    circumstances that it is fair and appropriate to do so.

    5.17   In a separate category are cases where the alleged misconduct is fairly
    trivial when regarded as a criminal offence, but far more serious in the context
    of a disciplined service.     Cases of common assault, minor thefts of police
    property and the use of bad language to a member of the public might fall within
    this category.   In such cases, the Director may decide that the offence i^s not
    such as to merit prosecution (he may use the expression that it would not be in
    the public interest to bring a criminal charge). If this is so, his decision is
    not relevant to the question whether disciplinary proceedings should be brought
    since he has not expressed the view that the evidence is insufficient to justify
    criminal proceedings. It follows, therefore, that the disciplinary authority^is
    free to take what action it thinks appropriate in such instances without further
    regard to the Director’s decision.

     5.18 Where a disciplinary charge is brought in a case in which the Director has
     decided that there should be no prosecution, the accused officer should be
     supplied with a copy of the Director’s letter notifying his decision, unless the
     chief officer, after such consultation with the Director as may be necessary,
     considers that there are special reasons against doing so in a particular case.




                                                   24
                                                               Sections 5*19-5.23

ATTITUDE OF COMPLAINANT

5.19 It can normally be assumed that a person who has made a complaint against
a police officer will be prepared to substantiate that complaint in criminal
or disciplinary proceedings.  If a witness indicates an unwillingness to attend
a disciplinary hearing, the chief officer may apply to the Crown Office of the
Supreme Court for a subpoena ad testificandum.   (In such cases, service of the
subpoena will    be in accordance   with  the Rules of the Supreme Court).
Complainants should not be asked to ^express a prefgr^pce for criminal or
disciplinary proceedings, or for attending one type of-Rearing rather than the
other.     Any unsolicited expression   of the complainant's    feelings should
nevertheless be recorded.

FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS WHERE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEEN BROUGHT

5.20 Section 104 of the 1984 Act doesnot apply   to a charge of criminal conduct
under paragraph 16 of     the discipline code in schedule   1 of the Discipline
Regulations which consists of having been found guilty of a criminal offence.
The Secretary of State considers that where an officer has been convicted of
a criminal offence there is no reason in principle why the disciplinary charge
of conviction for that offence should not then be preferred.    If, for example,
a police officer has committed a serious crime, the officer's fitness to remain
in the force is clearly in doubt and it is right that the chief officer should
be able to prefer the disciplinary charge of conviction for a criminal offence
so that suitable action may be taken.

5.21   It is emphasised that where a police officer has been found guilty of a
criminal offence, there is discretion whether or not to bring a charge under
paragraph 16 of the Discipline Code.     Generally speaking, the accused having
been sentenced by a court, the only matter outstanding is his fitness for the
responsibilities of his rank or as a member of a police force.       There may be
cases where some lesser punishment than dismissal or reduction in rank, such
as reprimand (though not a monetary punishment - see Regulation 25(1) of the
Disciplinary Regulations), would be appropriate.        In  some^ cases involving
conviction for comparatively trivial offences, including minor traffic offences
without aggravating factors, formal disciplinary action will, in all probability,
rarely be necessary.

5.22 The considerations mentioned in the preceding paragraphs continue to apply
where the court has given a suspended or deferred sentence, a conditional or
absolute discharge, or put the police officer on probation.     Notwithstanding
the provisions of Section 13(1) of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973, the
conduct in question comes within the scope of paragraph 16 of the Discipline
Code since these sentences follow a finding of guilt.

5.23   Cases may arise which involve both a criminal offence which is to be a
subject of prosecution and misconduct not amounting to a crime which is separate
from the criminal charge and could properly be made the subject of disciplinary
charges.   The procedure to be followed in regard to the bringing of disciplinary
charges will depend on the nature of the case. In an internal disciplinary case,
where no complaint is involved, and the chief officer is satisfied that no
further disciplinary enquiries might be needed during or as a result of the
criminal proceedings, then if it is practicable the disciplinary charges should




                                      25
Section 5.24

be framed and notified at the earliest opportunity; but theofficer should be
informed that the charges will not be proceeded with until       the result of the
criminal charges is known.      In a complaints case, the decision to prefer
disciplinary charges must await the determination of the question of criminal
proceedings, or the completion of the trial if the officer concerned is charged
with a criminal offence.   However, it is strongly recommended that at the time
the officer is charged with the criminal offence, he should, to leave him in
no doubt, be served with a written statement that the disciplinary aspects of
the case remain outstanding.   He should be told that no disciplinary proceedings
will be taken until the outcome     of the      trial is known.   The underlyingpolicy
here is that’ after having stood trial on a criminal charge     the officer should
not then learn for the first time that he must also face disciplinary charges.
The officer concerned will naturally be aware of the protection given by Section
104(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.    (see also paragraph 2 of Annex
O .

5.24   There are certain special considerations to be borne in mind when a case
resulting in criminal proceedings arises out of a complaint by a member of the
public.   Under the terms of the 1984 Act such a case must still be considered
from the point of view of discipline, even if the criminal proceedings adequately
dispose of the substance of the complaint.  The suggested procedure for reference
to the Complaints Authority in such cases is set out in detail in Annex G.    (It
should be noted that the Complaints Authority have no interest in the question
of the bringing of a disciplinary charge under paragraph 16 of the discipline
code).




                                     26
                                                                Sections 6.1-6.3

                                    SECTION 6

                 FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AOTBORITT

A   SUPERVISION OF INVESTIGATIONS

MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONART REFERRAL

6.1 Once a complaint has been recorded it will be necessary to refer it to the
Police Complaints Authority! if it alleges conduct by a police officer falling
within either section 87(1 Ha)(i) of the 1984/ Act or Regulation 4(1) of the
Police (Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals Etc.) Regulations f985; in the case^of
the former the Authority will have no alternative but to supervise the
investigation. Chief officers (or police authorities where they constitute the
•appropriate authority' as defined by Section 84(4)) will also wish to bear in
mind that the Authority are empowered to supervise the investigation of any
other complaint not falling within those criteria and of other matters (not the
subject of a complaint) where the public interest makes it appropriate for them
to do so.    It may therefore be desirable to invite the Authority to consider
becoming involved in any case likely to undermine confidence in the police,
locally or nationally, where independent testimony to the thoroughness of the
investigation could help to meet that concern.   Where matters of this kind are
referred to the Authority for their consideration,        it will usually be
appropriate to give an indication of the reason for doing so.     Under section
87(2) of the 1984 Act the Authority may also require the submission to them of
any complaint which does not meet the criteria for mandatory referral:    where
such a requirement is made it will be the duty of the appropriate authority to
comply with it.

6.2   If there is uncertainty over whether a particular complaint should be
referred to the Authority, it will generally be appropriate to let the Authority
decide the issue.    It is likely to become clear, as experience of the new
arrangements (and of the Authority's policy in applying them) develops, which
are the cases in which the Authority will probably wish to maintain an interest.
Where there is doubt whether an allegation of injury constitutes "serious
injury" as defined in section 87(4) of the Act (but there is/ no doubt that it
would amount to actual bodily harm) the appropriate authority should either seek
the view of the Complaints Authority on the question of referral or simply refer
it under section 87(1)(a).    In considering whether an injury amounts to, or
falls short of, actual bodily harm, it is the opinion of the Secretary of State
that forces should be guided by the judgement in the case R v Miller (2 QB 282)
(1954) which defines actual bodily harm as "hurt or injury calculated to
interfere with a person's health or comfort".

6.3   The appropriate authority is required by Regulation 4(2) of the Police
(Complaints) (Mandatory Referrals Etc) and by Regulation 10(1) of the Police
(Complaints) (General) Regulations 1985 to submit mandatory referral cases to
the Complaints Authority by the end of the day after the day on which it became
clear to the appropriate authority that the complaint fell within the criteria
for referral.   (It should be recognised that there may be cases where it is not
immediately apparent thatothe complaint falls within these criteria.      Such a
situation would arise if, for instance, medical reports showed that an injury
originally thought to be minor was in fact of greater significance.)     Because
the fact of referral has to take place within so short a time scale it will be
imperative for forces to be ready to respond quickly to indications that a
complaint may fall into one of these categories.     Referral will be deemed to
have taken place when the Authority have received the information constituting


                                       27
 Sections 6.4-6.8

 the record of complaint.        Referral should therefore be made by telex or
 telephone and, if by telephone, the call and its contents should be confirmed
 immediately in writing. There is no time limit in regard to voluntary referrals
 to the Authority;     but it will be borne in mind that the value of the
 Authority's independent supervision may in large measure depend upon its being
 involved from a very early stage.              _________________ __ _________
  6.4      Where a complainant makes several complaints about the
           same incident, not all of which fall within the criteria
           for mandatory referral, the Authority should be told of
           all the complaints that have been made. The Authority
           will supervise the investigation of all matters of
           complaint that arise from the same incident. Where the
           Authority's supervision is limited to particular matters
           within an investigation which is also concerned with
           unconnected breaches of discipline, the investigating
           officer's report should carefully distinguish the
           supervised from the unsupervised matters. The
           Authority's appropriate statement in such cases will be
           limited to supervised matters.
6.5    When a complaint sent directly to the Complaints Authority is sent on to
the appropriate authority under Regulation 3 of the Police (Complaints)
 (General) Regulations 1985 the Authority may at the same time indicate whether
they intend to supervise the investigations.     In such cases it will still be
necessary for the complaint to be        referred to the Authority formally in
accordance with the procedure for mandatory referral (where this applies) or for
cases "called in" by the Authority under section 87(2).    In doing so, reference
3hould be made to any previous correspondence with the Complaints Authority.
The fact that the Authority have passed on a complaint which does not have to be
referred, without signifying in so doing an intention of supervising, does not
preclude the appropriate authority from inviting them to supervise if it wishes
to do so.

HATTERS ALREADY THE SUBJECT OF CRIMINAL OR DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

6.6 Section 84(6) of the Act of 1984 indicates that the provisions of Part IX
of the Act in regard to the recording orinvestigation of complaints, shall not
be applicable to complaints about matters which are or havebeen the subject of
criminal or disciplinary proceedings.      The effect of this is   to Remove any
obligation to refer such complaints tothe Complaints Authority,   even where the
conduct in question would otherwise meet the criteria for such a reference.
(There would in theory be nothing to prevent the appropriate authority, at its
discretion, from referring such matters under section 88 - though there is
unlikely to be any point in involving the Authority in matters which, by
definition, have already been investigated.)

APPROVAL OF INVESTIGATING OFFICER

6.7   It will be for the Authority to decide whether to exercise their powers
under section 89 of the 1984 Act to require their approval of the appointment of
the investigating officer.     To assist them in this task, the appropriate
authority should at the time of referring a complaint or other matter provide
the information indicated in paragraph 4.15.

CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATION

6.8   Where the Authority supervise an investigation they will have power to
impose reasonable requirements affecting its conduct (which includes the
resources employed to carry it out).  This power is subject to the following
restrictions:
                                                                    Sections 6.9-6.12

         (a)   where the possibility of criminal proceedings arises the Authority may
               not make any requirement relating to the obtaining or preservation of
               evidence without the prior consent of the Director of Public
               Prosecutions.

         lb)   before making any requirement affecting the resources to be employed
               in an investigation, the Authority must seek the vifews of the chief
               officer responsible for making those resources available, and have
               regard to any views expressed.

    At the end of an investigation which they have supervised, the Authority must t
  iateke a statement (which will be sent $o the ehief officer or other appropriated
ga eauthority, the complainant and any officer whose conduct has been investigated)^
    saying whether they are satisfied with the conduct of the investigation, and.
    specifying any respect in which they are not. This is intended as a sanction of'
    last resort and it is hoped that the Authority will rarely if every find it
    necessary to make an adverse statement.       However it will be open to the
    Authority to enter certain qualifications when recording a satisfactory verdict
    on an investigation, without implying that they are dissatisfied with the
    investigation as a whole.     The Authority will also be able to record their
    reasons for being satisfied with an investigation, and mention any matter
    arising from the investigation or its supervision which they think should be
    brought to the attention of the appropriate authority, the complainant, or the
    officer whose conduct was investigated, or dealt with in the public interest;
    the Authority can be expected to preserve the confidentiality of investigation
    reports and accompanying statements (see paragraphs 7.14-7.15)•

   6.9 The fact that an investigation is being supervised by the Authority does no
   absolve police forces from the requirement to have regard to those parts of this
   Guidance which apply generally to the recording and investigation of complaints.
   At the same time it should be recognised that the Authority are not similarly
   bound to have regard to the Guidance (for example, in imposing requirements upon
   investigating officers.)

   6.10    If a complaint whose investigation thfe Authority are supervising is
   withdrawn the investigating officer is not required to submit a report to the
   Authority under section 89(6) of the 1984 Act, nor will the Authority be
   required to make an appropriate statement under section 89(7)•    The Authority
   should however be supplied on request with any information bearing on the
   circumstances in which the complaint was withdrawn, together with a copy of the
   complainants notice of withdrawal.

   6.11 A police officer conducting complaint investigations under the supervision
   of the Authority should bear in mind not only the need to observe the formal
   requirements of the Authority in regard to the supply of information and the
   conduct of the investigation, but also the desirability of keeping the Authority
   abreast of significant developments in the investigation.    In particular he is
   reminded of the procedure set out in paragraph 5*10 which requires him to inform
   the Authority if he proposes to consult the Director of Public Prosecutions and
   acquaint them of the outcome of such consultation.

    B   DISCIPLINARY ROLE

    SUMMARY OF PROCEDURES

    6.12    The procedures to be followed by the chief officer in submitting^
    complaints cases (and certain non-complaint cases) to the Complaints Authority




                                            29
Sections 6.13-6.16

after investigation and by the Authority in considering those cases, are set out
in more detail in paragraphs 6.16 to 6.HO but it may be helpful to start with a
fairly brief outline of what is involved.
                                                                                               C
6.13   If» after considering the investigating officer’s report, and after any
reference to the Director of Public Prosecutions, the chief officer decides that
no formal disciplinary proceedings should be brought against the officer
complained of, he must refer the case to the Complaints Authority.        If the
Authority accept that no disciplinary charges are called for, they will notify
the chief officer and the complainant.      A copy of their notification to the
complainant will |$ to the chief officer who should^ have notified the officers ia in s '" .
concerned on first "’hearing of the Authority's concurrence that no disciplinary
action need be taken.     If, however, the Authority are not satisfied with the
chief officer's decision they may ask for further information and may discuss               *’£■
the matter with the chief officer.      In the last resort they may direct that
disciplinary charges be brought.

6.1H    Disciplinary   charges   may   be   brought   by   the   chief   officer   in   four
circumstances:

     (a)   on his own initiative and without reference to the Authority. Except                (
           in cases to which section 90(6) applies (see paragraph 5*3)» there is
           no requirement in the 19811 Act that the chief officer should consult
           the Authority before preferring charges:   but see paragraphs 6.35 and
           6.36 in respect of the hearing of such charges;

     (b)   on his own initiative, but after reference to the Complaints Authority
           under section 90(6) - see paragraph 5.3;

     (c)   after discussion with the Complaints Authority as a result of which he
           has accepted their recommendation that charges should be brought;

     (d)   on the direction of the Complaints Authority failing agreement under
           (c).

If the officer when notified of a charge brought under (a) above admits the
charge, the Complaints Authority have no concern in the case, although they will
be notified of the outcome of the case and the punishment awarded by the chief
officer in due course - see paragraph 9 *35.     1° the case of charges brought
under (b) or (c) above, or, where the officer indicates that he intends to deny
the charge, under (a) above, the case may be heard either by the chief officer
sitting alone or, at the Authority's direction, by a disciplinary tribunal
comprising the chief officer as chairman and two members of the Authority.   (In
either case, where the case has been remitted under Regulation            of the
Discipline Regulations, the chief officer's place will be taken by another chief
officer.)   Where a charge is brought in the circumstances described in (d), a
disciplinary tribunal will always be held.

6.15    At a disciplinary tribunal the finding will be reached by all three
members, if necessary by a majority although the fact will not be disclosed. If
the officer is found guilty the chief officer will decide punishment after
consultation with other members of the tribunal.

MEMORANDUM AND INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6.16 After receiving the report of an investigation into any complaint or non­
complaint matter where the investigation was supervised by the Complaints
Authority, the chief officer is required first to consider matters related to


                                            30
                                                                Sections 6.17-6.20

any criminal offences revealed in the report (see section 5). Thereafter he is
required to submit to the Authority a memorandum in which he sets out his
opinion of the complaint or other matter to which it relates.   The memorandum
must also contain particulars of:

     (a)   any disciplinary charges which the chief officer has preferred or
           proposes to prefer in respect of the conduct investigated; and


     (b)   any exceptional circumstances which lead     him to consider   that the
           charges should be heard by a tribunal.

     (c)   where disciplinary charges have not been brought, his reasons for not
           doing so.

6.17   Similar requirements will attach to the receipt by the chief officer of
the report of an investigation into a complaint where the Complaints Authority
did notsupervise the investigation.     In such a case, however, the memorandum
described in paragraph 6.16 should be accompanied by:

     (a)   a copy of the complaint or,    if it was made orally,     a copy of the
           record of it; and

     (b)   a copy of the investigating officer's report with the relevant
           supporting statements and other documents annexed to the report by the
           investigating officer when he submitted it to the chief officer.

6.18   In any case where the chief officer, after considering the report of an
investigation into a non-complaint matter supervised by the Authority or into a
complaint whether the investigation was or was not so supervised, has preferred
disciplinary charges against the officer concerned and the officer has admitted
the charge and not withdrawn the admission, no memorandum as described in the
preceding paragraphs needs to be sent to the Complaints Authority.   Instead, at
the close of the disciplinary proceedings, including any appeal to the Secretary
of State, the chief officer is required to send to the Authority:

     (a)   particulars of the charges preferred and of any punishment awarded;
           and                                                 '
     (b)   where the charges related to a complaint and the investigation was not
           supervised by the Authority

            (i)   a copy of the complaint or the record of it, and

           (ii)   a copy of the investigating officer's reportand supporting
                  documents as described in paragraph 6.17*

6.19 Details of any disciplinary charges preferred may be submitted by means of
a copy of the discipline form (Schedule 2 of the Discipline Regulations) if this
is convenient.     Where the investigation report has been submitted to the
Director of Public Prosecutions under section 90(H) of the 198H Act, the
Complaints Authority will need to be told, particularly if no disciplinary
charges are preferred, what the Director's decision was and the terms in which
it was expressed.    This may be done by sending the Authority a copy of the
Director's letter to the chief officer and also (where there is one) his letter
to the complainant.

6.20   The Secretary of State considers that the chief officer's opinion on the
merits of any complaint (which should make clear whether he considers the

                                         31
 Sections 6.21-6.25

 complaint to be substantiated in whole or in part) will be invaluable to the
 Authority, as indeed will be his advice on any matters connected with the
 complaint.   Where he has brought charges, the chief officer's opinion on the
 question whether or not there are exceptional circumstances calling for a
 disciplinary tribunal (see paragraph 6.37) will be particularly important to the
 Complaints Authority.

  6.21   Where disciplinary charges are brought the link between them and the
  complaint which led to them will normally be obvious. But where no charges have
. been brought, it may not be so clear why this is so and the Complaints Authority
r will therefore need to have a statement of the chief officer’s reasons.      For
  example:

      (a)   there is no evidence to substantiate the complaint (or non-complaint
            matter);

      (b)   the matter can be dealt with by giving suitable advice to the officer
            concerned;

      (c)   criminal proceedings have been brought which leave no aspect of the
            complaint (or non-complaint matter) outstanding; or

      (d)   there is insufficient evidence to support a disciplinary charge (e.g.
            there are no independent witnesses).

 It should be noted that this is not intended to be an exhaustive list and in a
 complicated case a fuller account of the circumstances may be necessary, but it
 is sugested that a short explanation on these lines will suffice for the
 majority of cases.

6.22    Where b in paragraph 6.21 above applies it is important that the
memorandum to the Complaints Authority should explain what the ’suitable advice*
would consist of;    the term is an imprecise one which may be used to cover
different forms of advice.   The memorandum should, therefore, indicate exactly
what the chief officer has in mind in the individual case, at what level the
officer concerned would be interviewed and the substance of what would be said
to him.

6.23 Although the giving of advice may not have been proposed in the memorandum
sent to them, the Complaints Authority might nevertheless feel that such advice
would be appropriate and accordingly suggest this to the chief officer.

6.2H The Complaints Authority are not concerned with disciplinary charges other
than those in respect of matters complained of or matters the investigation of
which has been supervised by the Authority.    It is possible, for example, that
the investigation of a complaint might bring to light a disciplinary offence
wholly unconnected with it (e.g. a complaint that a constable had been rude on a
particular occasion might bring to light that he was absent from his beat). It
is unnecessary for the Complaints Authority to consider such an offence or any
charge which might be brought as a result;   this is purely a matter of internal
discipline.

6.25 In addition to the statutory requirements for information to be forwarded
to the Complaints Authority details of any relevant action taken or contemplated
following the investigation of a complaint (other than the preferring of formal
disciplinary charges) may be made available to them and they may be told what
information on this action can properly be conveyed to the complaint (see
paragraph 7.H) if they accept the decision that no disciplinary charge should be
preferred in respect of the complaint. If the chief officer receives any

                                        32
                                                                                 Sections 6.26-6.30

representations from the complainant or from the officer concerned for or
against the holding of a disciplinary tribunal he should send copies of them to
the Complaints Authority.

REQUESTS BY THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY FOR ADDITIONAL HFORMATIOH

6.26 Under section 93(8) of the 1984 Act chief officers are required to comply
with a request from the Authority for any information which they may reasonably
require for the exercise of their functions under that section which relates to
the Authority's powers in respect of disciplinary charges. .Such information nay
be in addition to the information c<>tftfined in <the investigation report and
other documents submitted to them.

6.27 It is expected that, if the procedure set down in the Act and Regulations
and discussed in paragraphs 6.16 to 6.25 is followed, the Complaints Authority
will not need to call for additional information other than rarely, and that
such requests are not likely to involve extra inquiries as opposed to the supply
of information readily available to the police.   If, however, the chief officer
is of the opinion that to comply with any such request would be prejudicial to
the interests of justice or that the required information is not obtainable
without disproportionate effort on the part of the police, then he may make
representations to the Authority to this effect.

POWERS OF THE COMPLAIMTS AUTHORITY IN RELATIOi TO THE BRIHGIBG OF CHARGES

6.28  The Complaints Authority are required under section 105(4) of the 1984 Act
to have regard to any guidance given to them by the Secretary of State with
respect to such matters affecting the preferring and withdrawing of disciplinary
charges as are the subject of current guidance by him to the police.         The
Secretary of State has issued guidance to the Authority to follow the criteria
set out in paragraphs 5*6, 5.12-5*17 and 9*4-9*14*

Recomendation by the Complaints Authority

6*29  Where the Complaints Authority consider that a disciplinary charge should
be preferred against an officer in respect of a matter complaiped of which has
not already been the subject of disciplinary charges, they will recommend to the
chief officer the charge which they consider should be preferred, giving reasons
for their recommendation. The Complaints Authority must be specific as to the
charge which they regard as appropriate.     The chief officer will inform the
Complaints Authority whether he accepts their recommendation and if he does,
proceed to prefer the charges. (The Complaints Authority will normally indicate
at the same time whether they consider that the charge should be heard by a
disciplinary tribunal - paragraphs 6*37 to 6*39)*

Direction by the Complaints Authority
6.30     W h e r e th e c h i e f o f f i c e r d i s a g r e e s w i t h the P o l i c e
         C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y ' s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n to p r e f e r a
         d i s c i p l i n a r y charge, h e s h o u l d i n f o r m them, g i v i n g his
         reasons.            The A u t h o r i t y m a y a c c e p t this; or t h e y m a y
         e n t e r into f u r t h e r d i s c u s s i o n s ; or t h e y may d i r e c t that
         c h a r g e s b e b r o u g h t as t h e y m a y specify, again g i v i n g
         reasons fo r t h e i r d i r e c t i o n in writing.                     If a d i r e c t i o n
         is made, the c h i e f o f f i c e r s h o u l d p r e f e r the c h a r g e
         f or t h w i t h and i n f o r m t h e o f f i c e r c o n c e r n e d and th e
         c o m p l a i n a n t t hat the., c h a r g e ha s b e e n brought at the
         d i r e c t i o n of th e A u t h o r i t y .         T h e c h a r g e will b e h e a r d and
         the p u n i s h m e n t t o b e i m p o s e d o r r e c o m m e n d e d will b e
         d e c i d e d b y a d i s c i p l i n a r y t r i b u n a l co n s t i t u t e d in
         a c c o r d a n c e w i t h S e c t i o n 94 of t h e P o l i c e and Criminal
         E v i d e n c e A c t 1984.
  Sections 6.31-6.36

  ADVANCE HARMHG OR URGENT CASES                                                        ("
  6.31   The Complaints Authority will consider and reach a decision on all cases
  submitted to them under section 90 of the 1984 Act as expeditiously as
  practicable, but there may be cases where it is particularly important that the
  Complaints Authority should act with especial urgency.   It is suggested that in
  suoh cases the chief officer should try to give them advance warning.

  THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY'S POWER TO DIRECT THAT A MATTER BE REFERRED TO THE
  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS                                          -
  t<&32   Section 92 of the 1984 Act provides that where a case is referred to tfte^*
■ ^Huthority under section 90 or 91, if the Authority consider that criainaltH
   proceedings against the officer concerned would be justified they may direct the
  Tbhief officer to send the case to the Director of Public Prosecutions.       The
   chief officer must comply with this direction.    In such a case, the procedure
   set out in paragraphs 6.16-6.18 must be followed once the Director has given his
   decision in the case.

  WITHDRAWAL OF CHARGES BEFORE THE HEARING                                              f
  6.33 Where the chief officer considers that a charge brought against an officer
  following a complaint should be withdrawn before the hearing, section 93(6) of
  the 1984 Act requires him to seek the leave of the Complaints Authority to do
  so, giving reasons for his view that the charge should be withdrawn.     This is
  because the withdrawal of charges makes the case broadly analogous with those in
  which no disciplinary charges have been preferred and which fall to be
  considered by the Complaints Authority under section 90 of the 1984 Act (see
  also Annex H, paragraph 21).

  CONFIDENTIALITY
  6.34   Where the chief officer prefers disciplinary charges before reference to
  the Complaints Authority he must not, of course, arrange for the charges, if
  denied, to be heard until the Complaints Authority have considered whether a
  disciplinary tribunal should be held. It is implicit in the procedure laid down
  in the 1984 Act that the chief officer should not make known his decision (which
  must of necessity be provisional) that charges should not be preferred in
  respect of any complaint before the Complaints Authority have reached their               ^
  decision on the case. Where there has been discussion between the chief officer
  and the Authority this will be treated as confidential.

  CASES COVERING MORE THAN ONE MATTER OF COMPLAINT
  6.35   Paragraphs 3.12 to 3.15 deal with itemisation of complaints and explain
  inter alia the importance of distinguishing different matters within a single
  statement of complaint.    Where a case contains several individual matters of
  complaint, it will occasionally happen that the chief officer considers that the
  evidence justifies disciplinary charges in respect of some matters but not of
  others.   Except in cases to which section 90(6) applies, he is, of course, at
  liberty to bring such charges without reference to the Complaints Authority, but
  he will still have to refer the other matters to the Complaints Authority, and
  the Authority retain their powers to recommend or direct the bringing of charges
  in respect of those matters.    If they decided to exercise those powers, this
  might mean the officer concerned finding himself faced with a second charge or
  charges some time after the first.

  6 .3 6 To avoid this difficulty, chief officers may therefore wish to consider            ^
  the following procedure, for use in cases other than those which must be

                                          34
                                                                    Sections 6.37-6.40

referred to the Complaints Authority under section 90(6) of the 1984 Act.      If
the chief •officer thinks that the charges he wishes to bring cover the main
substance of the complaint, he will proceed to bring them and then refer the
case to the Complaints Authority explaining his reasons for choosing to bring
charges in respect of those matters and not of others, and giving his view as to
whether they should be heard by a disciplinary tribunal.      If the charges he
wishes to bring cover a minor part of the complaint only, he should not bring
the charges but refer the case to the Complaints Authority telling them,
however, of the charges that he intends to bring and again explaining hia-
reasons for that intention;   if the Complaints Authority exercise their powers^
tQ recommend^ or direct the bringing of charges in respect     pf
                                                               the other, major?
matters complained of, he will then be able to bring all the charges at the same-,
time.   It is stressed that it is a matter for the discretion of the chiefr
officer whether he decides to bring charges before reference to the Complaints!
Authority in the situation described.       Equally, it is for the Complaints
Authority to decide whether they wish to exercise their powers to recommend or
direct the bringing of charges in respect of any matter complained of in respect
of which charges have not already been brought.

POWER OF THE COMPLAINTS    AUTHORITY TO     DIRECT   THAT   CHARGES BE HEARD BY A
DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL

6.37   Under section 94(2) of the 1984 Act the Complaints Authority may direct
that a disciplinary charge should be heard by a disciplinary tribunal instead of
by the chief officer sitting alone if they consider that to be desirable by
reason of any exceptional circumstances affecting the case.    The Authority may
exercise this power only in respect of charges in respect of matters to which a
memorandum under section 90 relates. A disciplinary tribunal cannot be convened
to hear charges    which the chief officer has brought on his own initiative,
unless the officer concerned does not admit the charges.      Factors which are
likely to be relevant to this decision are the instrinsic seriousness of the
charge, the complexity or difficulty of the case and any grave public disquiet
or other special circumstances.

6.3 8 Where the Authority decide that a charge should be heard by a disciplinary
tribunal the chief officer may himself wish to discuss the Complaints
Authority’s decision with them if he considers there are arguments pointing the
other way (this     may of course, apply equally where the Authority have not
recommended a disciplinary tribunal and the chief officer feels that one is
justified). Thechief officer should also ensure that    the Complaints Authority
are aware of any representation he may have received on that point once the
charges have been brought.

6.39   In all cases both the officer concerned and the complainant should be
informed at the earliest opportunity of a decision that a charge will be heard
by a tribunal.

HEARING OF RELATED CHARGES BY A DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL

6.40 Section 94(9) of the 1984 Act provides that, where a disciplinary tribunal
is to be held, other charges against the accused officer may also be heard by
the tribunal, if this seems to the chief officer to be the convenient and fair
course.   This is intended to allow the disciplinary tribunal to deal with
charges relating to otheroffences which may have come to light in the course of
the investigation of a complaint, although these are not relevantto the
complaint itself (see paragraph 6.35)•     The accused officer should be told at
once of any charge to be so heard and the Complaints Authority should also be
informed as soon as possible.


                                       35
Sections 6.41-6.44

CHARGE OP ADMISSION OR DENIAL BEFORE THE HEARING OF CHARGES
6.41     If before the hearing the accused officer changes from a denial to an
admission of a charge which the Complaints Authority have decided should be held
before a disciplinary tribunal,       then the Authority should be informed
immediately. If, before the hearing of charges which have been admitted by the
accused officer (so that no memorandum will have been submitted under section
9 0 ) the accused withdraws his admission, the hearing will have to be postponed
until the necessary submission under the provisions of section 90 has been made
to the Complaints Authority.     The Authority may then direct that the charges
should be heard by a disciplinary tribunal.

SPECIAL REPORTS BY THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6.42 The Complaints Authority are empowered by section 97(2) of the 1984 Act to
make a special report to the Secretary of State on any grave or exceptional
matter which comes to their notice which they think should be drawn to his
attention.   It is for the Authority to decide what constitutes a grave matter.
Special reports are required to be copied to the police authority and the chief
officer of the force concerned.   It is for the recipients of such a report to
decide what action it is appropriate for them to take in regard to it.

DELEGATION OF FUNCTIONS OF THE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

6.43    Paragraph 10(2) of Schedule 4 to the 1984 Act gives the Complaints
Authority power, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, to make
arrangements for the delegation of the discharge of their functions.        These
arrangements will include provision that all decisions on cases referred to the
Complaints Authority under section 90 of the 1984 Act will be taken by one or
more Authority members (if they are not taken by the Authority as a whole).

ACCUSED OFFICER CEASING TO SERVE

6.44   The fact that an officer who is the subject of a complaint or of a non­
complaint matter ceases to serve as a police officer (or had already ceased to
serve before the complaint was received) does not put the matter outside the
purview of the Complaints Authority.    The case should therefore be/treated in
accordance with the normal procedures as far as is practicable and a report sent
to the Authority,     notwithstanding that there could be no question of
disciplinary proceedings. The Authority should also be informed if the officer
ceases to serve while a report under section 90 of the 1984 Act is currently
with them; or if, charges having been preferred (whether or not after reference
to the Authority), the officer ceases to serve before a disciplinary hearing is
held.     The Authority would find it helpful to be informed as to the
circumstances in which an officer left the police service after a complaint had
been lodged.




                                       36
                                                                  Sections 7.1-7 .4
                                     SECTION 7

       INFORMATION AND ASSISTANCE FOR COMPLAINANT AND OFFICER COMPLAINED OF

 LEAFLET FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

 7.1 A revised leaflet explaining the complaints procedure has been prepared
 and is available from early 1989 in English, Welsh, Chinese, Bengali, Gujurati,
 Hindi, Punjabi and Urdu. Supplies may be obtained from the Central Office of
 Information. Copies of the leaflet (and the translation where appropriate)
 should be made available at every police station and anywhere else where the
 chief officer considers it desirable, and a copy should be supplied to any
 member of the public who asks for one. Copies are also made available by the
 Central Office of Information to various organisations such as the Citizens
 Advice Bureaux. The leaflet is not intended to be a substitute for the oral
 advice and explanation of procedure that is usually given to a complainant by
 the officer who interviews him thereafter, but it may be found useful to give
 a copy to each complainant as a reminder of the procedures. A copy of the
 appropriate translation should be given to a complainant whenever it appears
 that it would be helpful to him or her to have an explanation in one of these
 languages of the procedures involved.

NOTIFICATION OF THE OUTCOME OF A COMPLAINT

7.2 Paragraph *1.27 recommends that certain action should be taken to keep both
the complainant and the officer concerned informed about the progress of
investigation of a complaint under Section 85 of the Act. Annex H deals with
the presence of the complainant at a disciplinary hearing. The following
paragraphs are concerned primarily with notification to the complainant and
the officer concerned of the outcome of the complaint. It is recommended that
a similar procedure should be followed where the appropriate authority has
received directly from a member of the public a complaint against a senior
officer.

To the Complainant

7.3 Where disciplinary charges have been brought as a result of a complaint
(whether or not after reference to the Complaints Authority) it will be for
the chief officer to notify the complainant accordingly. Where the Complaints
Authority accept that disciplinary charges should not be preferred they will
notify the complainant and will send a copy of their notification to the chief
officer. Regulation 7 of the Police (Complaints) (General) Regulations allows
the Authority, in sending their notification, to provide the complainant with
such information by way of explanation as they consider appropriate.

7-4 There may be additional information, apart from that which the Authority
are permitted to send by virture of the Regulations, which the police consider
should be passed to the Authority and which the Authority may take into account
in their notification to the complainant. Any information which a chief officer
considers might be included in the notification (such as details of
administrative or other action taken,   the correction of factual errors in the
complaint, or an expression of regret   for the incident which has given rise
to the complaint) should be incorporated in his covering memorandum. It is
open to him to indicate what parts of   the memorandum may or may not be passed
on to the complainant. The investigating officer's report will remain
confidential.

                                      37
Sections 7-5-7-10

To the officer concerned

7.5 The chief officer is responsible for notifying the officer concerned of
decisions on disciplinary action whether or not this arises from a complaint.
He should endeavour to see that officers are not left in unnecessary suspense
and should keep them informed of the progress of the matter. In particular
he should inform the officer concerned as soon as possible of the outcome after
a complaint has been considered by the Complaints Authority. As noted above
(paragraph 7 .3 ) in a case where no disciplinary charges are to be preferred,
the Authority will normally write to the complainant at the same time as writing
to the chief officer to notify him of their decision.    If, in any particular
case it is felt that embarrassment could be caused by a complainant becoming
aware of the Authority's decision before the officer (for example where an
officer is in near daily contact with a complainant and it is proposed to give^
guidance to the officer on his conduct), this should be drawn to the Authority s
notice when the papers are forwardedfor their consideration. The Authority
have agreed that they will, in cases of this kind, defer notifying their
decision to the complainant toallow the chief officer to inform the officer
concerned and take any necessary related action. In appropriate cases, a copy
of the Authority's letter to the complainant may be given to the officer
concerned.

7 6 Where the Authority have supervised the investigation of a complaint they
will submit a statement to the chief officer stating whether the investigation
was conducted to their satisfaction or not. They are also required, where it
is practicable to do so, to send a copy of that statement to the complainant,
and to the officer or officers concerned.

7 7  Where a complaint has been settled by way of the informal resolution
procedure the complainant will be entitled to a record of the outcome of the
procedure provided that he applies within three months of that record being
made. The complainant should be informed of this entitlement when he is
informed that the procedure has been concluded.

COPIES OF COMPLAINTS
7 8  In the following paragraphs "the complaint" means the basic, document or
documents in which a complainant’s allegations against an officer are brought
to the attention of the appropriate authority. It is considered that a letter
which simply states that the writer wishes to complain, but which does not
include sufficient details for the purposes of investigation, does not
constitute a complaint in this sense; in such cases the complaint includes the
statement which the complainant will then normally make setting out his account
of the incident or conduct in question. Where a complaint is made orally the
complaint" includes the written record of what was said by the complainant in
describing the grounds of his complaint. When a copy of a complaint is supplied
to the complainant or the officer who is the subject of the complaint, in
accordance with the following provisions, it should not include any subsequent
statements made in the course of the investigation.

 7.9 Where disciplinary charges are to be preferred against an officer
 Regulation 10(1) of the Discipline Regulations requires that he should be
 supplied with a copy of the report, allegation or complaint on which the charge
 is founded, no less than 21 days before the date of the disciplinary hearing.

 7.10 Where disciplinary charges are not to be preferred, the officer against
 whom a complaint has been made may make a written request to the chief officer
 to supply him with a copy of the complaint. In these circumstances the chief
 officer should (subject to paragraph 7-12 below) arrange for a copy (or a copy

                                        38
                                                                 Sections 7.10A - 7.13

of that part which directly concerns him) to be supplied to the officer in
accordance with Regulation 9 of the Police (Complaints) (General) Regulations.
This Regulation applies notwithstanding that a complaint has been withdrawn.

7.10A   The document or documents       of which   copies   should   be   supplied   to an
officer under the Regulations are:

a.   if the complaint is made in writing, a copy of the letter of complaint
     or of that part of it which relates to that officer,

b.   if the complaint is made orally, a copy of the'written record made of
     the complaint (which may include a copy of a contemporaneous entry eg,
     in a pocketbook or incident register, and the formal record of the
     complaint made out later); and

c.   copies of the relevant parts of any statements which either contain
     fresh complaints or explain or particularise complaints already made.

It is considered that a letter indicating a wish to complain but not detailing
the substance of the complaint does not constitute a complaint for these
purposes.   In such cases, the complaint of which a copy shall be provided is
the relevant portion of the statement or other written record of the substance
of the complaint.

7.11   Under the same Regulations a copy of the complaint should be supplied,
on request, to the complainant (whether disciplinary charges are to be preferred
against the officer concerned or not.)

7.12   The Regulations also provide, however, for certain cases where it may
be considered necessary to withhold a copy of the complaint from either the
complainant or (where disciplinary charges are not to be preferred) the officer
against whom the complaint was made.    First, under Regulation 9(2)(a) the chief
officer may refuse to comply with a request for a copy of a complaint if he
considers that to supply a copy might prejudice any criminal investigation or
proceedings then pending.     Secondly, under Regulation 9(2)(K) he may refuse
to comply with such a request if he considers that it would in some other way
be contrary to the public interest to supply a copy of the complaint.      In the
latter case, however, he must seek the consent of the Secretary of State for
refusing the request.    The Secretary of State considers that where a request
is to be refused it should be made clear whether the refusal comes under
Regulation 9(2)(a) or Regulation 9(2)(b).

7.13 Any request for the Secretary of State's consent under Regulation 9(2)(b)
should be sent to the Assistant Secretary, F2 Division, Home Office, Queen
Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT, and should include:

      (a)   a   copy of the request made for a copy of the complaint;

      (b)   a copy of the complaint (or so much of it as relates to theofficer
            concerned); and

      (c)   the reasons for the chief officer's opinion that the request should
            be refused under the provisions of Regulation 9(2)(b).




                                        39
                                                             Sections 7-14 - 7-17

CONFIDENTIALITY OF DOCUMENTS PREPARED IN THE COURSE OF INVESTIGATION

7.14   It is a principle of long standing that investigation reports and any
accompanying statements should not be published.          Many reports contain
information which could not be freely disclosed, such as the names and addresses
of witnesses, the criminal records of named persons, or facts disclosed in the
course of the investigation which might be prejudicial to named persons.      The
maintenance of the principle that reports are confidential is in the interests
of ensuring that there should be no inhibi.tion, in connection with an
investigation, on conunuwication between police officers, between chief officers
and the Secretary of State, and between the police and the Complaints Authority.

7.15   Occasionally a complainant institutes criminal proceedings against an
officer who has been the subject of investigation under section 85 of the Act
upon learning that the Director of Public Prosecutions does not intend to do
so.   In such a case the complainant may request a copy of the investigating
officer's report and/or accompanying statements with a view to gaining access
to evidence which may incriminate the officer.     Any such request should be
declined.

7.16   There may be circumstances, however, in which it will be proper and
necessary to disclose material which has been obtained in the course of a formal
investigation.  Broadly, the situation where disclosure may be warranted arises
where such material may assist someone who faces criminal proceedings, or who
is seeking to challenge a conviction, to prove his innocence.    If such material
comes to light in the course of an investigation it should be brought to the
notice of the Director of Public Prosecutions (see paragraph 4.29).

7.17   Similarly, it may at times be proper and appropriate to disclose to an
accused officer    in disciplinary    proceedings   (or his    friend   or legal
representative) material in an investigation report which could assist^ in
demonstrating his innocence of a charge or in mitigating any penalty that might
be awarded upon a finding of guilt.    Such material may be found in a case where
a disciplinary charge is preferred when an investigating officer has recommended
none or has recommended      that   factors mitigating the accused officer's
culpability be taken into account before a decision is made to prefer a charge.




                                   40
                                                                   Sections 8.1-8.4

                                     SECTION 8

          ROLES OF HM INSPECTORS OF CONSTABULARY AND POLICE AUTHORITIES IN
                                RELATION TO COMPLAINTS

8.1   Police authorities are the disciplinary authority for officers holding a
rank above that of chief superintendent and are responsible for dealing with
complaints against such officers. They are not otherwise involved in individual
cases of police discipline.

8.2 Section 95 of the 1984 Act, however,~ .requires both police authorities and
inspectors of constabulary to keep themselves^informed about the working of the
complaints and discipline procedure. This is an aspect of their general duty to
secure the maintenance of an adequate and efficient police force and to exercise
their powers under the 1964 Act.       Police authorities, in particular, are
required to keep themselves informed about the way in which complaints by
members of the public against members of the force for which they are
responsible are dealt with by the chief officer of the force. It appears to the
Secretary of State that this responsibility is a supervisory one, to ensure that
the statutory procedures for the handling of complaints are being properly
observed.

8.3 The precise way in which police authorities act to discharge their function
under section 95 of the Act may vary from one authority to another.       Common
practice indicates, however, that this is likely to be by way of a complaints
sub-committee, or panel, who may hold regular meetings with the police force and
may regularly inspect the complaints register. Chief officers should make their
complaints books available for scrutiny by members of the authority in such
circumstances.

8.4   Section 12(1) of the Police Act 1964 requires chief officers to submit a
general report to the authority each year on the policing during that year of
the area for which their forces are maintained.    That report should include a
section concerning complaints and discipline.    Section 12(2) of the 1964 Act
requires chief officers, whenever required to do so by an authority, to submit a
report on such matters as may be specified by the authority. Clearly, these too
may concern complaints and discipline. In addition, a statistical return of all
complaints from members of the public against members of the force indicating
how they have been dealt with, including any reference to the action by the
Complaints Authority, should be placed before the police authority at its
meetings. (See paragraph 3-17 and Annex K for the form which this should take).
The attention of the authority should be drawn expressly to the following
categories of case:-

     a.     those in which    an investigatingofficer    has beenappointed    from
             another force under section 85(3) or 85(5) of the 1984 Act;

     b.      those in which the investigation has been supervised by the Authority
             and in which the Authority have expressed dissatisfaction with the
             investigation under section 89(10) of the Act;

     c.     those which have been referred to    the Director of Public Prosecutions
             under section 90 of the 1984 Act;

     d.     those where the Complaints Authority have directed      the bringing of
             disciplinary charges under section 93 of the 1984 Act;



                                          41
Sections 8.5-8.9
          e.   those where a disciplinary tribunal under section 94(3) of the 1984            (
               Act has been or is to be held.

8     The Secretary of State hopes that chief officers and police authorities
will discuss together what can be done to supplement the information‘ P ™ * 1?*
with further information which may be of assistance to the aUoh°r^       in.
exercise of its functions of general oversight of the handling of °°®Pla             '
Particularly in cases which have aroused local concern it may be helpful to the
authority to know something of the background.   It will also be              .
authority to give any information, beyond that referred toJ.n the
paragraph, about the general pattern 6f complaints in the f°rce a « *           :
recommended that chief officers should, at their^discretion <an
with the principle that the authority should not be involved in the hand    g
individual cases) make such information available when requested          y
authority to do so. (But see paragraph 8.8).

3.6   HM Inspectors will, as part of their annual inspection of
forces, consider the handling of complaints and discipline within the
chief officers should make their complaints books ^sellable ror t'’ „hich are                 C
An annual statistical return of all complaints, similar to t h e r e t u r , ®
made to police authorities, should be made. Paragraph 3 . 1 ' d e f e r s and » n n « J
gives the form which this should take.      It is anticipated that details from
these returns will form the basis of whatever comments HM Chief Inspector ol
Constabulary may make on complaints and discipline in his annual report.

INFORMAL RESOLUTION

8 7 Oversight of the procedure for dealing with less serious complaints by way
of in?or;:ig resolutionPwill fall to the police authorities and HM Inspectors as
part of their function under section 95 of the 1984 Act.    Paragrap 3-7
to the maintenance of a register of complaints, ^jiuding those wh
settled by informal resolution.     The register should be made available         ' Ior
inspection by police authorities and HM Inspectors;     the record of complaints
informally resolved should be sufficiently detailed to enable a Judgment to be
made on the general suitability for informal resolution of cases handled in this
way, as well as the means by which such resolution was conducted.

    DISCLOSURE AND CONFIDENTIALITY                                                            ^

    8.8   Section 12(3) of the Police Act 1964 states that if it aPPe^ s to;a ch lef
    officer that a report required by a police authority under section12(2) of the
    Act would contain information which in the public interes      oug   n         ,
    disclosed or which is not needed by the authority for the proper discharge of
    ? r functions, he may request the authority to refer the
    Secretary of State.   It is considered that the same principle should apply to
    any request by the authority to see the completed files, or material from sue
    S L l r on individual cases!     If it is felt that
    concerning a complaint may       involve a breach of confidentiality,
    disclosure would in any way be improper, the autho^lfc^ m*yt efchgSecretary of
    section 12(3) of the 1954 Act, to refer their requirement to the Secretary


    INFORMATION CONCERNING THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

    8.9   Both HM Inspectors and police authorities will be entitled to
    information on the part played by the Complaints Authority in the^ ndl1^    of
    complaints. The normal channel for such information will be the chief off c           .



                                            42
                                                             Section 8.9 Cont'd

as having the primary responsibility for the handling of complaints and
disciplinary matters in his force.   It is for this reason that it is suggested
above that information on this aspect of the handling of complaints should form
a part of the regular return (Annex K) by the chief officer to his police
authority.   Similarly, the annual return to HM Inspector (Annex J) includes a
section which deals with complaints referred to the Complaints Authority.
Police authorities will also (under section 97(6) of the 1984 Act) receive a
copy of the Complaints Authority's annual report together with any statistical
or other general information which the Authority consider should be brought to
their attention in connection with their functions under section 95 of the 1984
Act; and, as indicated in paragraph 6.42, a copy of any special report made
under section 97(2) of the Act which concerns their area.




                                       43
     Sections 9*1-9*4

                                        SECTION 9

      DISCIPLINARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR OFFICERS UP TO AID INCLUDING CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

     GENERAL

     9.1    Those responsible for administering the police discipline system are
     reminded that this guidance is issued under statutory authority, section 105 of
      the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, and that in discharging their
     responsibilities they are required to take its provisions fully into account.
st   .Whilst it is not necessary to follow, dts terms exactly in all cases, it shoi&d
5    not be departed from without good reason. , If, on a disciplinary appeal, "an
     appellant raises an apparent failure by the respondent to follow any of its
     provisions the respondent will be required to explain and justify this (section
      105(3) explicitly makes such matters admissible on appeal).      The weight and
     significance to be attached to any departure from the guidance will vary from
     case to case.   However, the Secretary of State will wish to be satisfied as to
     the extent to which that departure was justified and the extent to which, if at
     all, the departure might have proved detrimental to the accused officer's
     conduct of his defence.

     9.2 Much of what follows is addressed to the chief officer, in his capacity as
     disciplinary authority and as officer presiding at the first instance hearing.
     But much is equally applicable to the functions of deputy chief officers, or
     those otherwise responsible for the decision to bring discipline charges, the
     formulation of such charges, and the preparation of the case against accused
     officers.   The Secretary of State wishes these officers also to have regard to
     such of this section and of Annex H as is relevant to the discharge of their
     responsibilities. He wishes them to have regard in particular (but not solely)
     to the passages on the formulation and scope of disciplinary charges, the law
     and procedure relating to legal representation at disciplinary hearings, the
     admissibility of evidence, the editing of statements, the burden of proof and,
     generally, measures to ensure fairness to the accused officer.     Where it is
     possible to resolve such issues before the hearing takes place, this should be
     done; but where there is a difference of view on a question such as
     admissibility, the final decision will rest with the officer presiding at the
     hearing.                                                       '
     DISCIPLINE 00DE

     9.3   For many disciplinary offences    (depending on the terms in which they are
     framed in the discipline code) the     mental element necessary for a finding of
     guilt is less than that for most        criminal offences: the offence may, for
     instance, be made out if the act in    question was committed through lack of due
     care.

     Discreditable conduct (discipline code, paragraph 1)

     9-4   Proceedings for the offence of discreditable conduct should be brought
     sparingly.   Wherever possible a more Specific charge under one of the other
     paragraphs of the discipline code should be laid, and a charge of discreditable
     conduct should not be added to a charge under another paragraph unless it is
     based on facts distinct from those underlying that other charge. This applies
     with particular force where the officer concerned was off duty when the alleged
     misconduct took place.   Those responsible for bringing charges should bear in
     mind that certain types of conduct might reasonably be said to bring discredit
     on the police service when committed by an officer on duty, but not otherwise.


                                             44
                                                               Sections 9.5-9.10

This is not an area in which it is possible to lay down hard and fast rules:
each case must be treated on its merits.     Chief officers should bear in mind
also in such cases the advice contained in paragraph 3*19.

9.5   An illicit or irregular sexual relationship between a police officer and
another person is not of itself discreditable conduct within the meaning of the
discipline code. Here again it is necessary to examine carefully the particular
circumstances of each case in order to decide whether discredit to the police
force or police service is likely.

9.6 The offence of discreditable qpnduct is committed where an officer acts in
a manner likely to bring discredit on the reputation of the police force      x>r
service. If the conduct is known about outside the force, it will toe necessary
to establish only that it is reasonably likely to bring discredit.      But the
Secretary of State considers that the offence may be proved even if the conduct
is not known about outside the force, provided that it is reasonably likely to
become known about at some     stage, and that such discreditwill result if this
occurs.   Where it is in practice unlikely that the conduct will become known
about outside the force, it will be appropriate to bring a charge under this
paragraph only where the officer has behaved in a disorderly manner or in a
manner prejudicial to discipline.

9.7    There may be situations where the alleged misconduct consists of a
continuing state of affairs rather than a single action; it might not be serious
enough to require a charge if it occurs    over a short period, but its continuance
may make it serious. In such a case, the chief officer should consider whether
the officer concerned should be given an opportunity to correct the situation
rather than be charged immediately with an offence against discipline. Whether
this is appropriate in any case will depend on the nature of the conduct and the
officer's blameworthiness.

Disobedience to orders (discipline code, paragraph 3)

9.8 Paragraph 3 provides a defence to a charge of disobedience to orders where
an officer has 'good and sufficient cause' not to obey an order.         Thus an
officer does not commit this offence if his reason for failing to carry out an
order was that he did not know of it and had a good reason for not knowing of it
- for example, because it had not been properly communicated or promulgated.

Falsehood or prevarlcatlon(dlscipllne code, paragraph 5)

9.9   A disciplinary charge of falsehood or prevarication should not in general
be based on any mis-statement contained in a personal explanation made by an
officer in response to 'Regulation 7 notice' or any written or oral statement
made by the officer at an earlier stage of a disciplinary enquiry. But to this
rule there are exceptions. Such'a charge would be appropriate, for instance, if
a falsehood used as a means of 'covering up' was more reprehensible than the
original offence - as when an officer attempted to implicate an innocent
colleague as a means of diverting suspicion from himself.   In such a case it is
reasonable to see the falsehood as a distinct and separate element in the
officer's misconduct, deserving separate disciplinary action.

Racially discriminatory behaviour (discipline code, paragraph 9)

9.10   A charge of racially discriminatory behaviour should be brought where
there is evidence to show that an officer has, on the grounds of a person's
colour, race, nationality or ethnic or national origins, either behaved towards
that person in a manner which, even without those grounds, amounts to the
commission of the disciplinary offence of abuse of authority, or otherwise
 Sections 9.11-9*15

 treated him improperly.    In either case, the behaviour in question must have
 occurred while the officer was on duty.        Private acts of discrimination
 committed by an officer who is off duty should not be charged as an offence
 under this paragraph of the discipline code.   If the off duty behaviour of an
 officer amounts to a disciplinary offence, the charge should be brought under
 another paragraph of the code.

 9.11   The inclusion of this offence in the discipline code does not imply that
 no notice may ever be taken of racial differences.    For example, an indication
rof racial origin in the description of a anjsp^^ might be as relevant and propfer
 as an indication that the suspect is male or*/female, young or old.     Failure,
 however, to respond to an emergency call for no reason other than the racial or
 ethnic origins of the caller would amount to an offence.

 Loss or damage to police property (discipline code, paragraph 12)

 9.12 A charge under this paragraph requires a significant element of fault on
 the officer's part: loss or damage caused by a simple mistake does not justify
 disciplinary proceedings. An officer's agreement to pay towards the cost of the
 property which he has lost or damaged may be relevant to the decision whether to
 charge him under this paragraph.   But an offer of payment should not be used or
 seen as a way of avoiding formal discipline where this is otherwise justified;
 nor should a refusal to pay be used as a reason for a discipline charge where
 this is not otherwise justified; nor should an officer be given the impression
 that the decision whether to charge will depend on his willingness to pay.

 Unfitness for duty through drink (discipline code, paragraph 13)

 9.13   When an officer is unexpectedly called out for duties (ie where it was
 reasonable that he did not foresee the likelihood of being called out for such
 duties) he should be able at no discredit to himself to say that he has had too
 much drink.

 Alternative charges

 9.14 There will be cases where alternative charges under the'same paragraph or
 sub-paragraph of the discipline code seem equally appropriate.  For example, an
 officer may have destroyed or mutilated a police document either 'wilfully and
 without proper authority' or 'through lack of due care' (paragraph 5(b) of the
 code), and it may require a discipline hearing to determine which.    In such a
 case these alternatives should not be preferred as separate charges; rather, a
 single charge should be preferred, to the effect that the officer 'wilfully and
 without proper authority or through lack of due care' destroyed the document.
 Where, however, a charge of this kind is found proved in only one of the
 alternative aspects (e.g. where, in the example quoted here, the presiding
 officer is satisfied that the accused officer destroyed the document "through
 lack of care" rather than "wilfully and without proper authority") he should
 indicate this when announcing his finding and ensure that the entry in the
 records accurately reflects that finding.

 Schedule 2 to the Police Regulations 1979

 9.15 This schedule places certain restrictions on the private life of members
 of police forces. In the opinion of the Secretary of State:




                                        46
                                                               Sections 9.16-9*19

     (a) It is not appropriate to charge an officer with breach of paragraph 2
         of the schedule if he temporary leaves his home for a time and stays
          elsewhere. There may or may not be grounds for a charge under another
          provision of the discipline code, but any such charge will depend on
          the circumstances of the particular case:    for example, the officer
         may be liable to a charge of disobedience to orders for failing to
         notify the chief officer of an address at which he could be contacted.

     (b)   Paragraph    2 of the schedule applies only to a member of a police
            force.   Where, therefore, as a result of a posting to a different
           locality, an officer is required to move to other premises in the new
           locality, it is not within the power of the chief officer to require
           also that the officer'•£* spouse and family should live at those other
           premises.

     (c)   A cohabitee is not a lodger within theterms of paragraph 3 of
           schedule 2, even though he or she may make a contribution to the
           household expenses.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

Responsibility for arranging the hearing

9.16   The responsibility for arranging for the hearing of any disciplinary
charge rests with the deputy chief officer of the force concerned.       He will
consider the question of legal representation (see below and Annex H), fix the
date and time, arrange for accommodation and for the taking of a record of the
proceedings, and ensure that the accused officer and any witnesses (including
the complainant in cases arising from a complaint) are notified.       Where the
Police Complaints Authority have directed that a disciplinary tribunal be held,
the deputy chief officer should consult the Authority.   It is for the Authority
themselves to decide which of their members should sit on the tribunal, subject
to the condition that those members must not previously have had any involvement
with the case.    The costs of such a tribunal, other than the expenses of
Authority members, will be a charge on the police fund.          The powers and
requirements of the Authority in relation to disciplinary tribunals are
discussed more fully at paragraphs 9*20 - 9*21.    Further guidance on arranging
hearings is at Annex H.                                              '

9.17   Where a chief officer other than the accused's own chief officer is to
hear a case under Regulation 14 of the Discipline Regulations, whether on his
own or as a chairman of a disciplinary tribunal, the arrangements will still be
made by the accused officer's own force, but the chief officer conducting the
hearing should be consulted.

The disciplinary hearing

9.18 Annex H contains notes on the procedures to be followed before and at the
disciplinary hearing, including the rights and facilities to be made available
to the accused officer at all stages of the process. The advice in Annex H (as
in this section) is designed to further the twin aims of being fair to the
accused officer and getting at the truth:      the procedures they describe are
intended as means to this end, not (except where they are legal requirements) as
ends in themselves. Thus a departure from them will be justified if - but only
if - it can be shown that they led to a truer and fairer result than observing
them.

9.19   In relation to the provision of facilities to the accused officer, the
advice in the following paragraphs and in Annex H can be summarised as follows:
Sections 9-20-9.23

     (a)   he and his "friend" should be given adequate duty time to prepare his
           defence;

     (b)   he should be given copies of all the evidence in good time before the
           hearing;

     (c)   he should have the right at all stages to consult, and be represented
           by, a "friend" who may be a representative of a police staff
           association; to consult a lawyer before the hearing; and not to be
           liable to the punishments of dismissal, requirement to resign or
           reduction in rank unless he has been given the opportunity actually to
           be represented by a lawyer at: the hearing.-

     (d)   hearings should be carried out in accordance with the requirements of
           natural justice.

Hearing before a disciplinary tribunal

9.20 In general, the procedure at a hearing before a disciplinary tribunal set
up under section 94 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 will be in most
respects the same as that for a chief officer sitting alone.      Except for the
punishment, however, decisions at the hearing are for the tribunal as a whole,
by a majority if necessary.   It is important that those present, in particular
the accused officer and the complainant, should be satisfied that the Police
Complaints Authority members have taken a full part in the proceedings.      The
chief officer, as chairman, should ensure that the other two members of the
tribunal have the opportunities they need to ask questions of the presenting
officer, the accused and any witnesses. So far as the decision on punishment is
concerned, the chief officer should seek and take full account of the views of
the Authority members and ensure that they are aware of any information which he
will take into account in determining punishment.

9.21 Regulation        of the Discipline Regulations provides that no indication
should be given to any other person of whether the decision reached by a
disciplinary tribunal was unanimous or by a majority. Accordingly, where there
is any need for deliberation this should take place in private  .fIn the case of
most procedural decisions, however, it should normally be possible for the
disciplinary tribunal to agree on a course of action without the need to retire.

STANDARD OF PROOF

9.22 Regulation 23(2)(b) of the Police (Discipline) Regulations provides that
the required standard of proof in disciplinary proceedings is the same as that
at a criminal trial.    Thus in order for an officer to be found guilty at a
disciplinary hearing, the offence must be proved beyond reasonable doubt and
not, as in civil proceedings, on the balance of probabilities.

EVIDENCE

9.23 It is not necessary to follow exactly the procedures of a criminal trial,
and in particular a disciplinary hearing need not be bound by technical rules of
evidence. Where documentary evidence (such as copies and plans and transcripts
of court proceedings) are accepted by both sides, it is not necessary to prove
such evidence formally.     Great care should however, be taken with hearsay
evidence, which is to be defined as unsubstantiated statements offered by
witnesses based upon what someone else has said and not upon personal knowledge
or observation.    Such evidence should be admitted only under the following
conditions. First, there should be reasons which make it impracticable for the


                                         48
                                                              Sections 9 .24-9*28

originator of the evidence (i.e. the person who passed the information to the
hearsay witness) to give evidence himself, for example because he has gone
overseas for a protracted period.      Secondly, the evidence should clearly be
relevant to the charge or charges. Thirdly, every effort should be made not
only to test the reliability of the evidence, for example by comparing it with
the available direct evidence, but also to assess the reliability of the witness
himself insofar as this is possible. Even where these conditions are satisfied,
and theevidence is admitted, the presiding officer should treat it with caution
and, in   his statement of finding and/or punishment, shouldspecify the extent to
which he relied on JLt in reaching his decisions.
                                   i                          ,          .   . \ •
9.24   Statements taken from any person which include material not relevant to
the disciplinary charge(s) or not capable of proof should, as far as
practicable, be edited to remove such material. The purpose of this is to avoid
prejudicing the disciplinary authority by the introduction of extraneous matter.
It should be borne in mind that blank spaces or over-markings in a copy of a
statement can themselves indicate that prejudicial material has been removed or
hidden.     The editing should therefore be done in such a way as not to reveal
that it has taken place, for example by retyping of the full, edited statement.

REHABILITATION OF OFFENDERS ACT 197*1
9.25     Evidence  of criminal convictions     which   are  'spent'  under the
Rehabilitation of Offenders Act may be given in disciplinary proceedings, and
questions may be asked the answers to which would reveal such convictions
(paragraph 3 of schedule 3 to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974
(Exceptions) Order 1975).    But the Secretary of State wishes the practice in
disciplinary proceedings to be in accordance with that followed in the criminal
courts in similar circumstances. Accordingly if either party at a disciplinary
hearing intends to refer to the 'spent* convictions of a witness or to ask
questions about such convictions, he should first seek author y        o o sof
preferably at or before the beginning of the hearing, from the chief officer or
disciplinary tribunal hearing the case. Authority should be given only where it
is considered that the interests of justice require the evidence to be admitted.
The admission of evidence about spent convictions does not automatically require
the withdrawal from the proceedings of any third party, such as the complainant
in a complaints case.                                                '
PUNISHMENT
9.26  Section 102 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 provides that a
punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank may not be
imposed at a disciplinary hearing unless the accused officer has been giy®n the
opportunity to elect to be legally represented at the hearing.          This
discussed at Annex H.
9.27  Regulation 24 of the Discipline Regulations requires a separate punishment
to be imposed for each offence found proved.

9.28   If a chief officer intends to take into account the accused officer's
annual appraisal reports when deciding punishment, copies of the reports shou
also be supplied to the accused officer. Where a written statement of character
is prepared for use at the hearing in the event of a finding of guilt a copy
must be given to the accused officer with the other documents required to be
served on him by Regulation 10(1) of the Discipline Regulations.




                                        49
S«ctlona 9.29*9-33
Punlataaent In 'rc«ltt«d' c u t j
                                   a r u e remitted to hi* under Regulation 1<
9.29   A chief officer                .         only M k e , recommendation a* to
takea the deciaion aa t            I .hould be informed at the conclusion of
punishment.   The accuaed o                 U e n foun<J proved. and the presiding
the hearing what charge or c h w g e a J        pr0vide as soon aa poasible after
officer is required by Regulation ? ^ ) to p n w r W *                      er wlth
the hearing a formal statemen t of^ the                    ^    ..n t t 0 the chief

“     i« 7 ,‘ T        £     , ‘£ r « . * * w \ u < !   .<»                                                          * tw         *°
the officer himself.

            lto ..         < .«   « •» « « >                                                             u       «       £ .“ £
i s r i s .i r ?                                    *      «««*.                                     r r r : , :
                                                           - " s s                 -      ** —               *«- - *
officer of the decision on punishment.

CRIMINAL CONDUCT:                  TIMIMG OF DISCIPLINARY HEARING

             W »r. . « . . i p l l n . r , <h.r«.             *                                              V       '   ’« “ £
a     criminal             conviction         (paragraph      16 o                 prepare , p iea in mitigation,
officer should be        ' ” ,^ Cn*u,pended pending the disciplinary hearing.
If necessary, an officer m a y P                   relevant court proceedings;
so the hearing need                                     an immediate custodial           "
but there may be advantage in •"                  hl f officer should consider
or .        .wrfrt            .««««•          h“   ,.7“ ., J T r J i r I S             .pproprl.U   to b r f ,            or   M r


 conviction.
                  , n               sa          th# Discipline Regulations provides that a finding
9.31A         Regulation            28   of     the Dis p        ,nal con<Juct 1# automatically set
 of g u i l t      in respect            of    a charge °                          .     itself   se t   asid e           upon a
 aside  if the relev,nt   'fjjjjjl concerned. Section 3 of the Criminal Appeal
 successful appeal by the offic          instead of allowing or dismissing an
 Act. however, provides for the co«p t.           J f . ^ e m a t i v e offence. Such
    appeal, to substitute a v*rdic* ®f ‘" lpiln, „                                      conviction invalid, as the
    . decision would not                                                                   where a conviction of an
    criminal conviction would * ‘n l     .natively         Bt                           trivial in relation to the
                  I.       •» * > « « *                                                   »
    offence for which the 0 ” “ er                       or           i<Jer whether the punishment     in the
    the chief officer may                                                  ^   appropriate, and whether, in
    disciplinary proceedings might                                    *   h    j hl arrange for the officer
    order to overcome sny possible                                                        al t 0 the Secretary
                                                                                   an appe8
    or former officer concern d                                         h   disciplinary charge.      In such
    of State against the                                                    ir necessary, accept the appeal
    circumstances the Secretary of
    out of tl#**

    NEW TENANCIES WHILE AWAITING DISCIPLINARY HEARING

    9*32    U   -ill jenerally *                         ---riate^to                                                              «
    accomodation provided by the                        poJi     ^   ^                     ai$1|i„ al 0r requirement

    T ^ iT ’rrT:;: z : : r te^                                                                                       -    officer
    is awaiting trial on a criminal charge.

    MEDICAL TREATMENT
                               .           u                                   m
                                                   factor which may validly figure
    9.3 3  An officer's ®«dlcal         or pr0Ceed with disciplinary procedures,
    in the decision whether to *nitlat     f P orflcer to decide not to initiate
    It ia. for example, open to                        officer's medical condition
    proceedings where evidence sugg* ® \ s6lon of the alleged offence againat
    played a major r o l e i n   the c       offence ls 6UCh that it cannot clearly
    discipline and where I*? natuw>       ^ ln                                  ^
                                                       lnterest, 0f the force or the
    be shown to be in the public i      .ln,.     » similar approach may be adopted
    officer concerned to initiate proce      B’e<Jlcal condition ia such that the
    where it is clear that an officer        ^    ^ , ^ 1 breakdown. Where medical
     initiation of Proceedings might■ “                                «,«•*•• only after charge, have been
     evidence of the kl_ ^                                        *     open to a chief officer to consider
     laid against an officer,                                          disciplinary hearing takea place by
     abandoning proceeding*   b e f o                             r    e und er Regulation 9(1) of the Police
                                                                           *   « * . » . . . » < * • -

                                                                      50
                                                                    Sections 9.34-9.38

      the Police Complaints Authority under section 93(6) of the Act before
      withdrawing charges which arose from a complaints matter.) No similar power to
      withdraw charges exists where a hearing has already begun. In such a case, an
      officer's medical condition might provide cause for adjourning a hearing and may
      in any event be considered in mitigation of the penalty to be awarded if the
      allegations are found to be proved.

     9.34   If at any stage of the disciplinary process an accused officer's medical
     condition (whether or not it contributed to the alleged offence or might lead to
     a breakdown if the disciplinary process is pursued) is found to be such that he
 '   would normally be granted medical retirement, the disciplinary process should
>r   not necessarily prevent or delay retirement. In .-such a case, it will be for the
 f   chief officer to consider whether the public interest and the interests of the
     force and of the officer concerned would be better served by medical retirement
     or by allowing the disciplinary procedures to take their course.

     INFORMATION TO THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY AS TO THE O0TOOHB OF DISCIPLINARY
     PROCEEDINGS

     9.35    Section 91(2) of the 1984 Act requires a report to be sent to the
     Complaints Authority of the outcome of any case which is excluded from reference
     to them only because charges have been preferred and the officer has pleaded
     guilty to them.    Particulars should be supplied of the disciplinary charges
     preferred and of any punishment imposed.     If the charges related to conduct
     which was the subject of a complaint and the investigation was not supervised by
     the Authority, the chief officer should also send the Authority a copy of the
     complaint (or of the record of the complaint) and a copy of the investigating
     officer's report.   Such action should not be taken until any appeal has been
     disposed of or the time for entering an appeal has passed. The Authority would
     not, however, know of the eventual outcome of cases originally referred to them
     under section 90 where disciplinary charges (whether or not preferred after
     reference to the Authority) were denied by the officer concerned and the hearing
     was not before a disciplinary tribunal. For the completeness of the Authority's
     Information, therefore, chief officers should supply them with similar details
     in respect of such cases. A convenient way of doing this would be by sending to
     the Authority a copy of the discipline form when the case is closed.

     SUSPENDED OFFICERS

     9.36    The Secretary of State considers that an officer suspended under the
     Discipline Regulations remains subject to the discipline code and the Police
     Regulations during the period of suspension.   Therefore he remains liable to
     disciplinary proceedings for any offence he may commit during the period of
     suspension.

     9.37 Schedule 6 to the Police Regulations 1979 deals with financial provisions
     relating to police officers suspended from duty, and with the recovery of fines
     imposed under the Discipline Regulations.

     PROBATIONERS

     9.38   The provision for a chief officer to dispense with the services of a
     constable during his period of probation should not be used as an alternative
     means of dismissing a probationer where he should properly be charged with an
     offence against discipline. Whef-e disciplinary proceedings are appropriate and
     justified, they should be brougttl; where they are not brought, a probationer
     should not be left with the impression that he has been suspected of an offence
     and given no chance to defend himself at a disciplinary hearing.


                                           51
Section 9*39

RECORDS OF POLICE OFFICERS* F3SGERPRHTS

9.39 The Police Regulations provide for records to be kept of the fingerprints
of all serving police officers.   But it should be clearly understood that this
provision is made solely for the purpose of eliminating the fingerprints of
police officers at the scenes of crimes:  this fingerprint collection is not to
be used in order to provide evidence in any disciplinary proceedings brought
against a member of a police force. In the majority of cases where fingerprint
evidence is desirable, it will probably be following a criminal investigation
when fingerprints will ,have been taken during the course of that enquiry and
will be available as evidence.                        Met




                                       52
                                                                 Sections 10.1-10.4
                                     SECTION 10

        COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE ARRANGEMENTS FOR SENIOR OFFICERS (ABOVE
                       THE RANK OF CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT)*

 10 1    Part IX of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 assigns the task
 of recording and investigating complaints against police officers and taking
 any subsequent disciplinary action to the "appropriate authority".        In the
 case of forces other than the Metropolitan Police, the "appropriate authority"
 is the police authority for the force's area.   In the case of Deputy Assistant
 Conmissioner   or Commander of the Metropolitan Po^?e,         the "appropriate
^authority" is the Commissioner of ,Police of th% Metropolis (officers <^f
 Assistant Conmissioner rank and above are appointed       ®ay be removed by H$r
 Majesty and fall outside the arrangements described'here).      In this section
 of the Guidance reference is made, for convenience, simply to the police
 authority, but it should be taken to include where appropriate the Metropolitan
 Commissioner or the Deputy Conmissioner acting in his place.      The section is
 principally addressed to the appropriate police authority, in its capacity
 as disciplinary authority, and to the police officer appointed to investigate
 a •complaint’ against a senior officer.   It will, however, also have relevance
 for the tribunal appointed to hear the case against a senior officer and for
 the solicitor appointed to present the case.      The relevant regulations are
 the Police (Discipline) (Senior Officers) Regulations 1985 (hereafter called
 simply 'the Regulations’).

10.2 Those responsible for administering the senior officers discipline system
are reminded that by virtue of section 105 of the Police and Criminal Evidence
Act   1984  police officers    (and  the   Police  Complaints Authority where
appropriate) are required to have regard to the Guidance.     The Secretary of
State hopes that others involved in the complaints and discipline process will
similarly take account of the Guidance where applicable.

10 ^    Regulations 4(1) has the effect of applying to senior officers the
discipline code set out in Schedule 1 to the P o li c e (Discipline) Regulations
1985   Although it has not been thought necessary to frame a special discipline
code for senior officers, clearly some of the offences or some parts of the
offences listed will not be applicable to officers of that ra/ik. Care should
therefore be taken to ensure that charges under the discipline code are not
brought against a senior officer which are obviously inappropriate. Paragraphs
o o.g 15 0f section 9 above contain guidance on many of the charges in the
discipline code and should be consulted before any decision is made whether
‘ ch.r« .hould £ brought.       Section 104 of the 198* Act, which deals with
disciplinary charges against a police officer who has been convicted or
acquitted of a criminal offence, may also be relevant to the police authority s
 decision.

 ACTION ON RECEIPT OF A COMPLAINT

 10 4 Section 86(1) of the 1984 Act places upon police authorities the duty to
 record complaints against officers for whom they con.tltute the «PP^priate
 authority.  Thereafter they are empowered (by section 86(2)) to deal with the
 matter according to their discretion if satisfied that the conduct complained
 of, even if proved, would not justify a criminal or disciplinary charge. This


 *   But see paragraph 10.3 i-* regard to guidance on the formulation of charges.

                                         53
 S e c tio n 10.5-10*7
 .   ,k. fc-aa equivalent of the Informal resolution provision in regard to
 i» the broad q          k  b t lt wlll be noted that the consent of the
 °           la^ot required before a case of this kind is handled by informal
 complainant is            state's view it should be open to police authorities
 means; in the Secretary     COMl(1(,r appropriate In dealing with such matters,
 to take                                not indicated.   Subsection (3) provides
              othercase X    poace authority should appoint an officer (of at
 least the rank of the officer complained^f) from             ~

 S T f f l M r “to Sbe8w% wolntrdP, ‘ that c h ie f o f f ic e r i s required by subsection (D
 to comply with the request.
                      fiii/cN ftr th#» togu Act makes it clear that the complaints system is
thl0.5        Section 8M(5) of the ly            _ rt<-A«%Mon or controlodf the fforce by tli£ -
                                                                                                                               31'




                         appropriate ln such cases to have resort to the provisions o f Part
 IX of the 198H Act.
 T O H V K STiom o* o r c o h pu ih t s m d o ib e h h a itbbs iin m - v o c s b iio b o pfic b b s


  "I          t^-th T                                                                   7 is o 7 m



 z    s   s    l     - j x           x       r                                                                «

  £ L         “t     r       t   s       r       0f°fa                       S £    £                             . pe r v l s e
  the     investigation                  of      any matter     b£ou6|j        submitted      to     them   any    other

  “           in?;       *       e ^ ”                   d S . i ^


              ^ i —                                                        S S - r i S has°a” ready
  in respect of a complaint which the P                                             f th Authority do conclude
  treat otherwise than by formalinvestigation.                             But ir     tne i u h i o t y  ollce



  r s £ S & ^                                                        1     ^=sSfeg
  e S ^ S x rS ^ S ^ s s s
  very senior officers of the force.

  ,0.7         If the Complaints ‘^ o r i t y supervise th«f inj

  Ippointment^V* th e ^ n v e s ti^ tin g o f f ic e r or                  i f the appointment has already been
  made, to ask for another officer £o be appointed.




                                                                     5*1
10.3A It is the Secretary of State's view that the discharge of
its disciplinary functions in relation 'to senior officers should
be regarded by a police authority as a judicial function in
respect of which legal advice should be sought as appropriate.
The procedures adopted by the authority in this regard should as
far as possible reflect that view.   They should preserve strict
fairness and impartiality to all concerned together with strict
regard for the relevant statutory provisions.    In particular, it
is the view of the Secretary of State that it could be held to be
contrary to’the requirements of natural justice for an authority
member personally ^ggriWfect by any conduct of= a senior officer
which has been drawn to the attention of the authority by way of
a complaint: made under the provisions of the 1984 Act or
otherwise under the provisions of the Police (Discipline) -(Senior
Officers) Regulations 1985 to participate in certain decisions
which are required to be taken by the authority under these
statutory provisions. These decisions are:     (a) a decision to
refer the matter to an investigating officer, (b) a decision that
disciplinary proceedings should be taken against the officer
following an investigation, (c) any decision as to guilt or
punishment upon an officer's admission that he has committed an
offence or following the receipt of a report of a tribunal
established to hear charges against the officer and (d) a
decision to suspend an officer from duty as a result of the
allegation made against him. Where the size of the membership of
the police authority permits this, they will wish to consider
whether the confidentiality and thoroughness which are a
concomitant of the judicial approach to discipline matters are
not best guaranteed by delegating to a sub-committee of the
authority all detailed consideration of the issues required to be
examined under the statutory provisions. Authorities which
determine to adopt this approach will wish to have careful regard
to the sub-committee's terms of reference to avoid matters
becoming subject to re-examination when the sub-committee's
conclusions are reported to the whole authority. Furthermore, it
 is the Secretary of State's view that police officers are
 entitled to the privacy enjoyed by local authority employees
under paragraph 1 of Part I of Schedule 12A to the Local
Government Act 1972.

 10.3B A decision by a police authority to initiate an
 investigation of a complaint or other allegation against a senior
 officer must be regarded as a matter of legitimate public
 interest.   In its relations with the media, however, the police
 authority .will wish to have regard to the judicial nature of this
 aspect of its functions and in particular to the danger that the
 proceedings could be held to be prejudiced by wide public
 discussion of the matters under investigation and the
 circumstances surrounding the allegations.   (Where, however, the
 investigation is being conducted under the supervision of the
 Police Complaints Authority, inquiries about the progress of the
 investigation should be referred to the Authority).    In other
 cases, the police authority will find it helpful to decide at an
 early stage who should conduct its relations with the media in
 the course of the investigation and of subsequent action.    The
 member or officer so appointed should normally handle questions
 about such matters as the decision to investigate the allegations
 that have been made, the position of the officer under
 investigation, the progress of the investigation, and, after the
 investigation report has been received, the actions of the
 authority.
                                                              Sections 10.8-10.13
CONDUCT OF INVESTIGATIONS
10.8   Regulation 6 requires that the investigating officer should, as soon as
is practicable (without prejudicing his or any other investigation of the matter)
in writing inform the senior officer subject to investigation of the report,
allegation or complaint, and give him written notice - (a) informing him that
he is not obliged to say anything concerning the matter, but that he may, if
he so desires, make a written or oral statement to the investigating officer
or to the police authority; and (b) warning him that if he makes such a statement
it may be used in any subsequent disciplinary proceedings.

10.9   The procedure to be followed in any investigation is entirely a matter
for the officer appointed to carry it out, subject to any directions given/him
by the Complaints Authority in the case of investigation under its supervisions.'
General guidance on the    conduct of complaints     investigations is given in
paragraphs 4.16 - 4.25.

INVESTIGATING OFFICER'S REPORT
10.10    When the investigating officer has completed the investigation or has
taken it as far as he reasonably can, he should submit a report to the police
authority (or to the Complaints Authority with a copy to the police authority,
in the case of a supervised investigation).       Where it becomes clear to the
investigating officer in the course of a formal investigation that the complaint
is ill-founded or    that the effort in pursuing it   would be disproportionate it
is open to him to prepare an early report recommending to the police authority
(or to the Complaints Authority if the case has been supervised) that it is not
worth pursuing the matter further.       (It will be noted that, under the new
Regulations, the agreement of the Complaints Authority is required before
complaints are treated by the police authority       as anonymous, repetitious or
incapable of investigation.)

10.10A   The investigating officer's report (including accompanying statements
and exhibits), like any other police report, is made in confidence.        It must
not, either wholly or in part, be made available to persons other than authority
members or staff and must be handled at all times as a confidential document.

ACTION ON RECEIVING INVESTIGATING OFFICER'S REPORT
10.11   Where it appears to the police authority, on receiving tfye investigating
officer's report,    that a senior officer may have committed a disciplinary
offence, the authority are required by Regulation 7(1) to consider whether
disciplinary proceedings need to be taken.      In the case of a complaint (or
another matter whose investigation was supervised by the Complaints Authority
under the provisions of section 88 of the 1984 Act) the police authority are
required by section 90(1) of the Act to send a copy of the report to the Director
of Public Prosecutions unless the report satisfies them that no criminal offence
has been committed.

10.12 At the end of an investigation which they have supervised, the Complaints
Authority are required under section 89 of the 1984 Act, to submit to the police
authority (and the complainant, where practicable to do so) a statement whether
the investigation was or was not conducted to their satisfaction and specifying
any respect in which it was not so conducted.        No criminal or disciplinary
charges may be brought until this statement has been submitted to the police
authority - except in the case of proposed criminal charges where it appears
to the Director of Public Prosecutions that there are exceptional circumstances
which make it undesirable to await the submission of the statement.

10.13   Regulation 7(2) provides that, unless the police authority decide that
no disciplinary proceedings need be taken, they should inform the senior officer
in writing of the report, allegation or complaint and give him a written notice
(a) asking him whether or not he admits that he has committed an offence; (b)
informing him that he is not obliged to say anything concerning the matter but
that he may, if he so desires, make a written or oral statement to the police
authority; and (c) warning him that if he makes such a statement it may be used
in any subsequent disciplinary proceedings.
Sections 10.H-10.20

        Where the senior officer admit* that he has committed an offence the
police authority, having considered the report of the investigation, may either
(a)   bring disciplinary charges, or (b) impose a punishment without preferring
charges and without a hearing,    or (c) if satisfied that the offence, even if
proved, would not Justify the imposition of a punishment, deal with the matter
according to their discretion.

10 15   Where the officer concerned does not admit that he has committed an
offence but the police authority, after taking into account any statement he
may have made under Regulation 7. are not so satisfied, they       are required by
Regulation 9 to bring disciplinary charges unless they are satisfied that the
offence, even if proved, would not Justify the imposition of any punishment (in
which case they may deal with the matter according to their discretion).

10.15A   Regulation 9 provides,, for ^hV, formulation of chargesin a case w h W e
the polioe a u t h o r i t y * determines or is required to k n n g disciplinary chaises
in the circumstances described in paragraph 10.10 or 10.15 above               In such a
case the police authority must instruct an "independent solicitor             to draw up
the offence with which the officer is to be charged and enter it on the
discipline form prescribed in the Schedule to the Regulations.            The offence or
offences should be as set out in the Discipline Code (see also paragraph 10.3).
it should be accompanied on the same form by such particulars as will leave the
officer in no doubt as to the precise offence alleged.             The officer concerned
will then be charged by being served with a copy of the discipline form.

10 15B This Regulation defines the "independent solicitor" as "a solicitor who
is'not a member, officer or servant of the appropriate authority or of any local
authority which appoints any member of the appropriate authority       ^ulation
i»(2 ) has the effect of excluding a solicitor who is a member of the metropolitan
civil staffs where the appropriate authority is the Commissioner of^Polker or
the Metropolis).    It is the Secretary of State s view that this definition se
the minimum practical limitations on the choice of t h e independent solicitor.
In the interests of demonstrable fairness, a police authority may also wish t
exclude from appointment under this Regulation any solicitor who has in the
recent past had a professional association with the authority itself or with
any local authority which appoints its members or with the officer subject of
the proceedings.

RIGHTS OF THE ACCUSED OFFICER
10.16.   Where a senior officer is charged with an offence he must be presented
with copies of the evidence and informed of the date of the disciplinary hearing
as soon as possible after the decision to proceed with a disciplinary char|«--
This should be done at least 21 days before the date        of the hearing.   The
disciplinary form served upon him should leave him in no doubt as -to the precise
offence alleged.

10.17   When the above papers are served the accused officer should be reminded
that he may consult and be represented at the hearing by a lawyer.

10.18    All reasonable requests by the accused officer    for the attendance of
witnesses should be acceded to.     This provision should apply equally in those
cases where by virtue of Regulation 8(1) no disciplinary hearing is to be held
and   the witnesses are therefore being calledonly to support the         accused
officer’s plea of mitigation.      Such requests by an accused officer should
normally be made in writing to the appropriate police authority at lease lM days
before the date set for his hearing.

RESPONSIBILITY FOR ARRANGING THE HEARING                                          u
10.19   The responsibility for arranging the hearing of any disciplinary
rests with the appropriate police authority.     They will, in consultation with
the tribunal members, fix the date and     time for the hearing. They       *1*®
arrange for the taking of a record of       the proceedings, and ensure that the
accused officer and any witnesses (including the complainant in cases arising
from a complaint) are notified.

 HEARING BY A TRIBUNAL (Regulation 12)
 10.20 This Regulation provides that the case against a senior officer should be
 heard by a tribunal consisting of a single person appointed by the police
 authority from a list of persons nominated by the Lord Chancellor.      He will be
 assisted by one or more assessors appointed by the police authority with his
 approval.   One of the assessors must be a serving or former chief officer, but
 the Regulation precludes the appointment as an assessor of a person who is one of
 HM Inspectors of Constabulary; the chief officer of the force concerned; a
 member, officer or servant of the police authority concerned; or a member.

                                        56
                                                                    Sections 10.21-10.25

      officer or servant of any local authority which appoints any member of the
      police authority.   This enables in suitable cases an additional 'lay' assessor
      to be appointed who has experience of local authority matters, provided that he
      is not connected with the police or local authority concerned.

      PROCEDURE AT HEARING

      10.21    Regulation 13(1) provides that the disciplinary hearing shall be in
      private.   It is suggested that the same degree of privacy is followed in those
      cases where, by virtue of Regulation 8(1), there are to be no disciplinary
      proceedings but the police authority are to hear evidence in mitigation.

      10.22   Statements taken from witnesses or other persons by an investigating
      officer which are provided to an accused officer under Regulation 11 should ££t
      be placed before the tribunal in advance of the hearing.       At the hearing the
      tribunal should be provided only with the discipline form, indicating the
      charges to be heard.        If during theproceedings        the accused    or his
      representative or the solicitor presenting the case against him wishes to
      introduce into evidence a written statement   from a witness who is called o Siye
      evidence he should be allowed to do so. Where the witness is not called o ga^e
      evidence, any statement from a witness        should be considered only i * the
      requirements of Regulation 11 have been fulfilled.

      EVIDENCE
      10.23   It is the view of the Secretary of State that it is not necessary to
      follow exactly the procedures of a criminal trial, and in particular a
      disciplinary hearing need not be bound by technical rules of evidence.       ere
      documentary evidence (such as copies of plans and transcripts o            couru
      proceedings) are accepted by both sides, it is not necessary to prove sue
      evidence formally. Great care should, however, be taken with hearsay evidence,
      which is to be defined as unsubstantiated statements offered by witnesses based
      upon what someone else has said and not upon personal knowledge or observation.
      Such evidence should be admitted only under the following conditions.     First,
      there should be reasons which make it impracticable for the originator o      ne
      evidence (i.e. the person who passed the information on to the hearsay witness;
      to give evidence himself, for example because he has died in the meantime.
f -   Secondly, the evidence should clearly be relevant to the charge or charges.
V ■   Thirdly, every effort should be made not only to test the reliability o        ie
      evidence, for example by comparing it with the available direct evidence, u
      also to assess the reliability of the witness himself insofar as this is
      possible.    Even where these conditions are satisfied and the evidence is
      admitted, the tribunal should treat it with caution and, in its report to the
      police authority, should specify the extent to which it relied on it in relation
      to its recommendation on finding and/or punishment.

      STANDARD OF PROOF
       10.2H Regulation 18(2) of the Police (Discipline) (Senior Officers) Regulations
       1985 provides that the required standard of proof in a disciplinary case is       e
       same as that at a criminal trial.    Thus in order for a senior o f f i c e r to be
       found guilty at a disciplinary hearing, the offence must be proved            ey n
       reasonable doubt and not, as in civil proceedings, on the balance „f
       probablities.

       ADJOURNMENTS
C      10.25 The hearing may be adjourned from time to time as may appear necessary,
       either briefly or until a later date. If during the hearing of a case facts

                                               57
Sections 10.26-10.30

emerge which establish a prima facie criminal case, the tribunal should if
necessary adjourn the hearing to consider what action is appropriate as a
result.

CONCLUSION OF HEARING
10.26   As soon as possible after the conclusion of the hearing the tribunal
Should submit a report to the police authority, together with the transcript of
the hearing, giving their recommendation on finding and punishment. It is t .
view of the Secretary of State that the police authority should as a matter of
course regard the report of the tribunal as binding on them as to finding but
that, where the finding is one of guilt, it is within their discretion to accept
or reject the recommendation as to punishment.

10 27      If a punishment is imposed by the police authority the accused officer
s t o ^ d be informed that he has the right of appeal against both finding and
punishment to the Secretary of State.        If he indicates tha.fch®  intends
appeal, a copy of the transcript of the hearing should be supplied to him.

MEDICAL TREATMENT

10.28   An officer's medical condition is a factor which may validly figure in
the decision whether to initiate or proceed with diciplinary procedures. It    ,
for example, open to a police authority to decide not to initiate proceedings
where evidence suggests that an officer's medical condition played a major ro
in the commission of the alleged offence against discipline and where the natu
of the offence is such that it cannot clearly be shown to be in the public
interest or in the interests of the force or the officer concernedto initiate
Droeeedines.   A similar approach may be adopted where it is clear that an
officer's medical condition is such that ^ e initiation of proceedings m i g t
 lead to his medical breakdown.    Where medical evidence of the J i ^ V w o u l d be
 above emerges only after charges have been laid against an officer,
 o o ^ n t T a police authority to consider abandoning proceedings before any
 disciplinary hearing takes place by exercising their power to with
 under Regulation 10 of the Police (Discipline) (Senior Officers) Begulations.
 To Timilfr power to withdraw charges exists where a hearing has alreadybegun.
 In such a case, an officer's medical condition might provide cause for
 adjourning a hearing and may in any event be considered n m i ga ion
 penalty to be awarded if the allegations are found to be proved.

 in     Tf at anv staee of the disciplinary process an accused officer's ®ed*cal
 condition (whether or not it contributed to the alleged offence or might lead o
 a breakdown if the disciplinary process if pursued)     "ou^
 would normally be granted medical retirement, the disciplinary P™cess 3
 not necessarily prevent or delay retirement. In such a
 police authority to consider whether the public             -nd
 thP fnroe and of the officer concerned would be better ser-veu           y
 retirement or by allowing the disciplinary procedures to take their course.

 SUSPENSION (REGULATIONS 23 AND 24)

  10.30   These Regulations lay down the criteria which must [J®              ratified




  £   required" to notify the police authority as soon as practicable of their


                                          58
                                                             Sections 10.31*10.32

endorsement (or otherwise)   of that decision,   but the suspension will not take
effect until   the   policeauthority have         received  notification of  that
endorsement.

10.31   There may, however,   be rare cases of urgency where it would be wrong to
leave the senior officer      in post while theComplaints Authority review the
decision under the procedure described in the previous paragraph (for example,
if he has been arrested for a serious criminal offence).       In such a case the
suspension "iaay ttake  effect immediately, subject *-to the     proviso that j&e.
Complaints Authority’s ratification of the suspension'must be received withinC-ZU
Hours or the suspension will cease to have effect. Whether or not the decision
to suspend has been taken by the police authority or (in the case of deputy or
assistant chief constables) by the chief constable, the responsibility for
obtaining the Complaints Authority's ratification of that decision lies with the
police authority.

10.32 Once a senior officer's suspension has been approved, or ratified by the
Complaints Authority,     that suspension shall remain    in  effect until the
Complaints Authority direct that it be lifted; the police authority decide to
lift the suspension; it is decided that the officer shall not be charged with a
disciplinary offence; or the officer has been so charged and either all the
charges have been dismissed or a punishment has been imposed.




                                         59
                                                                                                   S ectio n s 11.8-11.11

woe Hint Bu.t also (unless he is .ware that the tribunal's report has been
submitted to the Secretary of State) send copies of the application to the
chairman of the tribunal.

11 8   P a r a g r a p h s 7(3) and 7(**) of the Rules provide for the Secretary of State
to'allow the amendment of a Notice of Appeal or supporting statement, or of a
response Jr accompanying document. Where an appeal tribunal has been appointed
IndTt has not reported, the discretion to allow such amendment rests instead
with the chairman of the tribunal.

RESPONDENT

Senior Officers
11 Q          Under paragraph 2(1) of Schedule * of the Police Act 196*1. the Respondent
 /              hpaI bv a senior officer of a county or combined police force        by a
              S J k . ? of    « t » or London police fore.) will be th. officer.'., own
SCi ■            thorltv   As regards an appeal by a Metropolitan senior officer, under
p a r a g r a p h 2^2) .the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis will normally be

the respondent.

Other Officers
11 m               Under paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 5. the respondent may be either the




a llo ts       a respondent ot h e r than the                            by1' . Cc h i e f ° o f f l c « r ^ o f ° « n o t h . r
cover cases “Jere the d                    i . c i p : (‘ lsclpllne) R e g u iations 1985. (or by a
tribunal u^der Section 93 of the                     198* Act chaired by such another chief
officer).

11   11            The Secretary of State has in mind that his decision on the question of
Iho should be the respondent, and also whether the ,W £ j j £ / ho“ ld *                                                 dlreCtCd
to consult other persons, will as a general rule be as follows.

       .            The respondent will, subject to c. below                    be the o f f i c e r who presided
                    at the disciplinary hearing at which the                    appellant was found guilty,
                    whether he sat alone or as chairman of a                    disciplinary tribunal and
                    whether or not he is the appellant's own                    chief officer.        Where, in a
                    case which was remitted under Regulation                    1H of the Police (Discipline)
                     Regula tio ns 1985. the . p p « . l 1 . . . . I n s t both fin d in g and »u n i« h .« n t,
                     the respondent w i l l 1* d i r e c t e d to »ct In c o n s u l t a t i o n »tth the
                        » iiant's own chief officer, in those areas where, as Officer
                     conducting the original disciplinary hearing, he made a recommendation
                     I s   to the punl«h»ent t o * l . p o M d . Where, however, the respondent
                                punishment In . r e . l t t e d c a s e , no such d i r e c t i o n . . 1 1 be
                     I m p o s e d

                     given.


           b         Where the case was heard by a disciplinary tribunal, and the appeal is
               ’     against finding and punishment, the respondent (as at a. above) will
                     JJ directed to act in consultation with the other members of the
                     tribunal and, in such a case where the appellant is a member of th
                     Metropolitan police force and the respondent is an ofJlc*r             ^
                     f o r c e other than the Commissioner himself the respondent will also be
                     directed to act in consultation with the Commissioner.

           <-        Where           in a case which was remitted under Regulation                       1« of the Police
                     ^ D i s c i p l i n e ) D e f l a t i o n . 1985. the • r ' Y c ' h ^ ' o m c . T
                      the respondent will be the appellant s own chief officer.

                                                  <e d irected to act in c o n s u l t a t i o n vith the other
 H.llA    Where                                        ‘hle reSponse should r eflect the collective
 members of a d i s c i p l i n a r y t                     i n a D D r o p r iate and, in the view of the
           frfl/sut"                    5nco!,sl.t.nt with the provisions of Regulation 18(9) of th.

 £ £ 7 » i.c ip ,.n « >                 * •.> « £ » .* «    S    .T    J ’S :                        i . &      r s ' E

                                                      ~                     *•*
                                                                61
Sections 11.1-11.7
                                        SECTION 11

                                   DISCIPLINARY APPEALS

11 1    Section 103 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 substituted new
provisions relating to appeals for tR
                                    h° - rPn
                                           rc
                                            e^ ° ^ ^ h^ 1s
                                                         Setc
                                                            i^ 0"                       ^secUon         37
^^Schedule^            are^ therefore, references to the provisions as amended by the


senior officer^ from the decisions of their police authority.

NOTICE OF APPEAL
.1 ?    Rule 4 allows an appellant a total period of 50 days in which to submit a
fuil, documented appeal        (paragraph 3 >        P         -        r       i           o       d
- S T ™      r     T J Z V s lV lll    /.hi^h t L appellant was notified in writing


s x    t t Z    i      s
                     z x    z z
notified of the decision on his appeal (paragraph                  >.
                                                                                - — - -
II .3   Under paragraph * , an appellant .uSft           wi^       "    ^   ^       ^   "       10^     1 ™


S ^ i s T i s S l ^ : s“ stss.
grounds on which it is made*

 11.5   Paragraph 3 provides that if, having - 5 " ‘«t'dfa» 1Nso;*Cesu^ 1AtPrha
                                                                              oL Vith°Ut
 all the prescribed written statements ;“j y P P ^     er peri0(J as maJ have teen
 grlnte^under1paragraph*^, the Secretary of State will be entiUed «                                 regar* the
 appeal as having been withdrawn.                                                   /           >
 NOTIFICATION TO OFFICER CONCERNED OF RIGHT TO APPEAL

 11.6   The Secretary of ?ta*e                ^cLclurion^^thrdLciplinary
 for an offence against d^sc*J\ .    f hig ight of appeal to the Secretary of
 proceedings be informed in writing of his rl8n*     ^       Further, that in
 State and the period during which such appeal must b       ^   officer should

 ^'reminded6of8 t h e° p r o v i s ions of paragraph 3(1) of Schedule 5 to the *|licejlct


                                                                                                         *• -
 appeal tribunal he should say so when submitting his appeal.

 WITHDRAWAL AND AMENDMENT OF NOTICE OF APPEAL ETC



 plragraph       1 to his own chief officer, and to such other person as is the
 respondent by virtue of a direction given by the                   eal tribunal the
 paragraph 1 1 . 1 0 ) . Where an appeal has been remitted to an appeal

                                                60
                                                               Sections 11.17-11.21

DOCUMENTATION TO BE SENT TO APPEAL TRIBUNAL
11.17 Rule 6(2) applies where an appeal is against both finding and punishment.
It provides that the Secretary of State shall withhold from the members of an
appeal tribunal so much of the respondent's statement and documents as appear
to him to relate to the appellant's character and record of service until after
the tribunal has completed its examination of and formed its opinion on the
finding and is about to consider the question of punishment.      In practice, this
is achieved administratively by bundling papers relating to the finding
separately from those relating to the punishment and arranging for the force
providing accommodation and services to the tribunal to present the bundle
relating to punishment to the jnerobers at the appropriate times.

11.18   It will be helpful, therefore, in the case of an appeal against both
finding and punishment, if the chief officer concerned will compile his response
under Rule 5 and the transcript of the relevant disciplinary proceedings as
follows:-

     a)   Two separate statements should be prepared, one statement dealing with
          the question of the finding, and the other statement dealing with the
          question of punishment.

     b)   The transcript should be prepared in 2 separate parts, one part
          covering the hearing up to and including the decision on finding, and
          the other part covering the remainder of the proceedings. Where an
          appeal has already been made to a chief officer, the transcripts of
          the hearings before both the original discipline authority and the
          appellate authority, should be separated in this way.

STATEMENTS IN LIEU OF ORAL EVIDENCE
11.19   The provisions in Rule 13 concerning the admission of written statements
in lieu of oral evidence follow the same lines as those included in the Police
(Discipline) Regulations 1985 and the Police (Discipline) (Senior Officers)
Regulations 1985-

GIVING OF REASONS
11.20   The Secretary of State is now required under paragraph 4(1) of Schedule
5 to the 1964 Act, to provide the appellant and the respondent^ with a written
statement of his reasons for his determination of the appeal.     In the case of
an appeal which has been referred to a tribunal, and where the Secretary of State
has accepted the tribunal's recommendations, this requirement will be met by
sending to the appellant, and respondent, a copy of the tribunal's report setting
out the reason for its recommendations.   In all other cases, a separate written
statement setting out the reasons for his determination of the appeal will be
provided.

TAXING OF APPELLANT'S COSTS
11.21   It is, of course, open to any appellant to take whatever legal advice
or assistance he chooses, in the preparation and presentation of his appeal,
but where those costs are to be met out of the public purse, it is implicit that
only such costs as are considered reasonable will be met.   Under paragraph 4(3)
of Schedule 5 the Secretary of State may direct the manner in which any costs
related to an appeal shall be taxed.     When a request for taxation is received
(and it is hoped that such a request would be made only after discussion locally
with the appellant’s legal representatives has failed to produce agreement on
a figure acceptable to both sides), it is the practice to pass the matter to
a Taxing Master of the Supreme Court for consideration.

                                         63
Sections 11.12-11.16

11  12   Paragraph 11.18 describes apppropriate arrangements of the contents of
a response of an appeal againstfinding and punishment.       It is, of course, open
to a chief officer to seek legal advice in the preparation of his response (just
as it is open to an appellant        to seek such advice in the preparation of his
appeal).    In the ordinary case   (ie, where the respondent is the appellant s own
chief officer) the chief officer concerned will no doubt, bearing in mind Rule
5o act in consultation with the clerk of his police authority.          Attention is
however drawn to paragraph (3) of Rule 10, which is of particular          importance
where   theTase is one in which Regulation 14 of the P o l i c e (Discipline)
Regulations 1985 applies.     It is the view of the Secretary of State that, in
such a case, it is desirable that neither the appellant's chief officer nor his
own police authority should be involved in the arrangements for obtaining legral
advice or in the matter of the content of the response, except to         the extent
that it may be necessary for them to provide strictly factual information,
 to be advised of the costs likely to be incurred by the respondent.

APPEAL TRIBUNALS

" r y 1” ragrCaapSh S3 U )T S^heduf f s to the 1964 Act, requires the Secretary of
State to appoint a tribunal to consider an     appeal where either, it appears to
him that the case cannot be properly determined without taking evidence, or the
appellant has been punished by way of dismissal, re^uii^ent ^            resign or
reduction in rank and the appellant has requested that a tribunal be appointed.
This requirement "does not, however, inhibit the Secretary of State from allowing
an appeal without referring it to a tribunal if he considers there are sufficient
 grounds for doing so.

 11  14  Paragraph 3(6) of Schedule 5 makes provision for the Secretary of state
 to* require an appeal tribunal to     deal in its report on an appeal with any
 particular matter he may specify.    Rule 15(l)(d) provides for the tribunal to
 comply with such a requirement.   The appellant and the respondent will normally
 be notified whenever the Secretary of State makes a requirement of this kind
 in a particular case.

 n™ Wf-ittpn
 Tl- 15
              nrOral Evidence                                     .        , , _
          Paragraph 5(lMcf~of Schedule 5 to the 1964 Act, expressly contemplates
 that the Rules may enable an appeal tribunal to deal with a ^ a s e on written
 evidence or representations, instead of holding an oral hearing.

 11 16 Paragraph 3(8) of Schedule 5 provides that the appeal tribunal will hold
 a "hearing if the Secretary of State requires this. Paragraph 3(9) provides that
 they will also hold a hearing in all other cases unless it appears to them
 unnecessary to do so.    Before reaching a decision under                 n0t
 hold a hearing, the tribunal is      required by paragraph 3(10) to afford
 respondent and the appellant an opportunity to make written o r , if elther *
 requests, oral representations in the matter and also to consider
 representations.

     11 16A Rule 8 of the Police (Appeals) Rules 1985 provides that, where a hearing
     is held in respect of an appeal against both finding and punishment on a
     particular charge the hearing will be by way of a rehearing of the charge if
     the Secretary of State so directs; whether to proceed by way of a rehearing of
     the charge if the Secretary of State does not so direct is at the discretion
     of the tribunal.   When an appeal is against punishment only, any hearing that
     takes place will normally be confined to matters relevant to punishment.
     Paragraph 3(11) of Schedule 5 provides that when an oral hearing takes place
     the appellant and the respondent have the right to legal or other representation
     before the tribunal.   This right extends to a hearing of oral representations
     under paragraph 3(10) of the Schedule.

                                         62
                                    AMVKX A

         NOTES OH PART IX OF THE POLICE AID CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT 1984

Section 83 abolishes the Police Complaints Board and establishes the Police
Complaints Authority.     Schedule M to the Act sets out the Authority's
constitution and membership and makes administrative and other provisions.

Section 8M defines the terms "complaint" and "appropriate authority" and imposes
on the chief officer of a force a duty to take preliminary steps when he
receives a complaint.

Section 85 sets out a prtOce^UF® to be followed to establish an investigation
into a complaint about the conduct of an officer of the rank of chief
superintendent or below.    The chief officer is first required to consider
whether the complaint is capable of resolution under the informal resolution
procedure. Only if it is not or if the informal resolution procedures fail does
he have to appoint an officer to investigate the complaint formally.        The
section permits the officer appointed to achieve formal resolution or to
investigate the complaint formally to be of the rank of chief inspector or
above.

Section 86 sets out the procedure to be followed by a police authority to deal
with complaints against officers of above the rank of chief superintendent.
Whilst no provision is made for an informal resolution procedure, it is open to
a police authority to deal at its discretion with a complaint if it is satisfied
that the conduct complained of, even if proved, would justify neither
disciplinary nor criminal proceedings against the officer concerned.

Section 87 provides that complaints alleging that the conduct in question
resulted in the death of, or serous injury to some person, and certain other
complaints defined in regulations (see the Police (Complaints) (Mandatory
Referrals Etc) Regulations 1985) must be referred to the Police Complaints
Authority.   In addition, it is open to the appropriate authority to refer any
other complaint to the Authority;   it is also open to the Authority to require
the submission of a complaint to them. The section defines "serious injury as
"a fracture, damage to an internal organ, impairment of bodily function, a deep
cut or a deep laceration".

Section 88 permits the appropriate authority to refer to the Police Complaints
Authority any matter which is not a complaint but which appears to indicate that
an officer may have committed a criminal offence or an offence against
discipline if it appears to the appropriate authority that the matter ought to
be referred by reason of its gravity or of any other exceptional circumstances.

Section 89 requires the Police Complaints Authority to supervise the
investigation of certain serious complaints and permits the Authority to
supervise the investigation of other matters if they consider that it is
desirable in the public interest that they should do so.          It allows the
Authority to approve the appointment of an investigating officer and, in
accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of State, to impose
restrictions or conditions in respect of particular investigations. Where the
investigation is supervised by the Authority, the investigating officer must
submit his report to the Authority and send a copy to the appropriate authority.
The Authority, having received the report, submit to the appropriate authority
an 'appropriate statement*.       This statement will indicate whether the
investigation was carried out to the Authority's satisfaction and will be copied
to the person by, or on behalf of, whom the complaint was made. No disciplinary



                                        1
charges may be brought before the appropriate statement has been submitted to
Se   appropriate authority.    In addition, unless the Director of Public
Prosecutions feels that there are exceptional circumstances attached to the
case, the Director may not bring criminal proceedings before the appropriate
statement has been submitted.

Section 90 requires a police authority to submit to the Director of Public
Prosecutions any report drawn up on the conduct of a senior officer unless
satisfied by the report that no criminal offence has been committed.            The
section requires a chief officer who receives a report concerning the conduct of
an officer of the rank of chief superintendent or below to consider first
whether the report indicates that a criminal offence may have been committed by
that officer and, if so, to consider whether the offence indicated is such that
the officer ought to be charged with it. If he considers both that an °^ence
has been committed and that the officer should be charged with it, the section
requires him to send a copy of the report to the Director of PubJ;J-°
Prosecutions.    After the Director of Public Prosecutions has dealt with the
question of criminal proceedings, the chief officer is required to send the
Police Complaints Authority a memorandum indicating whether he has preferred
disciplinary charges in respect of the conduct which        was the subject of the
 investigation and, if not, his reasons for not doing       so. Similarly, if the
chief officer decides that, although a criminal offence has been'
officer should not be charged with it he must send the Police Complaints
Authority a memorandum indicating whether he proposes to prefer disciplinary
charges in respect of the conduct in question and, if not, his reasons for not
doing so. Moreover, a similar memorandum must be sentto the Poll°®
 Authority where the chief officer considers that the report discloses no
 criminal offence;   in such a case he must indicate to the Authority ^ether he
 has preferred disciplinary charges in respect of the conduct in qi.estion, rnd if
 not his reasons for not doing so.     Where a chief officer indicates that he
 proposes to prefer disciplinary charges or has done already it wi:11J>e* his duty
 to prefer them or proceed with them as the case may be.            The sectionialso
 requires the chief officer to send to the Police Compl ai nt s Authority     W
 the complaint and of the report of the investigation where the investigation was
not subject to supervision by the Authority.

Section 91 provides that no memorandum needs to be sent to the Pol^ e
Authority if disciplinary charges have been preferred in respect of
investigated and if the accused has admitted the charges and has n o t J ^ r a w n
his admission.   In   such acase the outcome of the proceedings together with a
copy of the complaint and the investigation, has to be reported to the Police
Complaints Authority.
Section 92 empowers the   Police Complaints Authority to direct a chief offi°er to
send to the Director      of Public Prosecutions a copy of the report o:f an
investigation where a      chief officer has already considered that Report and
determined not to refer    the contents to the Director. It imposes a duty on the
chief officer to comply    with any such direction.

 Section 93 empowers      the Police Complaints Authority to recommend,        and
 subsequently direct, that a chief officer should prefer disciplinaryq char«es
 the basis of the      report of an investigation where the chief o ^ e r has
 indicated that he     eitherhas not preferred or  proposes not to prefer such
 charges.    It imposes a duty on the chief officer to comply with any such
 direction.    In addition the section empowers the Authority to give a chief
 officer permission not to prefer charges or not to proceed with charges which
 have been laid.




                                          2
                                     AME X B

                NOTES OK THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985

Regulation 1   provides for the Regulations to come into force on 29 April 1985.

Regulation 2 revokes the previous discipline regulations except where anofficer
has been charged with a disciplinary offence before 29 April 1985* It provides
in particular that, where an officer has not been charged with an offence but
where, in his case, action has already been taken before 29 April 1985 for the
purpose of the 1977 regulations then action already taken will have effect on .
21 April 1985 and I3hereafte£fp&Af   it had been carried out for the purpose of ’
the correspoadir® provision. i% the new regulations.   It also provides that the
1977 provisions relating to suspension and to punishment shall continue to have
effect where an officer has been charged with an offence before 29 April 1985.

Regulation 3provides that nothing in the regulation shall apply      to an offence
committed or alleged to have been committed by a senior officer.

Regulation U is an interpretive provision.

Regulation 5 provides that an officer commits a disciplinary offence if he
commits one of the offences in the Discipline Code whioh is set out in schedule
2 to the regulations.

Regulation 6 provides for the investigation of complaints by members of the
public and of internal reports or allegations. The Act itself provides for the
appointment of investigating officers in the case of complaints.      Where an
internal report or allegation is received from which it appears that an officer
may have committed an offence then the chief officer may decide in the first
instance that no disciplinary proceedings are necessary and need not in such a
case appoint an investigating officer.       The regulations provide that the
investigating officer may be a member of the police force concerned or, if the
chief officer of some other force agrees to provide an investigating officer, a
member of that force;    he should be of at least the rank of chief inspector;
and he should be of at least the rank of the officer subject to investigation.
Neither in the case of internal reports or allegations nor in the case of
complaints may the investigating officer be the chief officer of the police
force concerned or any member of the police force concerned serving in the same
sub-division or branch as the officer subject to investigation.

Regulation 7 provides for the officer who is subject to investigation to be
given written notice of the nature of the allegations against him and allows him
to make a statement concerning them.

Regulation 8 deals with the formulation and preferring of disciplinary charges.
This duty rests with the chief officer (but see Regulation 15) subject to any
requirement to refer the report of an investigation into a complaint to the
Police Complaints Authority. A discipline form has to be served on the accused:
it is to be in a form set out in schedule SL to the regulations.

Regulation 9 allows for the withdrawal of charges before they are heard.

Regulation 10 provides for documents to be given to the accused officer.     He
should be supplied with a copy of any statement made by him together with
witnesses' statements, a     copy of the original complaint and also of     any
statement made by the complainant, even though it may contain complaints or




                                         1
allegations against him which are not the subject of the disciplinary charge,
and any statement which, in the event of a finding of guilt, will be admitted as
character evidence in relation to the officer concerned to assist the officer
conducting the hearing or a chief officer to determine tfte punishment to be
imposed or recommended.   The regulation provides that these documents will be
supplied to the accused officer at least 21 days before the date set for the
hearing of the charges. An exception to this time limit is made where the
accused officer is detained in pursuance of the sentence of a court or has
received a suspended sentence of imprisonment and where, having been supplied
with the documents in the case, he does not elect to be legally represented at a
hearing and where the chief officer is satisfied that it would be appropriate
for the hearing to take place before the expiry of a period of 21 days from the
date on which the member is charged. Paragraph M of the regulation permits the
officer conducting the hearing, with the consent of the accused, to allow any
other document not Copied to the accused officer prior to the hearing to be
adduced in evidence.

Regulation 11 provides that the accused officer shall be invited to state in
writing on the discipline form whether he admits or denies the charge, whether
he wishes to be legally represented in      a case where it is appropriate and
whether he proposes to call witnesses and, if he wishes the chief officer
concerned to take steps to secure the attendance of such witnesses, their names
and addresses. The regulation also provides that where any such witness is a
member of a police force he shall be ordered to attend the hearing of the case.

Regulation 12 provides that the officer responsible for formulating charges
against the accused officer shall give that officer an opportunity to elect to
be legally represented at the hearing if he is satisfied that, on a finding of
guilt, the punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank
should be available to the officer conducting the hearing.

Regulation 13 provides for the charge to be heard by the chief officer concerned
(but see also Regulation 16) or, in the case of the Metropolitan Police, by the
appropriate officer or a disciplinary board (see schedule M) except where the
case has been remitted to another chief officer or where a tribunal is to be
held.   Where there is a disciplinary board or tribunal, references in the
regulations to the officer conducting the hearing are to be understood as
references to the board or tribunal.

Regulation 14 provides a number of detailed instances of cases where the hearing
of disciplinary charges should or may be remitted to another officer.

Paragraph 2 of the regulation provides that a chief officer will remit to
another chief officer any case if he is interested in the outcome otherwise than
in his capacity as chief officer, if he is a material witness, or if, upon his
consideration of a case in which the accused officer has not been given an
opportunity for legal representation, he forms the view that, on a finding or
guilt, the punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank
should be available to the officer conducting the hearing.

Where, in accordance with Regulation 16, the hearing is being presided oyer by
an officer below the rank of chief officer, the officer taking the hearing is
required by paragraph M of the regulation to remit the case to the chief officer
if he is interested in the case otherwise than as the presiding officer, if he
is a material witness, or if he considers his powers of punishment to be
insufficient for the case.   In the latter case, the officer remitting the case
should not give to the chief officer to whom the case is remitted any indication
of his assessment of the case or of the punishment that ought to be imposed.




                                        2
Section 9M provides that where the Police Complaints Authority dlreot that
disciplinary charges shall be preferred against the officer or, In any other
case where they consider it to be desirable by reason of any exceptional
circumstances affecting the case, the hearing will be before a tribunal. The
section also deals with the constitution and manner of working of such
tribunals.

Seciton 95 provides that police authorities and inspectors of constabulary, in
carrying out their duties in respect to the adequacy and efficiency of police
forces, should keep themselves informed of the working of the provisions of part
IX of the Act.

Section 96 enables the Police C@m£fiitftts Authority to agree to arrangements fqr
the handling of complaints against constabularies maintained by bodies other
than police authorities. If such arrangements are not entered into voluntarily,
the Secretary of State has the discretion to impose them by order.

Section 97 requires the Police Complaints Authority to make annual reports to
the Secretary of State and to send a copy to each police authority together with
any relevant information relating to that authority's area.     In addition, the
Secretary of State may call for reports from the Authority on matters relating
generally to their functions and the Authority may, of their own initiative
report to the Secretary of State on matters coming to their notice. Report.* of
the latter kind are copied to the police authority and the chief officer
concerned.

Section 98 places restrictions on the disclosure of information by Authority
staff and members. Any unauthorised disclosure is a criminal offence.

Section 99 permits the Secretary of State to make regulations as to the
procedure to be followed under part IX of the Act.      It also places upon the
Secretary of State the duty to make certain specific regulations.

Section 100 sets out the procedures to be followed in making regulations. In
particular a draft has to be provided to the Police Advisory Board for England
and Wales.

Section 101 provides certain modifications to the Secretary o£ State's existing
power to make disciplinary regulations under section 33 of the Police Act 1964.
In particular it requires the regulations to provide for racially discriminatory
behaviour to be made a specific disciplinary offence. The section also permits
delegation of certain functions under the Act and requires regulations to be
made dealing with such matters.

Section 102 provides that, on the hearing of a disciplinary charge, an officer
of the rank of chief superintendent or below may not be punished by dismissa ,
requirement to resign or reduction in rank unless he has been given an
opportunity to be legally represented at the hearing. Such representation may
be either by counsel or by a solicitor. In any other case, an officer may only
be represented at the hearing of a disciplinary charge by another member of a
police force.     The section requires regulations to be made setting out
procedures to implement the requirements of the section. It also provides that
if an officer has been given the opportunity to be legally represented at a
hearing the case against him may be presented by counsel or a solicitor whether
or not he is actually so represented.




                                        3
Section 103 substitutes for the existing section 37 of the Police Act 1964 and
schedule 5 to that Act new provisions relating to appeals to the Secretary of
State against findings at disciplinary hearings.

Section 104 safeguards an officer who has already been charged and either
acquitted or convicted of a criminal offence against being charged with a
disciplinary offence which is in substance the same. The section also provides
that no statement made in the course of informal resolution of a complaint may
be admissible in subsequent criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings unless
it consists of or includes an admission relating to a matter which does not fall
to be resolved informally.

Section 105 provides for the Secretary of State to issue guidance to chief
officers and to other police officers concerning the discharge of their
functions under part IX of the Act and otherwise in connection with discipline.
It requires police officers to have regard to any such guidance in the discharge
of their functions. The guidance may not be issued in relation to the handling
of a particular case. Failure on the part of any police officer to have regard
to the guidance when determining whether an officer has committed an offence
against discipline or the punishment which should be awarded for such an offence
shall be admissible in evidence in any appeal. The section also requires the
Police Complaints Authority to have regard to any guidance given to them by the
Secretary of State on matters affecting the preferring and withdrawing of
disciplinary charges.




                                        4
                                     AMNKX C

          NOTES OH THE POLICE (COHPLAIBTS) (GENERAL) REGULATIONS 1985

Regulation 1 provides for the Regulations to come into force on 29 April 1985.

Regulation 2 is an interpretation provision.

Regulation 3 requires the Complaints Authority to forward any complaint they
have received to the appropriate authority, unless this would be against the
complainant's wishes or seems to the Authority to be unnecessary. Paragraph (2)
permits the Authority to forward a complaint against the complainant's wishesp$f
they are satisfted?that the public^ interest so requires.

Regulation 4 provides a time-limit of seven days for the Complaints Authority to
notify the appropriate authority whether or not they will supervise an
investigation. The time-limit normally runs from the day on which the Authority
receive the complaint or non-complaint matter referred to them, but if the
Authority requests further information, or the investigation is delayed pending
the outcome of related criminal proceedings, the time-limit runs from the time
when the Authority receive the information requested or notification of the
trial outcome.

Regulation 5 obliges the appropriate authority to       meet theComplaints
Authority's reasonable requirements for information and documents relating to
complaints or non-complaint matters referred to them for supervision.    This
applies whether or not      the Authority have decided to supervise the
investigation.

Regulation 6 requires the investigating officer to keep the Complaints Authority
informed of any consultation he proposes to have with the Director of Public
Prosecutuions about an investigation under the Authority's supervision, and of
the outcome.

Regulation 7 allows the Complaints Authority, in their statement to the
appropriate authority after supervising an investigation, to explain why they
are satisfied with its conduct, and to mention any matters which they think
should either be brought to the attention of the appropriate authority, the
complainant or the officer who was the subject of the investigation, or be dealt
with in the public interest.

Regulation 8 requires the Complaints Authority to deal with a case without undue
delay when a memorandum is sent to them under section 90 of the Act. Paragraph
(2 ) deals with a case in which the chief officer has not preferred disciplinary
charges or does not propose to prefer such charges and the Authority accept his
decision: in such a case the Authority shall inform the chief officer and, if
this is reasonably practicable, the complainant of their acceptance of his
decision.    Paragraph (3) applies where a chief officer, with the Authority's
leave, withdraws a disciplinary charge against an officer: in such a case the
Authority must inform the complainant and provide him with any appropriate
explnation.    Paragraph (4) relieves the Authority of the duty to notify the
complainant of matters falling under paragraphs (2 ) and (3 ) where to do so would
not be reasonably practicable.

Regulation 9 provides for copies of    complaints to be supplied to a complainant
or to the officer against whom the     complaint was made upon a request made in
writing. Paragraph (2) provides for     the request to be refused where compliance
with it might prejudice any criminal   investigation or proceedings pending at the



                                         1
 time of the request or where compliance would be contrary to the public ^terest
 and the Secretary of State agrees that the request should not be complied wi jj*
 Where a request for a copy of a complaint is refused, no further request nay be           p
 made within 6 months of the refusal.

 Regulation 10 provides that complaints of death or serious injury ,_«hose
 investigation- the Complaints Authority are required to ^ p e r v ^ e under section
 87(1)(a)(i) of the 1984 Act, must be referred to them        by the end of_the      y
 after it becomes clear to the appropriate authority that section 87(1)(a)( )
 applies. Paragraph (2) provides the same time-limit for referral of complain s
 "called in" by the Authority under section 87(2).

’’^Regulation 11 provides that the provisions of Part IX of the Act
  ■"where the complainant or his solicitor or some other person \ctin« as ^
   authorised agent gives notification in writing that he withdraws the
   or does not want any further steps taken in consequence of it.     P ^ g r a p h (2 )
   requires the appropriate authority to forward to the Complaints Authority a c py
   of any notificiation given under this Regulation if the complaint wasforwarded
   to the appropriate authority by the Authority or has been referred to the
   Authority under section 87 of the Act or has been sent to the Authority under
   section 90(9) of the Act.

  Regulation 12 requires the keeping of a force complaints register.

  Regulation 13 permits a chief officer to delegate his functions under certain
  parts of the Act and under the Regulations relating to complaints. Delegation
  may be to an assistant commissioner or commander in the City of London Poll°e*
  to an assistant commissioner or deputy assistant commissioner in the
  Metropolitan Police and to a deputy chief constable or assistant chief constable
  in any other force. In no case may delegation be to an officer who has acted as
  investigating officer in relation to the complaint in question or who has acted
  in relation to it in any attempt to resolve it informally.




                                                                                           L
                                            2
                                                                    Paragraph 1.2

                                     AIMKX D

  NOTES OB THE POLICE (COHPLAISTS) (MANDATORY REFERRALS ETC.) REGULATIONS 1985

Regulation 1 provides for the Regulations to come into force on 29 April 1985-

Regulation 2 is an interpretation provision.      The definition of "complaint*
includes a complaint against a police officer of any rank.

^Regulation 3 means that the Regulations do not apply to any complaint ma d^
 before 29 April 1985, or to any oqpp^aiafc or non-complaint matter related |5f
 conduct which occurred before 29 April -ISW•                             - c-or

 Regulation 4 provides that, in addition to complaints of death or serious injury
 which must be referred to the Complaints Authority under section 87(1)(a)(i)
 the 1984 Act, the appropriate authority must also refer any complaint alleging
 assault occasioning actual bodily harm, corruption, or the commission of a
 serious arrestable offence, so that the Authority can decide whether or not to
 supervise its investigation. The complaint must be referred by the end of the
 day after it first becomes clear to the appropriate authority that this
 Regulation applies to it.

 Regulation 5 gives the Complaints Authority certain powers in relation to
 investigations which they are to supervise. Paragraph (1) extends the ambit o
 their power under section 89(4) of the 1984 Act, so as to allow them to approve
 or veto the choice of an investigating officer in non-complaint matters which
 they have decided to supervise.     Paragraph (2) gives the Authority power to
 impose such reasonable requirements as to the conduct of the investigation as
 appear to them to be necessary. This power is subject to the reservation that
 the Authority must obtain the consent of the Director of Public Prosectuions for
 requirements on matters of criminal evidence, and must not make any requirement
 related to the resources a chief officer is to provide for an investigation
 before consulting him and having regard to any representations he may make.




                                         1
                                     ANNEX E

NOTES ON THE POLICE (DISPENSATION FROM REQUIREMENT TO INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS)
REGULATIONS 1985 (FORMERLY THE POLICE (ANONYMOUS, REPETITIOUS ETC. COMPLAINTS)
REGULATIONS 1985) •

The Police (Anonymous, Repetitious Etc Complaints) Regulations 1985 were
amended by the Police (Dispensation fronurequirement to Investigate*; _      ^
Complaints) Regulati<fns-S£990, which f^fnetfetto force on 1 July ft999?e ?3
              ;. <.;.r . '■-i£*i •            y-          ;       c* no
Regulation 1 provides for the Regulations to come into force in 1985-
                                           •r                        i.r

Regulation 2 is an interpretation provision. The definition of1 "complaint
includes a complaint against a police officer of any rank.

Regulation 3 contains the substance of these Regulations. Paragraph (1)
provides that where the appropriate authority is of the opinion that a
complaint is anonymous or repetitious, or is vexatious, oppressive or
otherwise an abuse of the procedures for dealing with complaints, or is
incapable of investigation (as defined by paragraphs 2 3 and <4 of the
Schedule respectively), or if the complaint has been made more than 12 months
after the incident which gave rise to it, and that either no good reason for
the delay has been given, or that injustice would be lively to be c^ se<^ by
the delay, they may request the Complaints Authority to dispense with the
requirements of Part IX of the 1984 Act; this may be done at any stage of
dealing with the complaint. Paragraph (2) specifies the information that
is to be supplied to the Complaints Authority when making the request.
Paragraph (3) gives the Complaints Authority power to make such a dispensation
and requires them to consult the appropriate authority before rejecting a
request, and paragraph (4) requires the Complaints Authority to notify the
appropriate authority and, where the Complaints Authority agree to the
request, to inform the complainant unless this is not reasonably practicable.

The Schedule contains definitions for the operation of regulation 3-
Paragraph 1 explains references within the Schedule to an injured person
other than the complainant" and to "action not being reasonably practicable
Paragraphs 2 and 3 define an "anonymous complaint , a repetitv>us complai
and an "informally resolved complaint" for the purposes of regulation 3-
Paragraph <4 sets out the circumstances in which it may be said to be  o
reasonably practicable to complete the investigation of a complaint .
    Paragraph 7 of the regulation provides that the chief officer conducting "thf^
    hearing may remit the case to another chief officer if, for any reason”falling?
    outside those listed in paragraph 2 , he considers it ap p s ^ r ^ ^ e so to do.

    Regulation 15 provides for the task of deciding whether a police officer should
    be charged with an offence to be delegated to, in the City of London police
    force an assistant commissioner or a commander, in the Metropolitan Police force
    to a commander or above or chief superintendent or above depending upon whether
    the charge arises from a complaint or otherwise, and in any other police force
    to a deputy chief constable or to an assistant chief constable.

     Regulation 16 allows for the task of presiding at a disciplinary hearing to b€^
   -delegated to a deputy chief constable.      It raaakes ^equivalent-provision for ttes^
■^-jfilty of London :Police. It also iprovi<$es itbat tttoe ^officer to-iihomthe hearingy
     would be delegated in a normal case may notlfeear?a charge if he'has acted as
    -investigating officer, if he has decided orv the nature of the charges to be laid
     in the case or if he has taken part in any attempt to achieve the informal '
     resolution of a complaint.

    Paragraph 5 of the Regulation prohibits, an officer who conduots a hearing
    this regulation from imposing punishments of dismissal, requirement to resigir or
    reduction in rank.

    Regulation 17 applies where a disciplinary tribunal is to be held.    Paragraph
    (2 ) provides that where the chief officer remits the case to another chief
    officer he is to inform the Police Complaints Authority that he has done S£ and
    that the other chief offioer will therefore be the chairman of the tribunal.
    The regulation also provides that, in the Metropolitan Policej the dhairmani of
    the tribunal may be an assistant commissioner or deputy assistant commisMoner
    nominated by the Commissioner. The Polioe Complaints Authority are required to
    inform the chief officer of the force concerned (and, where appropriate, the
    chief officer who is to chair the disciplinary tribunal) who the 2 Authority
    members on the disciplinary tribunal will be.                          • v

    Regulation 18 provides for the procedure at a disciplinary hearing.      Such a
    hearing shall be in private. A member of any police force may act as presenting
    officer as may a counsel or a solicitor in appropriate cases. Paragraph M of
    the regulation permits counsel or a solicitor presenting the case an<$^ any
    representatives of the accused officer to be assisted by a serving member^ of a
    police force. This will permit the accused officer's friend on the one hand and
    the investigation officer on the other to be prsent to assist the person
    presenting the case on either side.    In addition the officer conducting the
    hearing may, if the accused or his representative does not object, allow any
    member of a police force, members of the Police Complaints Authority or any
    solicitor to attend the hearing.

    Regulation 19 makes special provision for the introduction of statements'into
    disciplinary hearings in lieu of oral evidence.      It allows the admission in
    evidence of a written statement without the maker being called as a witness if
    the evidence in it would have been admissible if given orally. A copy of suoh a
    statement must be given to the other side at least 21 days (or an agreed shorter
    period) before a hearing; unless the other side object within 14 days (or an
    agreed shorter period) the statement will be admissible. The officer conducting
    the hearing may nevertheless admit written evidence adduced by one side at the
    hearing with the agreement of the other side.      Where a written statement is-
    adduced, the officer conducting the hearing may nevertheless, ask the oral
    evidence be given by the person who made the statement. If it is not he may
    then disregard the written evidence.




                                             3
 Regulation 20 allows for the adjournment of the hearing.                      ..., \

 Regulation 21 allows for hearings in the absence of the accused in certalft
 circumstances.                                                       -r

  Regulation 22 provides that a complainant may be present at a disciplinary
  hearing while any witness (including the accused) is being examined or cross-
  examined about the facts relating to the charge;            provided that where a
  complainant is to give evidence he should not be allowed to attend before he
  gives his evidence.       Thus a complainant is not entitled to be present when
  punishment is being considered or where there are no witnesses or when the
 R e u s e d pleads guilty. Where the accusasii^ives evidence -the complainant -may
'M m      questions either through the prresiiding officer or, at *the presidipgr
 '•Officer's discretion, directly.     The presiding officer :may disallow questions
  which he considers to be irrelevant o r :formulated in an undesirable manner .    1

 Regulation 23 makes it clear that the power to determine finding rests in all
 cases with the officer conducting the hearing of the charge. Paragraph 2 of the
 regulation provides that the criminal standard of proof shall apply at
 discipline hearings.
 Regulation 24 deals with punishment. It sets out the different punishments that
 may be awarded and provides that, in general, the punishment shall be imposed by
 the officer conducting the hearing. There are 2 exceptions: under paragraph 3
 where a case has been remitted under Regulation 14 the chief officer hearing the
 case will make only a recommendation as to punishment and, where a disciplinary
 tribunal is held, the chairman (i.e. the chief officer) will determine th£
 punishment after consulting the other members of the tribunal. Under paragraph
 5 the chief officer to whom a case has been remitted must, having hearer the
 case, send the statement of the charge he has found proved together with a
 statement of the facts in so far as they are relevant to punishment and his
 recommendation as to punishment to the accused officer's own chief officer.
 That chief officer should be provided with a transcipt of the hearing and he
 should decide on and impose a punishment without undue delay. Paragraph 6 makes
 clear that in imposing punishment regard must be had to the accused officer s
 record of service and may be had to other evidence and that the accused may
 adduce evidence as to character.    Paragraph 9 of the regulation provides that
 where an internal appeal lies to the chief officer the punishment imposed by the
 deputy chief officer shall not take effect unless and until the period for
 giving notice of appeal has expired or, where such notice is given, the appeal
 has been determined.

  Regulation 25 provides that a reduction in rate of pay or a fine may^ not be
  imposed for an offence of criminal conduct.         It also provides that the
  punishment of reduction in rate of pay may not be such as would reduce the
  accused officer's pay below the minimum of the scale applicable to his rank and
  defines a limit on the size of any fine which might be imposed. (A punishment
  of reduction in rate of pay should not be expressed as a reduction of a certain
  number of increments or as a reduction to a specified salary (the reason or
  this is that it might have the effect of preventing the payment of any increment
  until the period of punishment is over and would also prevent assimilation to
  any new scale of pay which might be awarded generally).       The punishment of
  reduction in rate of pay should always be expressed as a reduction by a
  specified amount.)

  Regulation 26 provides that where a hearing has been conducted by an officer to
  whom the case has been delegated under Regulation 16, and where the charge    s
  been found proved and punishment imposed, the accused officer may appeal to his
  chief officer against both the finding and the punishment or against the
                                                                               Paragraph 4.28

                                               ANNEX F

            TIMING OF INVESTIGATION OF A COMPLAINT WHERE THERE ARE PENDING CRIMINAL
                                          PROCEEDINGS

        Investigations before the trial

           1. A common type of case where problems of timing may arise is one in which the
iatt-ci  w complaint and allegations involved in it ai?e„directly or closely associated.with
        ;crcriminal proceedings which are pending*;^Irt such a case, save in exceptional
           circumstances of the kind .mentioned ina paragraph: ;6 below, it is suggested, that
           the complaint should be regarded as ‘being in effect sub judice and that
           investigation should ordinarily be deferred until the conclusion of the trial.
           The desirability of identifying all possible witnesses as soon as possible and
           taking from them statements relevant to the complaint is appreciated but in the
           normal case it is outweighed by the other considerations mentioned in paragraphs
           2 to 5 below.

        2.    First, the investigation usually begins with the complainant being
        interviewed and questioned as to the details of his complaint and a statement
        being taken from him, provided he desires to make one.       An inquiry of this
        nature of necessity involves a probing examination of the complainant on matters
        touching upon offences with which he has been charged and which are still
        subject to determination by the court.

        3 .Such an inquiry is open to criticism in that          it facilitates the obtaining of
        incriminating statements from the complainant, and the exposing of his defence
        to     the pending proceedings.       The undesirability of such a course is underlined
        by    the terms of^'paraqraph 17.5 of the Code of Practice for the
                         D e t en t i on / Treatment and Q uestioning of Persons by Police
               •It is on.Of ficers'l .Jional cases that questions relating to the offence
               should be put to the accused person after he has been charged or informed
               that he may be prosecuted.          Such questions may be put where they are
               necessary for the purpose of preventing or minimising harm or loss to some
               other person or to the public or for clearing up an ambiguity in a previous
               answer or statement.'

        U. Secondly, the interview might well involve the identification of witnesses
        whom the defence propose to call.      If the investigation is pursued the
        investigating officer will need to interview these witnesses with a view to
        taking statements from them.

        5.    Thirdly, the complainant would require to be cautioned before being
        questioned, certainly if any statements made by him and indeed by any possible
        witnesses are to be made available to the prosecuting solicitor for use by the
        prosecution.   To caution the complainant in these circumstances could well
        inhibit him from supplying any information and could be regarded as having the
        effect of discouraging him from pursuing his complaint.

        6.   There may, however, be exceptional circumstances where it is proper to
        proceed with the investigation of the complaint provided that the complainant is
        legally represented and that it is clear that the solicitor representing him,
        while fully appreciating the prejudice which could result to his client were, he
        to be interviewed prior to the determination of the proceedings, indicates that
        he nonetheless desires that the complaint should be investigated immediately.




                                                   1
One such example might be if the complaint appears so cogent that it makes the
deputy chief constable doubtful after taking legal advice (see paragraph 8
below), whether it is proper to continue with the prosecution at all.

7.    Where a complaint is investigated before trial the report of the
investigation would, where this is necessary by virtue of section 49(3) of the
1964 Act, be sent to the Director of Public Prosecutions. It may be that the
Director would not feel it right to give any decision as to proceedings being
taken against the police officer or officers concerned until the pending
proceedings had been disposed of but, dependent on the nature of the complaint
and of the evidence available in support of it, the Director might think it
right to give advice £S vto the desirability of continuing with thecj>ending
proceedings against the coigglainant.

8 . The Secretary of State advises that the solicitor for the prosecution and
where appropriate Counsel should in all cases be informed at an early stage of
any relevant complaint and of its nature. The deputy chief constable may care
to seek their advice as to when the investigation should take place, seeking
further advice from the Director in cases of difficulty.

9 .To sum up, it is suggested that   in the type of case mentioned in paragraph 1
above:

     a.    if the complainant is not legally represented, he should not, save in
          exceptional circumstances, be interviewed, but should be told that the
          investigation of the complaint will be suspended until after the trial;

     b.   if the complainant is legally represented, his solicitors should be
          told that it is proposed to suspend the investigation until the pending
          proceedings have been disposed of, since it would involve interviewing
          their client and questioning him on matters touching upon the charge
          preferred against him and might well necessitate interviewing any
          witness whom it might be possible he intended to call on his behalf.
          The solicitors should also be informed that if the investigation were
          to proceed any statements made by the complainant or by the relevant
          witnesses would be made available to the prosecution;

     c.   if notwithstanding this warning, the solicitors still stated that the
           complainant wished that enquiries be not delayed pending his trial,
           then the deputy chief constable may think it proper for the
           investigation to proceed. The complainant might so wish if he thought
           it might bring to light evidence which would result in the prosecution
           being withdrawn.    The complainant should be cautioned before any
           questions were put to him or any statement taken from him;

     d. the solicitors should in such circumstances be asked to state in
         writing that they agree to the complaint being investigated and realise
         that the result may be given in evidence;

     e.   the prosecution lawyers should be informed at an early stage of any
          relevant complaint and of its nature.

Police investigations In complaints and other matters affecting conviction after
trial but before an appeal

10.   If a person who has been convicted at a magistrates' court appeals to the
crown court, his appeal is heard by way of a rehearing of the case.          The
considerations set out in the previous paragraphs regarding the investigation of
a complaint before trial apply equally where an appeal against conviction has
been made to the crown court.


                                         2
            punishment only. Notice of appeal has to be givenwithin 2 days of the day on
            which the accused was notified of the punishment. He must furnish the chief
            officer with a statement setting out the grounds of his appeal within 21 days
            following the day on which either he receives the transcript of the record of
            proceedings at the original hearing where he has asked to be supplied with such
            a transcript or, where he has made no such request, following the day on which
            he gave notice of appeal. Either the period for giving notice or the period for
            indicating grounds of appeal may be extended by the chief officer if he is
            satisfied that by reason of the special circumstances of the case it is just and
            right to do so.      The regulation provides that the appellant may attend the
            proceedings and conducthis appeal either in person or by a friend. He or his
            representative may make oral or written representations in support of the appeal
 £t(j C •   and is allowed to adduce only new evidence j$hi§h could not have been adduced at
: V1 tie    the hearing at       whichthe Qharge * was        proved.  Witnesses giving oral
       'r   evidence at an      appealmay be cross-examined, and the officer considering the
            appeal may, at his discretion, admit written evidence.       The regulation also
            provides that a verbatim record of appellate proceedings should be taken and a
            transcription of the record made and supplied to the defendant for the purpose
            of an appeal to the Secretary of State if the appellant asks for one. Paragraph
             12 of the regulation provides that, on an internal appeal the officer conducting
            the appeal may not award any punishment graver than the punishment awarded at
             the original hearing.

            Regulation 27 provides that the chief officer may suspend       an officer from
            membership of his force and from his office as constable where a report,
            allegation or complaint is received from which it appears that that officer may
            have committed a disciplinary or criminal offence. The chief officer’s power to
            suspend an officer may be exercised at any time after the receipt of the repor ,
            allegation or complaint up to the time when either it is decided that the
            officer shall not be charged with a disciplinary offence or, where charges have
            been preferred, when all the charges have been dismissed or punishments have
            been imposed or an appeal has been determined.     The regulation provides that
            suspension shall remain in force until either it is decided that the officer
            shall not be charged, or he has been so chargedand has been dealt with, or any
            appeal he may makehas been determined,    or the chiefofficer decides that the
            suspension shall be lifted.

            Regulation 28 applies where an officer is found guilty of a charge of criminal
            conduct following a conviction in a court of a criminal charge/and subsequently
            appeals successfully against his conviction.   In such a case, this regulation
            has the effect of setting aside the disciplinary conviction whilst allowing the
            chief officer to charge the officer concerned with some other disciplinary
            offence, having regard to section 104 of the Act, which relates to double
            jeopardy.

            Regulation 29 requires the keeping of a forcediscipline book.

            Schedule 1 contains   the Discipline Code.

            Schedule 2 contains   the discipline form.

            Schedule 3 makes the      necessary   adaptations   of   the   regulations   for   the
            Metropolitan Police.




                                                     5
                                                                  Paragraph 5.21

                                    Aim g

         DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE IM CASES WHERE CKEMHIAL PROCEEDINGS ARE
                   TO BE INSTITUTED AGAUST THE POLICE OFFICER

1. Where a complaint has been referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions
under section 90(4) or section 92(2) and the Director has notified his decision
on the question of criminal proceedings, the chief officer is required, by
virtue of section 90(5) of the 198U Act, to refer the case to the Complaints
Authority straightaway.    There is no exemption from this procedure because
criminal proceedings are'Hbeing brought. It Is recognised, however, that wher^e
there are to be criminal proceedings no decision on the disciplinary aspects of
the case dan in most cases be reached until the outcome of the criminal
proceedings is known.     An additional complicating factor is that when the
criminal proceedings result in a conviction the chief officer may wish to bring
a charge of criminal conduct under paragraph 16 of the discipline code. (This
is not a charge with which the Complaints Authority have any concern since it is
not a charge arising directly out of the complaint.) If, however, such a charge
is brought and subsequently the Complaints Authority exereise their powers to
recommend or direct the bringing of other disciplinary charges the officer may
find himself facing a second disciplinary hearing. While it is entirely within
the chief officer's discretion at what point after the conviction he brings a
charge under paragraph 16 it is suggested that, where criminal proceedings are
pending in a complaints case, chief officers may find it helpful to adopt the
procedure set out in the following paragraphs.

2. If the chief officer is satisfied that the criminal charge or charges cover
the whole matter of the complaint, he will refer    the papers to the Complaints
Authority at once under section 90(5) giving this as the reason why he has not
brought charges and does not propose to bring any disciplinary charges (other
than a possible charge under paragraph 16). If the Complaints Authority agree,
that is the end of the matter:      but the chief officer will not inform the
officer and the Authority will not inform the complainant of the decision until
the criminal proceedings are completed. (Chief officers are asked to inform the
Complaints Authority of the eventual outcome of the criminal proceedings.) If
the Complaints Authority do not agree they will so inform the fchief officer and
he will proceed as if paragraph 3 below had applied.

3. If the chief officer is not satisfied that the criminal charge(s) cover the
whole matter of the complaint, he will refer the papers to the Complaints
Authority at once under section 90(5) giving as his reason for not preferring
charges the fact that criminal proceedings are pending and informing them that
he will let them ahve a further report when the outcome is known.           The
Complaints Authority will take no action at this stage except to note the
report.   Once the criminal proceedings are completed the chief officer will
consider the disciplinary aspects of the case and follow one of the courses set
out in paragraphs U, 5 and 6 below.

M. If the chief officer proposes to bring a charge under paragraph 16 and the
officer concerned is in prison or has received a suspended sentence, he will
bring the paragraph 16 charge and arrange for it to be heard and then inform the
complaints Authority of the result.

5. Where the criminal charge leads to a penalty other than imprisonment or a
suspended sentence:




                                       1
      i. If the chief officer decides not to bring disciplinary charges other
          than a paragraph 16 charge he should prefer the latter but should not
          arrange the hearing until he has reported to the Complaints Authority
          why he is not bringing other disciplinary charges and the Authority
          have given their decision.

      ii. If the chief officer decides to prefer disciplinary charges, with or
           without a paragraph 16 charge, he should prefer the charges but should
           not arrange the hearing until he has reported to the Complaints
           Authority and the Authority have given their decision.      (If, however,
           the disciplinary charges, other than the paragraph 16 charge, cover all
u         the matters complained Of which were not covered bj thft cxriJatnal charge
ht:       and all the charges arte admitted, the hearing caa tate place and the
           Complaints Authority need only be informed of the outcoma undter section
           90 ( 2 ) . )
6 . If the chief officer does not intend to bring a paragraph 16 charge or if
the officer was acquitted of the criminal offence, he will report to the
Complaints Authority for      their decisionwhether to recommendor direct that
disciplinary charges   (or    charges additional to those which the chief officer
himself intends to bring) should be brought.

7.    It should be noted that reports to the Complaints Authority in the
circumstances described in paragraphs 5 and 6 above are not formal references
because that will already have been done under paragraph 3 above. But the chief
officer will have to bring his memorandum up to date by giving the outcome of
the criminal proceedings and his reasons for not bringing any disciplinary
charges which he could in theory have brought. Where the chief officer takes
the view that charges are precluded by virtue of the 'no double jeopardy' rule
the Authority will need more than a bare statement to that effect.      It will
normally be helpful to them to have a brief report giving the substance of the
criminal case, and,     in particular, any  further information which might be
relevant to any possible disciplinary charges.

8 . The fact that the officer complained of ceases to serve as a police officer
does not put the complaint outside the purview of the Complaints Authority.
(See paragraph 6 .MM).

9. Where disciplinary charges (other than a paragraph 16 charge) are preferred
and denied the case must be submitted to the Complaints Authority for their
decision whether a tribunal ought to be held.




                                           2
                                     AMEX H

  NOTES OH DISCIPLINARY HEARINGS BEFORE THE CHIEF OFFICER AID BEFORE A TRIBUNAL

The following notes are designed to ensure that disciplinary proceedings are
conducted fairly and with uniformity. Some of the notes reproduce provisions of
the Regulations but are included here for the sake of completeness. Reference
to Regulations are to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985*

TRIBUNAL CASES

gg. Where the Police Complaints .AuthofciJ^ haveictirected that a charge or charges
shall be heard by a*tribunal, the tribun&l^as=a whole exercises, by majorityvif
necessary, the same powers in relation to the hearing (except on punishment) as
are normally exercised by the chief officer alone. References in the following
paragraphs to the officer conducting the hearing or to the presiding officer
should accordingly be taken in appropriate cases as references to the tribunal.

3. Where it has been arranged for related charges to be heard at the same time
as charges in respect of which a tribunal is to be held (see section 94 of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984), all the charges will be heard by the
tribunal and the procedure for all of them will be the same as in any other
tribunal case.

LEGAL REPRESENTATION CASES

4. The following paragraphs describe the procedure for determining whether an
accused officer should be offered the right to elect for legal representation at
a disciplinary hearing and for notifying him of this.            The subsequent
procedures, including procedures at the hearing, should be identical whether the
case is presented and defended by a lawyer or by a serving police officer.

5.   Section 102 of the 1984 Act provides that the punishments of dismissal,
requirement to resign or reduction in rank may not be imposed at a disciplinary
hearing unless the accused officer has been given an opportunity to elect to be
represented by a lawyer at the hearing. Accordingly, the first question to be
considered once the decision has been taken to charge an officer is whether or
not it should be a 'legal representation' case. The decision should be taken by
the officer bringing the charge (who except in delegated cases and in the
Metropolitan and City of London Police Forces will be the deputy chief
constable). There are two opposing considerations which deputies will have to
bear fully in mind when making their decision.      On the one hand, the chief
officer's powers of punishment will be severely limited unless legal
representation has been offered in due form:     he will be unable to impose a
penalty more severe than reduction in rate of pay.     On the other hand, for a
variety of reasons the deputy should attempt as far as possible to limit the
number of occasions on which the right to elect for legal representation is
offered.   First, such an offer is in effect a warning to the officer that on
conviction he is liable to receive one of the most serious punishments; if it is
given unnecessarily it may cause the accused officer considerable needless
anxiety. Second, in such a situation the accused officer may well feel that he
ought to retain a lawyer rather than a serving police officer 'friend' for his
defence, which could be very expensive for him or his staff association. Third,
where he does elect to be represented by a lawyer, the Act provides that the
case against him may be presented by a lawyer, which also has considerable cost
implications.




                                        1
6 . The deputy thus has a delicate path to tread, and in reaching his decision
he should take account of all relevant considerations.      In the Secretary of
State's view legal representation should be offered if and only if the deputy
considers that were the charge to be found proved, there would be a genuine
prospect of the chief officer considering a punishment of dismissal, requirement
to resign or reduction in rank appropriate to the case.

7. The procedure for notifying an officer that he is to have the right to elect
for legal representation is set out in the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985•
These provide that where the officer formulating the charges is of the view that
the case is a "legal representation" case, the officer concerned will be given
an opportunity on the discipline form to indicate whether or not he wishes to be
legally represented. The regulations further provide that he should be required
to indicate his decision on the matter within     days rff tthe dfettee on which the
documents in the case (see paragraph 12 below) are served ton .him. Normally
these documents should be served with the discipline form. Where any one of the
documents is served later, the 1M day period starts from the date on which that
document Was served.    Where, however, a document is adduced at a hearing by
agreement between the two sides, the introduction of that document shall not of
itself justify an adjournment of the hearing to allow the unrepresented officer
to consider electing to be represented at later sessions of the same hearing.
In such a situation, however, the officer presiding at the hearing should
.consider granting an adjournment to allow the defendant to reconsider his
position if the statement so affects the      strength of the case against him
(either as to his guilt or as to the likely severity of the punishment to be
awarded) that it would be in the interests of justice to grant it.                The
discipline form will indicate to the officer that if he fails to make an
election within the 1M day period without reasonable cause, this will be taken
to indicate a decision on his part not to be legally represented.
                                                       *


8 . The right given in the legislation is a right not to receive the most severe
punishments at a disciplinary hearing unless the offer has been made of legal
representation at the officer's expense. Obviously, if the officer gives notice
that he does not wish to be so represented, or without reasonable cause fails
within the time limit to give notificaion that he does so wish, the punishments
of loss of job and rank will be available to the chief officer if the charge is
found proved.

9 . There may be cases in which      two officersface the    samecharges, but, because
one of them has rank and the other      not, the most severe puni&hment thought
reasonably likely in the latter case is a financial penalty, while in the former
case it may be considered likely that a reduction in rank would be imposed.    If
the   deputyconsiders that the charges should nonetheless be heard together, the
right to elect for legal representation should be offered to both officers.

10. In the case of a Metropolitan Police officer who qualifies and elects for
legal representation at a hearing before a Disciplinary Board, the right to such
representation shall continue if the charge is found proved, until an appeal by
him has been heard by the Commissioner.

PREPARATION

Rights of the accused officer

11.    Every effort should be made to assist an accused officer, his 'friend' or
his    legalrepresentative to interview witnesses who might be called for the
defence. It is recognised that an investigating officer should ideally be seen
by both sides as acting totally neutrally as between an accused officer and the


                                          2
11. The same objections do not apply, however, an investigation preceding an
appeal from conviction at the crown court because the hearing of an appeal by
the Court of Appeal does not constitute a retrial, the appellant rarely appears
and fresh evidence is involved in only a very few cases. For the most part the
question before the Court of Appeal is whether there was anything wrong with the
conduct of the trial at the crown court.        It is considered desirable that any
material relevant to an appeal, including any such material which arises in the
context of a complaint, should be before the Court of Appeal at the time of the
hearing. Where this has not happened, it has sometimes been necessary for the
case to be referred back to the court by the Secretary of State under section 17
of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 for reconsideration in the light of fresh
evidence arising from ^subsequent ..police [investigations.

12. The Secretary of State therefore- wishes to commend to chief officers the
practice of rather greater flexibility as regards investigations following
conviction in the crown court but before an appeal may have been heard. It is
an essential element in any such greater flexibility of practice that the
defence should agree in writing to provide access to the defendant and their
witnesses for the purpose of the investigation under section 85 of the 198M Act.
Investigations might for instance be appropriate in the following circumstances:

     a.   at the request of the trial judge or the Court of Appeal;

     b.   when information about documents in the possession of the police or the
          examination of exhibits has been requested by the appellant, either
          direct or through the Registrar of the Court of Appeal;

     c.   because matters come to the attention of the police which throw doubt
          on the validity of the conviction.

There may be other cases.

13.   It is not suggested that the investigation of a complaint should proceed
automatically at this stage but that the deputy chief constable should consider
seeking the advice, where necessary, of the prosecuting solicitors and/or the
Director whether it would be appropriate to proceed with enquiries (see
paragraph 8 above).    Where, after such consultation, there are still doubts
about whether it is proper to begin or to continue with enquiries before the
hearing of an appeal, it is suggested that the deputy chief constable should
inform the Registrar of the Court of Appeal what is proposed and why, so that
the Court may, if they think it appropriate, indicate that they would see
objection to enquiries proceeding.   It would also help the Court of Appeal if
the deputy chief constable informed the Registrar of any case where enquiries
were proceeding before appeal at the beginning of those enquiries, if he
considered that the outcome of the investigation might substantially affect the
appeal.

14.   When it is decided to proceed with an investigation pending appeal, the
deputy chief constable should keep his legal advisers informed of progress, and
notify them especially of any developments that may bear upon the conviction
under appeal.   In cases where it is not possible to assess the authenticity of
information coming to light until all enquiries have been completed the deputy
chief constable should apprise them of that situation.          The prosecuting
solicitor and, where appropriate, counsel will be able to advise whether any new
material is relevant, and, if so, how it should be assembled so that it will be
admissible in evidence, if necessary.     They will also arrange for any such
evidence to be made available to the Court of Appeal and, in accordance with the
usual procedure, for copies to be supplied to the defence.




                                        3
15.   There should be no alteration in the normal rule that the report of the
investigating officer is a confidential document that should not itself be
disclosed.




                                      4
authority presenting the case against him.   In many circumstances, therefore,
the defence will be content for the Investigating Officer or some other
officer of the force to be present at such interviews.   Cases may arise where
the public interest in the protection of classified or otherwise sensitive
information might require the presence of a senior officer of the force at
interviews of this kind.    Normally, however, where the accused officer, his
"friend" or his legal representative raises objections, chief officers should
permit the interviews of defence witnesses to take place in the absence of
both the Investigating Officer and any other officer.

12.   The accused officer must be presented with copies of the evidence and
ordered to appear at the disciplinary hearing as soon as possible after the
decision has been taken to proceed with a disciplinary charge, and at least
21 days before the date set for the hearing.     Regulation 10(1) specifies
the documents that he is entitled to receive.         t

13.    When the above papers are served,    then,  if it is not a legal
representation case, the accused should be reminded that he may consult,
and be represented at the hearing by, a "friend" who may be any serving
member of a police force irrespective of rank; and that he may consult a
lawyer about any     aspect of the case, though   he may not actually be
represented by a lawyer at the hearing.

14. Where two or more officers are accused of offences arising from the same
incident they may ask that their cases be heard separately.       The officer
arranging the hearing should grant such a request unless he is satisfied that
a joint hearing can be held without injustice to either or any of the
accused.

Documents to be made available to disciplinary authority

15.   Statements taken from witnesses or other persons by an investigating
officer which are provided to an accused officer under Regulation 10(1)
should not be placed before the disciplinary authority before the hearing.
At the hearing the officer presiding should be provided only with the
discipline form, indicating the charges to be heard.           If during the
proceedings the presenting officer or the accused officer wishes to put in
evidence a written statement from a witness who isto be called to give
evidence he should be allowed to do so, subject      to the consent of either
side at the hearing.   Where the witness is not to be called to give evidence,
any statement from that witness will be admissible only if the requirements
of Regulation 19 have been fulfilled (amongst other matters, this p v e s both
the accused and the presenting officer the effective power to require that
written statements shall be admitted as evidence on behalf of the other side
only if the maker of the statement is called as a witness and made available
for cross-examination.

GENERAL PRELIMINARY

16.  Subject to the provisions of Regulations 18(2) and 22, the hearing will
be conducted in private (see, further, paragraphs 25, 41 and 42).

17.   The case against the accused officer will be presented by a serving
officer (who may be the investigating officer, except in cases where he may
be called as a witness unless there is agreement with the defence for him to
so act) or laywer, as appropriate (see above).   His duties include making an
opening statement, giving a brief outline of the case, examining the
witnesses   and helping  to bring out    the   facts  both for and against
the accused.


18.   At the hearing the accused officer may conduct his defence in person,
or be represented by any serving member of a police force irrespective of
rank (the "friend"), or, in "legal representation" cases, by a solicitor
or barrister.    The accused should be given every facility for communicating
with his "friend" or lawyer.     If he is represented by a "friend" both he
and his "friend" may cross-examine the witnesses called to support the case
against him.    The accused's "friend" may appear at the hearing either in
uniform or in plain clothes.
                                   3
 19. The Regulations are so drawn that it is open to the officer conducting the
 hearing to be assisted by a solicitor or barrister.         It is suggested that
 consideration should be given to obtaining assistance of this kind only in those
 cases where both the defence and the case against the accused officer are to be
 presented by lawyers. The decision should normally be taken by the deputy chief
 constable in order to prevent the presiding officer from gaining prior knowledge
 of the case. In reaching his decision the deputy chief constable should attempt
 to assess whether it is likely that points of law will arise such as will
 require advice from a lawyer.     In reaching his decision, there would appear to
 be no objection to his approaching the lawyers involved in the case to inquire
 whether such points are likely to be put forward at the hearing. Care should be
 feitken if   such an approach is made not to discuss any merits of points which ?
 rfiight beput forward nor to apprise the officer who will conduct the hearing:.of
vtsfee nature of the issues which will be raised. During the hearing, the lawyer
 assisting the presiding officer should not be asked to advise on matters of
 fact. His advice on points of law should be given orally and in the hearing of
 all parties to the case.

20.   Before the case against him is presented the accused may submit that the
facts alleged in the charge are not such as to constitute the offence with which
he is charged. If the submission is upheld the disciplinary charge to which it
relates must be dismissed (Regulation 18(6)). He may also at this stage submit
that the    correct procedure has not been followed - for example that he has not
received   all the documents to which he is entitled under Regulation 10(1). If
this is upheld, the case should be adjourned.    If, following the dismissal of a
charge under Regulation 18(6), an amended charge is preferred,the proceedings
may, and if the accused wishes it, shall, be adjourned to enable him to consider
his defence or to introduce fresh evidence.     In a complaint case, there is no
requirement to refer the matter back to the Police Complaints Authority when a
charge has been dismissed, whether or not it is amended at the hearing.

PLEA OF GUILTY

21.   The officer should be asked at the beginning of the hearing whether he
pleads not guilty or guilty to each charged     It is open to him to plead not
guilty, even if on the discipline form he has stated that he admits the charge.
In addition, the presiding officer should treat a statement in mitigation made
by or on behalf of the accused officer prior to punishment being awarded, as a
plea of not guilty (despite an earlier guilty plea) where it appears from the
statement that the accused officer did not understand the nature of his plea or
did not intend to plead guilty, or that the facts adduced in the plea, if
substantiated, would mean that the requirements of the offence had not been made
out.   In either case (whether the change of plea is at the instance of the
accused officer or the presiding officer) the presiding officer is required to
hear the case as if a plea of not guilty had been entered from the outset, and
he should grant an adjournment unless satisfied that the case both for and
against the accused officer can be conducted fairly and effectively without an
adjournment.

22.   When an accused officer pleads guilty:

      (i)   the officer conducting the hearing may dispose of the case without
      hearing witnesses, the facts being outlined by the presenting officer. He
      should, however, hear evidence if he considers it desirable to do so, and
      in particular he should agree to any request by the accused or his
      representative for witnesses to be heardj

      (ii) whether or not witnesses are to be called, the accused officer should
      be given full opportunity to make or submit any statement in mitigation of
      punishment.
SEQUENCE OF CHARGES AT HEARHG

23   When an accused officer pleads guilty to one or more charges and not guilty
to other charges at the same hearing, the officer conducting the hearing should
first hear the case concerning the charges to which he has pleaded not guilty,
and the presenting officer should as far as practicable confine his remarks in
his opening statement to matters relevant to these charges.

24.   Where an officer pleads not guilty to all charges, the order in which
charges are heard is a matter within the discretion of the officer conducting
the hearing. In deciding on this he should take account of any request made by
the accused officer.

25. Where a disciplinary charge stems from a complaint made by a member of the
public, the complainant may if he wishes be present throughout the proceedings
and until a finding is reached; provided that if he is to be called ast a
witness, he should not be allowed to attend before this point, and that the
presiding officer may require him to withdraw if evidence is to be given which,
in the presiding officer's view, might disclose information which ought not to
be disclosed to a member of the public. If the presiding officer considers it
appropriate, he may allow the complainant to be accompanied by a friend or
relative, to whose presence the same rules and restrictions will apply. Apart
from giving his evidence, the complainant should be allowed to put questions to
the accused officer either on his own behalf or through the presenting officer;
but he should take no other part in the proceedings (see Regulation 22 and the
notes on it in Annex B).

ADJOURNMENTS
26. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time as may be necessary, either
briefly or until a later date.     Except insofar as it might be necessary to
discuss administrative arrangements for the adjourned hearing or hearings, it is
important that the officer conducting the hearing should not discuss the case
itself with any persons whether connected with the case or not. It is only in
this way that the impartiality of the hearings can be seen to be properly
protected.
27. If during the hearing of a case facts emerge which establish a prlma_facle
criminal case, the officer conducting the hearing should if necessary adjourn
the hearing to consider what action is necessary as a result.

28.   At the conclusion of the hearing the presiding officer may adjourn to
consider finding(s) and (if appropriate) punishment(s).

DECISIONS
29. In a tribunal case, the decision as to finding will be reached by the three
members together, if necessary by a majority; the decision as to punishment will
be for the chief officer alone but he must consult the other members of the
tribunal as to their views.

30.   Where a chief officer from another force is hearing the case under
Regulation 14(2) (ie where the accused's own chief officer is an interested
party or a material witness) he will be responsible for the decisions as to both
punishment and finding, subject, in tribunal cases, to the tribunal's role.

31. Where the chief officer of another force is hearing the case at the request
of the accused’s own chief officer in any other circumstances (Regulation 14(7))
it is for him alone (except in tribunal cases) to determine the finding, but he
may only make a recommendation as to punishment. The decision on punishment in
such cases is for the accused’s own chief officer, taking into account the
recommendation(s) of the presiding officer.

The decision on punlshaent

32.   Regulation 24(6) provides that in considering the question of punishment
the officer conducting the hearing must have regard to the accused s reoord
police service as shown on his personal record; and he must give the accu®®^
his representative the opportunity to make oral or written representations»
the question of punishment, to present relevant evidence and to re*“e®*
witnesses be called. It is open to the officer conducting the case to adjourn
the hearing to hear further evidence relevant to punishment.

33. The Regulation also makes clear that it is open to the officer conducting
the hearing to consider any other evidence which in his opinion would ass*st
in determining the question of the punishment to be imposed or recommen e *
officer conducting the hearing should as a matter of course ear ev            .
appropriate senior officer concerning the accused's character and his genera
performance as a police officer. It is vital that such evidence should be fair
and accurate and should cover all relevant matters including those w l ^
the accused's credit.     The officer who is to present it should therefo e
exercise considerable care in its preparation; in particu          °
nothing is included in the evidence which cannot be substantiated. The s
officer concerned should prepare typewritten copies of the evidence he P™P°se
to give (though, of course, it will be necessary for him actually to Preser*
evidence at the hearing only if the officer is found guilty) and this should be
handed to the accused officer at least 21 days before the hearing.

34.   The material to be entered in an officer's personal r e c o r d following a
disciplinary conviction is set out in the Police Regulations, and, under the
relevant Regulation, a punishment so entered may be expunged at the end ol th
period specified in the Regulation if the officer requests this. Punishments
which have been expunged in this way should not be referred to w en ev en
presented as to an officer's character and general record following a subsequent
disciplinary conviction; but evidence should be given of any
disciplinary convictions and of any commendations.    Subject to this, nowever,
the guiding principle in the selection of evidence of character and record
should be the relevance of the evidence.         Thus details of ®nt^ es " ®
divisional discipline book (which, by definition fall short of form
disciplinary action) should not be given unless they are relevant to the current
charge.   But where an officer has been found guilty of a serious offence, a
his continuance in the force or in his existing rank is ini question, then a
aspects of his performance will be relevant to the question of punishment.
Moreover, if, for example, he has been found guilty of being late for duty>
will be relevant that his time-keeping had on other occasions been a c*u®e
concern and that he had been warned about this - whether or not this had bee
sufficiently serious to merit an entry in the divisional discipline book.
Relevance should also be the prime consideration when deciding whether any
reference should be included to complaints made against an officer during his
service.

35.   The disciplinary authority when considering the question of punishment
should not have regard to any report or other document which has not been
disclosed to the accused officer.

36.   As soon as possible after the hearing the decision of the disciplinary
authority should be recorded on the discipline form and notified to the accused
in writing. When a punishment is awarded, a form setting out the conditions or
appeal to the Secretary of State should be handed to the accused officer.
ABSENCE OF ACCUSED
37.     If without reasonable excuse, an accused officer does not attend the
hearing of the case, the hearing may proceed and be concluded in his absence
sublect to the provisions of Regulation 21.         (In such a case, the accused
officer's 'friend' or legal representative may be heard as if the officer were
present.) By virtue of Regulation 21(1)(a), where the accused is in prison and
wishes to make representations in person, the hearing must not be concluded
until he has been enabled to do so.         Alternatively he might wish to have
representations made on his behalf by his 'friend' or lawyer, as appropriate.
It should be clearly established before the hearing whether the accused wishes
to attend himself, or to have representations made on his behalf (see paragraph
9 .3 H of the Guidance for advice on cases where the accussed officer is medically
unfit to attend).

MISCELLAMEOUS
39.       A verbatim record of the proceedings at the hearing will be taken.        It is
the Secretary of State's view that the record should normally be made by tape
r e c o r d i n g unless this is impractical, for example where the electricity supply
fails or where a hearing takes place away from a police building in a place
where tape facilities cannot be provided.          If the accused officer subsequently
gives notice of appeal (whether by way of an internal appeal or by way of appeal
to the Secretary of State) then, at his request, a transcript of the
be made and a copy supplied to him. The transcript is made avaiUble to him for
the purposes of his appeal only and must be returned to the discip                      y
authority with any copies when all disciplinary proceedings are at an end. The
record and any transcript should be held in the secure c o n d i t i o n s applied to any
confidential personnel papers. The record should, however, be made available t
the accused officer if he wishes to compare it with the transcript.

■so. For the purpose of reckoning overtime, rest day entitlements and so on, the
accused officer, his 'friend' and any police witnesses who have been engaged in
completing statements and attending a disciplinary hearing should be
on duty unless in a particular case this would be inappropriate      In ^dition,
chief officers should allow as duty a reasonable amount of time spent
preparation of an officer's defence.

HO. Reasonable expenses incurred by civilian witnesses attending a hearing may,
at the discretion of the chief officer and subject to the concurrence of the
police authority, be met from the police fund.

 H1. Apart from the chief officer and, in tribunal cases, the two Board “^bers,
 the only persons who should ordinarily be present d u r i n g a disciplinary hearig
 are the presenting officer; and, in a legal representation, case,             Po1
 officer adviser; the shorthand writer; n e c e s s a r y administrative staff, the
 accused officer; his representative and, in a legal representation case,
 •friend' he consulted before the hearing; witnesses when they are actua y
 giving evidence; the complainant in a complaint case, together with a friend o
 S S u vr if appropriate; and any other police officer or civilian admitted in
 accordance with Regulation 18.

 H2.  It will sometimes be helpful, in the interests of gaining experience, for
 deputy chief constables, assistant chief constables and prospective Pr e s e n t i " 8
 officers or 'friends' to attend disciplinary hearings in their own force as
 observers    There is no objection to this, nor to such officers attending a
 hearing in a force other than their own, provided that in all such cases the
 chief officer concerned gives his permission and that the accused officer or his




                                            7
representative does not object. It must be made clear that such an officer is
present simply as an observer and that he will take no part in the proceedings.
The Regulations also permit the attendance of a member (but not an officer) of
the Police Complaints Authority and any solicitor, in each case at the
discretion of the presiding offioer and with the agreement of the accused
officer or his representative. In the case of both Complaints Authority members
and solicitors, attendance should be in the interests of their pining
experience. It is recommended that a solicitor may be allowed to attend where
the Police Federation or Superintendent's Association have indicated that he is
likely to be used in the future to represent their members in disciplinary
hearings.




                                        8
                                                                                                     ^ arag ra p n 5. 10

                                                   ANNEX J

                      COMPLAINTS, D ISC IPLIN E AND COMMENDATIONS - ANNUAL RETURN
                                                                                                          Form E
                      YEAR                             POLICE FORCE _________________

B efo r e   completing this form, please read the notes

PART A       CASES DURING THE YEAR ARISING FROM COMPLAINTS BY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

                                                             Status at Year End

1.     Number of cases during the year                       Case               1            Pending                 Total
       arising our of complaints received                  Completed

                             a.            this year

                               b. in previous years

                                               Total
                                                                                    .____ ___ ________


       Of t h e total cases completed i n how many was the       i n v e s t i g a t i o n   carried
       out by an officer from another police force

 3. In how many cases did complainants make forma] representation, during
     the year, of dissatisfaction with an invest’Ration or its outcome

PART B        COMPLAINTS COMPLETED DURING THE YEAR

i|. How many complaints were:
      a. Withdrawn or not proceeded with                        e. Total,

       b. Investigated - unsubstantiated                        f. For the total at He hew many
                                                                   ccrplainants were involved ..
       c. Investigated — substantiated
       d. Informally resolved
                                                                                                                "8
                                                                                                                1c     <0
                                                                                                                      •H
                                                                Of all those proceeded with- (Hb,              2£
       Of those substantiated (He) how many resulted in
                                                                4c and Hd) how many alleged:
       court proceeding for:                                                                                   •5m com
                                                                a.                               Incivility
       a.             Traffic offences only
                                                                5.                                  Assault
       b.      Other criminal offences only
                                                                c.        Irregularity in procedure
       c. Both traffic and other criminal
                                 offences                       d.                  Traffic irregularity
                                                                e.                           Neglect of duty
       How many resulted in:
                                                                f.                       Corrupt practice
       d.     Disciplinary proceedings only                     g.         Mishandling           of property
        e.     Both traffic and disciplinary                    h.      Irregularity in relation to
                                 proceedings                                       evidence/perjury
        f.       Both criminal (not traffic)                    i.               Oppressive conduct or
                and disciplinary proceedings                                                harassment
        g.       Traffic, other criminal and                                  Racially discriminatory
                                                                j.
                    disciplinary proceedings                                                behaviour
        h.         None of the above results                    k.      Unlawful/unnecessary arrest
                                                                                       or detention
Vnex J                                                        6 . continued
                                                                    1.     Impropriety in connection
                                                                         with the search of premises

                                                                    m.                      Other crime

                                                                    n.                           Other


jART C REFERENCE OF CASS TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

      How many cases, completed in year, were referred to D.P.P.
      and in how many of these was prosecution reccrrmended?
                                                                                 Cases                    Prosecution
                                                                                Referred                  Recaunerried

                                    Complaint cases - Traffic Offences
                                                          Other Offences

                                 Non-conplaint cases - Traffic Offences
                                                          Other Offences

                                                                                Complaint                 Nsn-ccnplaint
S.    Nunber of cases involving the alleged cctrmission of a criminal
      offence by a police officer not referred to the Director of
      Public Prosecutions
                                                                                Complaint                 Non-complaint
K     Number of cases referred on direction by the Conplaints
      Authority under section 92(2)


’ART D CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

10. Give in the following table -
             The nunber of officers convicted of criminal offences in cases completed during year
             The number of these officers sentenced to imprisonment (either irrmediate £r suspended)
             the total number of charges of vfaich officers were convicted.

                                                        Nunber of Officers                     Total number of charges
                                                                                               nf which officers were
                                                Convicted           Sentenced to ’'’prj.soment convicted

                                                                         Ccnplaint    Other       Ccnplaint       Other
                          Offence Group     Complaint       Other
    NDICTABLE
4   .       Violence against the person
                        Sexual offences
                               Burglary
                                Robbery
        Theft and handling stolen floods
                      Fraud and forgery
                        Criminal damage
1.                              Perjury
i.                           Corruption
i-            Other indictable offences

ON-INDICTABLE
<.                              Assault
I.         Other offences (not traffic)
n.                     Traffic offences
                                  TOTAL
                                                                                                   Annex J

11. Convicted for traffic offences and:                                 Number of officers

                                                                  Coaplaint         Other
                           Disqualified from driving
                      Off duty at time of offence

PART E DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

Disciplinary proceedings completed in year:
12.   NLmber of officers

                                             a arising directly       b in other      c of both
                                             out of complaints      circumstances    types a and     Total
                                                   only                 only             b
                  a. involved in charges
                  b. found quilty of one
                     or more charges

13. Number of charges arising:                        Directly out of              In ether
                                                         coiplaints              circumstances
                                            Total                                            “
                                           Proved

14. Ntmber of charges heard by : -
                                                Deputy chief officer
                                     chief officer in first instance
                                             Chief officer on appeal


15.       Ntmber of officers offered le^al representation
        ^jmber of these who accepted legpl representation
                                                                                         /

16. How many officers received each of the following pinishroents?

                                   Dismissal frtr> the force
                                      Requirement to res’ll
                                           Reduction in rank
                                           Reduction in pay
                                                        Fine
                                                    Reprimand
                                                     Caution

17. Proceedings uider Paragraph 16 of the Discipline Code ccrpleted in year

  Nurnber of officers: -                            Involved
                           - Dismissed or required to resign
                                            Reduced in rank
                                   Cautioned or reprimanded
Annex J

PART F RESIGNATIONS
18.   Number of officers who resigned in the year after criminal charges
      oref'e»'r*d against them but before proceedings completed.

19.   Number of officers (not already counted under 18) who resigned in
      the year after disciplinary charges preferred against them but be-;
      fore disciplinary hearing completed.

20.   Number of officers (not already counted under 18 or 19) who were
      permitted in year to resign while under suspension.


PART G COPIES OF COMPLAINTS

21. Number of officers who requested a copy of the complaint under-
    Regulation 9(1) of the Police (Complaints)(General) Refutations 1985

22.   Number of officers who were denied a copy:       Under Regulation 9(2)a
                                                       Under Regulation 9(2)b


PART H CASES REFERRED TO THE POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY AND COMPLETED IN YEAR

23.   Number of investigations referred to the Authority:-
                                                       Referred                 Supervised

                                 -   section 87(1)(a)(i)
                                 - section 87(1)(a)(ii)
                                        section 87(1)(b)
                                           section 87(2) _______   .^                  __
                                              section 88            ^      ____________ _
                                                  Total __                           '

24.   Kumber of cases referred under section 90 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984

      a.   Where disciplinary charges had been brought                            '          '
      b.   Where disciplinary charges were proposed but not yet brought
           (s.90(6))                                                             ___________
      c.   Where no disciplinary charges had been brought
           - Authority recommended charges to be brought
           - Authority directed charges to be brought                                   ______
           - Authority concurred in chief officer's decision

25.   Number of complaints submitted under Police (Anonymous, Repetitious, Etc. Complaints)
      Regulations 19^5 and number in which the Authority agreed to dispense with require­
      ments.                                                          Dispensed.
                                                            Total              with
                                                                            Requirements

                            a.                     Anonymous
                            b.                   Repetitious
                            c. Incapable oT investigation

26.   Number of cases reported under section 91(2) of the Police and                  Total
      Criminal Evidence Act 1984 for information on completion of
      disciplinary proceedings
                                                                     Ainex J

                                                                   Tribunals held
27    a  Number of caaea in which tribunala were required because
         the Authority directed that diaciplinary chargea ahould
         be brought                                               _______
      b. Number of caaea in which the Authority directed the
         holding of a tribunal but had not previoualy directed
         the bringing of diaciplinary chargea                           ______


28.   Number of commendationa and letteraof appreciation.
                                                   Commendations            Letters of
                                                                           Appreciation

                         Fro* Chief Conatable                            ___________
                                  From Courta
                    From members of the public                           ___________
            From other aourcea (specify below)




            _____________ 19 _____       Chief Constable

Pleaae return to Room 564
                 Home Office,
                 50 Queen Anen's Gate,
                 London,
                 SVMH 9AT.
                                                                            Annex J

FORM E - MOTES FOR GOIDASCE - Please read carefully before completing the for*.

              GENERAL: Definition of a completed case or complaint

The following criteria should be followed      to determine   whether   a   case   or
complaint is to be regarded as completed:

    i.      any matter which results in disciplinary proceedings being brought
           (either arising out of a complaint or otherwise) should be regarded as
           completed when the disciplinary hearing (including any aPP®al     t0
                                                                              the
           chief officer) is over and any punishment has been communicated to the
           officer concerned (no account should be taken for this purpose of an
           appeal to the Secretary of State);

   ii.     where a matter does not lead to disciplinary proceedings it should be
           regarded as completed when the final decision not to take proceedings
           has been made, ie, normally, when the Complaints Authority notifies
           the chief officer of their agreement to his decision;

   iii.    a   ’non-complaint1 matter   referred to   the  Director   of Public
           Prosecutions which does not result in either criminal or disciplinary
            proceedings should be regarded as completed at the point when the
            final decision not to take either criminal or disciplinary action is
           made;

    iv.    a •non-complaint' matter which leads to criminal proceedings but to no
           subsequent disciplinary proceedings should be regarded as completed at
           the point when the final decision not to take disciplinary proceedings
           is made.

PART A - This section applies to cases only

     i.    A 'case' for the purposes of this section is a single investigation
           carried out by an investigating officer into one incident or a group
           of incidents complained of by one or more persons.     Thus, where a
           person complains that he was assaulted by an officer while being

           arrested and was later subjected to threats at the police station,
           this would be investigated and counted as one case comprising two
           complaints.  Where a second person also complains about the alle«e^
           assault on the first complainant this would still be investigated and
           counted as one case even though it may      consist of more than one
           complaint and involve two persons.

    ii.    The starting date for a case (to decide in which year’s figures it
            should   be included) will    be the date on which it was recorded.
            Question 1a, reading across concerns only     c*3es   received in the
            current year. Question 1brefers only to action taken in the current
            year on cases received in previous years. .The figures should include
            cases subsequently withdrawn or not proceeded with, and cases where
            the Complaints Authority agreed to dispense with requirements.

    iii.   Cases not falling within section 84(4) of the Poli°e and Criminal
            Evidence Act 1984 should not be included anywhere in Question 1.

     iv.   For definition of ’completed' see general note above.



                                         1
    v.     The total at 1b should equal the total number of pending cases in the
           previous year's return.

   vi.     Question   3   should    include   all    formal representations of
           dissatisfaction with an investigation or its outcome, whether in
           writing or not, received during the year, regardless of the year in
           which the case was received or completed.

PART B -   This section applies to complaints   completed in the year,   irrespective
           of when they were received, ie        both those completed    having been
           received in the year and those       completed in the year     having been
           carried over from previous years      should be included.     (question Mf
           concerns complainants).

     i.    A complaint for the purposes of this section J.s each of the individual
           matters of complaint in a completed case.        Guidance on how many
           matters of complaint should be recorded where there is doubt is given
           in paragraph

    ii.    For definition of 'completed' see general note above.

   iii.    Complaints in respect of which the Complaints Authority have granted
           dispensation under the Police (Anonymous Repetitious Etc. Complaints)
           Regulations 1985 (see Question 25) should be included in the total of
           complaints not proceeded with at Question 4a.

    iv.    In Questions 5 and 6 the term "substantiated" applies to any complaint
           which has led directly to a finding of guilt in crimina             or
           disciplinary proceedings, or to the giving of word3 of advice.

     v.    For the purposes of Question 4f where the completed complaints include
           those made by different people about the same matter each complainant
           should be counted.    Where they include those made by one person on
           separate occasions about the same or different matters the comp a nan
           should be counted only once.

    vi.    In Question 5 'disciplinary proceedings'      excludes proceedings under
           paragraph 16 only of the Discipline Code.

   vii.    The sum of the answers to Question 5a-h should equal the total given         .
           at 4c.

  viii.    In Question 6 the sum of the answers in the first column should ®Qual
           the total of unsubstantiated complaints given at 4b; the sum of the
           second column should equal the total of substantiated compla n s g ven
           at 4c; and the sum of the third column should equal the total oi
           informally resolved complaints given at 4d.

    ix.    In Question 6 categories a - n should be interpreted as follows.-

                a.   Incivility                       Swearing, abusive or offensive
                                                      language or behaviour (but not
                                                      racial abuse: see j below);
                                                      in- considerate behaviour not
                                                      amounting to neglect of duty.




                                                                                        O
                                          2
b.   Assault                         Any unjustified use of force
                                     or personal violence (but not
                                     technical    assaults   arising
                                     from     unlawful     arrests);
                                     indecent assault; attacks by
                                     police dogs.

c.   Irregularity in procedure       Unreasonable       refusal    to
                                     provide access to a solicitor
                                     or to permit a detainee to
                                     .make    a    telephone    call;
                                      improper      disclosure     of
                                      information; other procedural
                                      irregularities not caused by
                                      neglect; breach of the Codes
                                      of Practice for the time being
                                      in force under s.60 or 66 of
                                      the 1984 Act.

d.   Traffic irregularity            Complaints about the driving
                                     or use of vehicles on police
                                 f   business (but not about police
                                     conduct   in    dealing   with
                                     civilian traffic).

e.   Neglect of duty                 Omissions, failures or neglect
                                     as speicified in paragraph 4
                                     of the Police Discipline Code
                                     other than the mishandling of
                                     property or money.

f.   Corrupt practice                Any    criminal allegation of
                                     corruption, or any improper
                                     practice of the kind defined
                                     in    paragraph   7        the
                                     Discipline Code.
                                                       /


g.   Mishandling of property         Theft  or loss or property
                                     (including money); unreason­
                                     able retention of property:
                                     damage to property in police
                                     custody; failure to account
                                     for    money    or   property;
                                     improper disposal of property.

h.   Irregularity in relation         Perjury: other allegations of
     to evidence/perjury              falsehood; any allegation that
                                      evidence     was   obtained    by
                                      irregularity or under duress;
                                      failure to conform with the
                                      Judges    Rules or associated
                                      administrative       directions;
                                      allegations of conduct of the
                                      kind described in paragraph 5
                                      of    the     discipline    code;
                                      concealment of evidence etc.




                            3
                                                    Unnecessary or unjustified use
               i.   Oppressive conduct or
                                                    of   "stop   and  search"   or
                    harassment
                                                    analogous powers, harassment;
                                                    improper requests for driving
                                                    documents•

                                                    Any conduct which, if shown to
               j.   Racially discriminatory
                                                    have taken place would be a
                    behaviour
                                                    breach of paragraph 9 of the
                                                    Discipline Code.

                    Unlawful/unnecessary
                    arrest or detention

                                                    Damage or theft in the course
                    Impropriety in connection
                                                    of    entry   or    search  of
                    with the search of premises
                                                    premises. Unauthorised entry
                                                    or search.       Premises left
                                                    untidy or insecure.

                                                    Criminal   damage    (except    in
               m.   Other crime
                                                    connection with     searches    of
                                                    property).


               n.   Other

PART C • refers to cases only

     i.    For definition of 'completed' see general note above.

           in Question 8 the first coluan should not Include any cases where the
    ii.
           complaints were withdrawn or not proceeded with.

PART D

     i.    For definition of 'completed' see general note above.

    ii.    in Question K>, in giving the nuaber of officer.
           officer should be counted only once, under the pr
           there is more than one offence.

   iii.    Where officers have committed offences out®Jd® ^ ^ ^ ^ / ^ h i c l T t h e
           these should be recorded in the returns of
           officers belong.

PART E
           For definition of 'completed' see general note above, especially i.
      i.

     ii.
                                                                     'OtTmcn
           In Questions 12, 13, 16 d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings for
           paragraph 16 only of the Discipline Code should be exclude .

    iii,    In Questions 12 and 13 'arising directly out of c°“P ^ intS’
            include only those charges which are directly related  au l URh not
            of the complaint.   Charges relating to matters which,          not
            covered by the original complaint came to l g        eircun,stances'.
            investigation, should be included under in




                                            4
     iv.    In Question 16, where an officer has been found guilty of more than
             one disciplinary offence, the entry should record only the most
             serious punishment.

      v.    The total number of officers in Question   16 should equal the number
            given in the total at Question 12b.

     vi.    Where an officer has been found guilty of a Code 16 offence and other
            disciplinary offences he should be counted in Questions 12, 13, 16 as
            well as in Question 17. A footnote should be added at the bottom of
            the page where this arises.

PART G

Questions 21 and 22 should give the total number of instances where a copy was
requested or withheld in the year rather than the number relating to cases
completed in the year.

PART H

Questions 23, 24, 26 and 27 refer both to complaint and to non-complaint cases,

       i.   For definition of 'completed' see general note above.

      ii.   In this section • disciplinary charges'       excludes   charges   under
             paragraph 16 of the Disciplinary Code.

     iii.   Complaints itemised at Question 24 should not include those itemised
             in Question 25.

PART I

The figure required in this section is the actual number of commendations and
letters of appreciation received, rather than the number of officers these
matters relate to.




v.


                                          5
                                                                                         r a t'a g ra p n   J . I /

                                                   ANNEX K

PERIOD                                                     POLICE FORCE


PART A CASES DURING THE PERIOD ARISING FROM COMPLAINTS BY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
                                                                         Status at end of period
1.    Number of cases during the period arising                            Case
      our of complaints received                                         Completed            Pending                 Total
                                 a.            this period
                                 b. in previous periods                              i
                                                         Total
                                                                                     L

2.    Number of cases completed in which the investigation
      was carried out by an officer from another police
      force.


3.    Number of cases in which complainants made formal
      representation, during the period, of dissatisfaction
      with an investigation or its outcome.


PART B COMPLAINTS COMPLETED DURING THE PERIOD

4. Number of complaints which were:-
     a. Withdrawn or not proceeded with                             d. Informally resolved
     b.   Investigated - unsubstantiated
                                                                    e. Total ..........
     c.     Investigated - substantiated
                                                                 6. Of all those proceeded
     Nunber of those substantiated which resulted in:-              with
                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                       iff'
                                                                    nunber alleging:-
     a.           Court proceedin'™ for
                       traffic offences                             a.             Incivility
     b.      Court proceeding for other                             b.                Assault
                                                                                       /
                      .criminal offences
                                                                    c.        Irregilarity in
     c.        Disciplinary proceedings                                             procedure
     d.        None of the above results                            d. Traffic irregularity
                                                                    e.        Neglect of duty
                                                                    f.       Corrupt practice
                                                                    g.        Mishandling of
                                                                                    property
                                                                    h. IrregiLarity in rela­
                                                                          tion to evidence/
                                                                                    perjury
                                                                    i.     Oppressive ccnduct
                                                                                or harassment
                                                                    j. Racially discrimina­
                                                                            tory behaviour
                                                                    k. Uhlawftsl/irmecessary
                                                                        arrest or detention
                                                                    1.     Impropriety in ccn-
                                                                         tion with the search
                                                                                  of premises
                                                                    m.           Other crime
                                                                    n.                   Other
nn«x K
ART C REFERENCE OF CASES TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

   NLriber of cases, completed in period, referred to D.P.P.
   arrimmber of these in which prosecution vas reecmnended                            Cases         Prosecution
                                                                                     Referred       Reccnmended

                                Arisirg out of a complaint - Traffic Offences
                                                             -   Other Offences

                              Arising in other circumtances - Traffic Offences
                                                             -   Other offences


                                                                         Arising from           Arising in other
                                                                          complaints             circunstanceo

3. a. Nunber of cases involving the alleged ccnrrdssion of a
      criminal offence by a police officer not referred to
      the Director or Public Prosecutions

   b. Nunber of cases referred on direction by the Complaints
      Authority under section 92(2)


?ART D CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
                                                                          Arising from          Arising in other
                                                                           complaints            circunstancea

       Nunber of officers convicted of criminal offences
       (other than traffic offences) in cases completed
       during the period
         Nunber of officers convicted of traffic offences
         in cases completed in the period

PART E CASES REFERRED TO THE POLICE OCMPLAIMS AUIHORnY AND COMPLETED IN PERIOD

10. Nunber of investigations referred to the Authority:-
                                                                          Referred              Supervised

                                              - section 870)(a)(i)
                                              - section 87(1)(a)(ii)
                                                    section 87(1)(b)
                                                       section 87(2)
                                                            section 88
                                                                 Total


11. Nunber of cases referred under section 90 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
              a                               Where disciplinary charges had been brought
               b. Where disciplinary charges were proposed tut not yet brought (s.90(6))
               c.                          Where no disciplinary charges had been brcygit
                                              Authority reccnmended charges to be brcogjit
                                                Authority directed charges to be brought
                                         - Authority concurred in chief officer's decision
                                                                                      Annex K

    12.   Humber of complaints submitted under Police (Anonymous Repetitious Etc. Complaints)
          Regulations 1985 and number in which the Authority agreed to dispense with require­
          ments.
                                                                     Dispensed with
                                                     Total
                                                                      requirements
                   a.                   Anonymous
                   b.                 Repetitious
                   c.   Incapable of investigation


                                                                     Tribunal held
>         a.   Number of cases in which tribunals were required
               because the Authority directed that disciplinary
               charges should be brought.
          b.   Number of cases in which the Authority directed
               the holding of a tribunal but had not previously
               directed the bringing of disciplinary charges.


    PART F COMMENDATIONS

    14.   Number of commendations and letters of appreciation
                                                     Commendations     Letters
                            from chief constables
                                     from courts
                   - . from members of the public
                               from other sources




                                                                          9
                                                                                Annex K

                                        NOTES

Complaint means a complaint by a member of the public recorded under section 86
of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.      The following notes may be
helpful in considering the statistical return.

PART B:

     A case is treated as 'completed' at the end of any criminal or disciplinary
     proceedings that may have resulted, or when the decision has been taken,
     following any necessary reference to the Director of Public Prosecutions or
     the Police Complaints Authority, not to bring such proceedings.         One
     complaint could result in more than one type of proceedings (criminal,
     traffic or disciplinary) against more than one officer.

Disciplinary proceedings:

     This heading does not include proceedings for the charge of having been
     found guilty of a criminal offence.

Reference to the Police Complaints Authority:

     i.   Under section 87 of the 1984 Act the investigation of certain serious
          complaints must be referred to the Authority for supervision.        The
          Authority must supervise all cases involving death or serious injury
          (section 87(1)(a)(i)) and complaints of assault occasioning actual
          bodily harm, corruption or any serious arrestable offence, must be
          referred to the Authority for possible supervision (Regulations made
          under section 87(1)(a)(ii)). Other complaints may be referred to the
          authority on a discretionary basis (section 87(1 Mb) ) or may be called
          in for supervision by the Authority (section 87(2)).         Section 88
          allows non-complaint matters of a grave or exceptional character to be
          referred to the Authority.

   ii.    Under section 90 of the 1984 Act the chief officer xnust refer to the
          Authority the reports of the investigation into all complaints by
          members of the public against members of his force unless:

          a.    the complaint relates    to an   officer   above   the   rank of chief
               superintendent; or

          b.   it is withdrawn; or

          c.   disciplinary charges have been brought covering all the matters
               complained of and these have been admitted by the accused officer.

          Where no disciplinary charges have been brought, the Authority have
          power to direct the bringing of charges.    Where disciplinary charges
          are brought the Authority may direct that they be heard by a tribunal.
          A tribunal must be held where charges are brought on the direction of
          the Authority.

 iii.     Under the Police (Anonymous Repetitious Etc. Complaints) Regulations
          1985 the chief officer may ask the Authority to dispense with further
          action because the complaint is anonymous, repetitious, or incapable
          of investigation.



                                         1
                                                                                         Annex L

                      LEAFLET "COHPLAIBTS a g a i h s t t h e p o l i c e *

There is a new system for making sure that complaints about police behaviour are
handled fairly.

A new, independent organisation called the Police Complaints Authority has been
formed. When someone makes a very serious complaint it runs the investigat

Even when the complaint is        l e s s  t h e new Authority double-checks the.
                                             s e r i o u s


results of the investigation - and can insist’that action is taken.

It is completely    independent.            None     of its Members are,      or have ever been,
police officers.

This leaflet explains how to make a complaint against the police.                        it also
describes what happens to your complaint under the new system.

How to make a complaint

First, decide exactly what you think the police officer did wrong. For «a»Ple>
was the police officer unnecessarily rude to you?     Did he or she danag y
property? Of injure you?

If so, you have every right to complain.    But remember that the police have to
enforce all laws.     Sometimes   people complain about the police when
actually a particular law they don't like.

Write it down
All you have to do to complain is write down clearly what happened. ^
page of this leaflet is a listof information you should include.     It should be
sent to the police officer's Chief Constable.     If you don t know which pol
force he belongs to or the address, you can write to the Chief
local police force who will make sure your complaint is sent to                 *%he
You can find the address in the phone book under 'Police . For Lon     ,
the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis or to the Commissioner of the City
of London Police.

Or simply visit
 You can also make a complaint by going to any police station. T h e r e , a n o f T ^ e r
 will take down details of what happened.    This may actually save you time, as
 action can begin sooner.

 Getting help
 You may want someone to complain for you. That's fine - they can write for you,
 or visit the police station.    You should give the person helping you aletter
 that says you agree to have him or her complain for you.

 If you want advice, your local Citizens' Advice Bureau will be able to help.
 They can tell you what kinds of things you can complain about and how to g
 about it. Or you could talk to a solicitor.




                                                         1
What happens after you have «ade a coaplalnt

What happens next depends on your complaint.   You may feel that an apology is
all you need.   This may come either from the officer or from his police force.
On the other hand you may find that there was a reason for the way the police
officer behaved, and that you are satisfied with an explanation. This process
of talking things out is called Informal Resolution. This is a new procedure.
It's up to you to decide whether or not you are happy for the complaint to be
dealt with in this way. If you are not, or if the police think that the case is
too serious to be dealt with in this way, there will be an investigation into
what happened.
                                                                               T hr
 The investigation

  The police will appoint a senior officer to look into your complaint.     He asks
. you what happened. He also talks to the officer you complained about,    If theVe
                                                                               a •
  are any other people who saw what happened, he talks to them.

 All this takes time.   The investigation has to be thorough to be fair.

 If your complaint is very serious - if for example someone was badly hurt - the
 investigation must be supervised by the independent Police Complaints Authority.
 The Authority can tell the senior officer how to carry out the investigation.
 At the end of the investigation the chief officer decides what action to take.
 The Police Complaints Authority double-checks the decision, even when they did
 not supervise the investigation.

 If the Authority feels stronger action should be taken it has the power to
 change the decision.

 The Outcome

 Ifthe chief officer   or the Police Complaints Authority think that the police
 officer may have done something wrong, one of 2 things can happen:-

      First:If it looks   as if the officer in your case has broken the law and
              so ought to be put on trial, the evidence is sent to the Director
              of Public Prosecutions, who is completely independent from the
              police.

               If the chief officer does not do this the Police Complaints
               Authority can insist that the case is sent to the Director.

               It is then the Director of Public Prosecutions who decides if there
               is enough evidence for the officer to stand trial.

      Second: If the officer has not broken the law, he may still have broken the
              rules of police conduct.    In this case, the chief officer or the
              Authority can bring about a disciplinary hearing. The evidence is
              heard by the chief officer or his deputy, and sometimes by Members
              of the Authority as well.

 Civil proceedings

 Whateverthe result of your complaint you still have the right as well to take
 the police   to court and sue them if      you feel that you should be paid
 compensation for something they have done - for example, if a police officer has
 damaged some of your property. This is called a civil action - you can find out
more about this at your Citizens' Advice Bureau. But you should bear in mind
that if you bring a civil action against a police officer, the official
complaint investigation may be held up until the civil action has been
completed.

The rights of an officer

It's only fair that police officers are protected too. As you can imagine, some
people deliberately make false complaints against them.       Like anyone else,
police officers have the right to bring civil actions against such people. They
can sue.

Remember                                                 ^    --   j
--------                                                           i '4="'••■
The new complaints procedure is there to help you. It relies on yoii to complain
if something goes wrong. You can be sure that your complaint will be dealt with
fairly and that if an officer has done wrong action will be taken.

That helps you and also helps the police to keep up the standard of discipline
which we all expect of them.




                                        3
The Police Complaints Authority is

    New - set up by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 198M.

     Independent - police officers and ex-police officers cannot
                   be Members of it.

     Powerful   - it can insist that there should be a disciplinary hearing or
                  that the case should be sent to the Director of Public
                  Prosecutions to decide on a trial.    It must supervise the
                  investigation of serious complaints.

     Fair       - it's there to make sure the correct action is;taken.

Checklist

Your complaint should say:

     What exactly happened?    What was done?   What was said?

     When did it happen?     Where did it happen?

     Was it seen by someone other than yourself and the officer?    Do you know
     how they can be contacted?

     Do you have proof of any damage?                                         r




                                           H
     c o n c e r n e d h a s c o m m i t t e d a d i s c i p l i n a r y o f f e n c e . If s o
     h e m u s t d e c i d e w h a t a c t i o n t o tak e : H i s r e c o m m e n d a ­           S o m e im p o r t a n t
     t io n s a r c s e n t t o t h e A u t h o r i t y w i t h . e v e r y r e p o r t.
•    T h e c h i e f o ffice r m a y r e c o m m e n d t h a t t h e p o lic e                     POINTS A BO U T THE POLICE
     o f fi c e r i n v o l v e d s h o u l d b e c h a r g ^ v j ^ a d i s c ip l i n a r y
     o f f e n c c . If h e d o e s n o t t h e A u t h o r i t y h a y e t h e r i g h t t o      COM PLAINTS AUTHORITY
      in sist u p o n a c h a r g e a n d t h a t t h e o f f ic e r b e b r o u g h t
      b e f o r e a d i s c ip l i n a r y h e a r i n g . T h e e v i d e n c e is t h e n        T h e P o lic e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y are:
      h e a r d b y t h e c h i e f o ffice r c o n c e r n e d , o r h i s d e p u ty ,
      a l o n e o r in c e r t a i n c i r c u m s t a n c e s b y a t r i b u n a l                 INDEPENDENT
      i n c l u d i n g M e m b e r s o f t h e A u t h o r i ty .                                 N o p o l ic e officer, p a s t o r p r e s e n t, c a n b e a m e m b e r . T h e
•     W h e n e v e r a d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e is b r o u g h t y o u will b e        A u th o r ity h a v e their o w n b u d g e t.
      i n f o r m e d a n d y o u will b e a b le t o a t t e n d t h e h e a r i n g .
•     If t h e A u t h o r i t y d e c i d e a g a i n s t d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s
      t h e y will w r i t e to y o u t o e x p l a i n w h y If t h e p o lic e
      o ffice r h a s b e e n g i v e n ' a d v i c e ' o r a w a r n i n g a b o u t h i s
                                                                                                     POWERFUL
                                                                                                   T h e A u th o r ity su p e rv ise c ertain inv estig atio n s for w h ich
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                   t h e y m a y a p p r o v e i n v e s t i g a t i n g officers, d i r e c t inq uiries,
       c o n d u c t , t h e A u t h o r i t y ' s l e tte r will s a y so.
•      T h e l e tte r f r o m t h e A u t h o r i t y i n f o r m i n g y o u o f t h e           a n a m a y insist o n d i s c i p l i n a r y c h a r g e s .
       o u t c o m e o f y o u r c o m p l a i n t is n o r m a l l y t h e final s t a g e
                                                                                                     THOROUGH
       of the co m p la in ts procedure.
                                                                                                   T h e r e p o r t o f e v e r y c o m p l a i n t is e x a m i n e d in detail.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  V/*>    I
                                                                                                      FAIR
    C l V l l . PROCEEDINGS                                                                         T h e A u t h o r i t y e n s u r e t h a t t h e c o r r e c t a c t i o n is t a k e n a n d
                                                                                                    th a t b o th sides are given e v ery o p p o rtu n ity to p u t their
    If y o u h a v e m a d e a c o m p l a i n t y o u still h a v e t h e ri g h t a s             c a s e t o t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o ff ic e r w h o will a ls o g a t h e r
    well t o t a k e t h e p o l ic e t o c o u r t a n d s u e t h e m if y o u feel               e v i d e n c e f r o m a n y i n d e p e n d e n t w itn e s se s.
    th at y o u s h o u ld b e paid c o m p e n s a tio n for s o m e th in g th ey
    h a v e d o n e , fo r e x a m p l e , if a p o l ic e dfffee r h a s d a m a g e d
    s o m e of y o u r p r o p e r t y . This is c a l l e d a civil a c t i o n - y o u
     c a n find o u t m o r e a b o u t th is at y o u r C i t i z e n s A d v i c e
     B u r e a u o r h o r n a s o licito r. But y o u s h o u l d b e a r in m i n d
     t l u t if y o u b r i n g a civil a c t i o n a g a i n s t a p o l ic e officer, t h e
     c o m p la in t investigation lead in g to p ossible d iscip lin ary
     a c t i o n a g a i n s t t h e o f f i c e r m a y l>e h e l d u p u n til t h e civil
     a c t i o n h a s b e e n c o m p l e t e d w h i c h c o u l d b e a l o n g tim e .
                                                                                                                                                                                  j[Okgjo^j^L
      It s o n l y fair t h a t p o l ic e o ffice rs a r e p r o t e c t e d t o o . A s y o u
      c a n im a g i n e , s o m e p e o p l e d e l i b e r a t e l y m a k e false                                                                                                   jTiitit
      c o m p l a i n t s a g a i n s t t h e m . L ik e a n y o n e else, p o l ic e office rs
      h a v e t h e rig ht t o b r i n g civil a c t i o n s a g a i n s t s u c h p e o p le .
                                                                                                                     WkadJdSi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r.x-tt'-!..'v.r.v-1*.

      RlMEMBER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w
      T h e c o m p l a i n t s p r o c e d u r e is t h e r e t o h e l p y o u . It relies
      o n y o u to com p lain . Y ou c a n b e su re th a t y o u r c o m p la in t
      will b e d e a l t w i t h fa irly a n d t h a t a c t i o n will b e t a k e n if a n
                                                                                                       10 G r e a t G e o r g e S t r e e t , L o n d o n S W 1 P 3 A E
      o f f ic e r h a s d o n e w r o n g .
            T h a t h e l p s y o u a n d a l s o h e l p s t h * p o l ic e t o k e e p u p           ri t p j i c t l f o r I K * P o lic e C o m p U m lt A u l h « i t l y b y l H c C e n l i j 1 0 U ( « o f U ( u i mMj1SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l ( o n 190*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PIJONI
                                                                                                       PttAlvd lit ih«UK
      t h e s t a n d a r d s w h i c h w e all e x p e * r # N j ^ * » *           ■'
 ( lie I’d .        C o m p la in ts A u th o rity are a n in d ep e n d e n t                         •    Y ou <-an g e t s o m e o n e else t o p u t f o r w a r d t h e c o m p l » ..i (               •      T h e A u tf t b 'r it y 'm a y s u p e r v i s e a n y in v e s .. <; .ti^.i if a
b o d y . T h e i r p u r p o s e is t o s e e t h a t w h e n e v e r a c o m p l a i n t                  o n y o u r b e h a lf, a s l o n g a s y o u g i v e t h e m a letter                                  c h ie f o ffice r o r a lo cal p o lic e a u t h o r i t y a s k s f o r th eir
is m a d e a b o u t t h e c o n d u c t o f a p o l ic e o f fic e r b y a                                 a g r e e i n g t h a t t h e y c a n d o so.                                                           i n d e p e n d e n t h elp .
m e m b e r o f Ihc^'public it is d e a l t w i t h t h o r o u g h l y , a n d                        •    Y ou c a n w.rite t o t h e P o lic e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y t h e m ­
a b o v e all, fairly.
     T h e A u t h o r i t y w e r e s e t u p u n d e r t h e P o lic e a n d
                                                                                                            s e l v e s a t 10 G r e a t G e o r g e S t re e t . L o n d o n S W i P 3 A E ,
                                                                                                            w h o will m a k e s u r e y o u r c o m p l a i n t is s e n t o n t o t h e                    How DO THE AUTHORITY
C r i m i n a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984. T h e M e m b e r s c o m e f r o m                              r i g h t place.
m a n y d if f e re n t b a c k g r o u n d s : b u t n o n e o f t h e m is a p o lic e                                                                                                                         SUPERVISE AN ___________.
o ffice r o r h a s e v e r b e e n o n e .
     T h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e t w o m a i n jobs:                                               T       he       NEXT STEP                                                                                INVESTIGATION?______________
 1 T h e y su p e rv ise th e in v estig atio n o f serio u s c o m p la in ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W h e n t h e P o lic e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y s u p e r v i s e a n
     a g a i n s t a n y p o l ic e o f f ic e r in v o lv i n g , f o r e x a m p l e , d e a t h ,   W h a t h a p p e n s next d e p e n d s o n y o u r co m p la in t. You m a y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in v estig atio n th e y a p p o in t o n e o f th eir M e m b e r s to be
     s e r i o u s in ju r y o r c o r r u p t i o n .                                                 feel t h a t a n a p o l o g y is all y o u n e e d . T h i s m a y c o m e e it h e r
2 T h e y h a v e t h e final s a y in d e c i d i n g w h e t h e r a p o l ic e                                                                                                                                r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e case.
                                                                                                       f r o m t h e o f f ic e r o r f r o m his p o l ic e force. O n t h e o t h e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e t h e p o w e r t o a p p r o v e t h e selectioi
     o f f ic e r s h o u l d b e c h a r g e d w i t h a b r e a c h o f disc ip lin e.               h a n d y o u m a y find t h a t t h e r e w a s a r e a s o n f o r t h e w a y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o f t h e s e n i o r p o l ic e o f f ic e r w h o will b e c o m e t h e
                                                                                                       t h e p o l ic e o f f i c e r b e h a v e d , a n d t h a t y o u a r e s a tis fie d w i t h            i n v e s t i g a t i n g officer, e i t h e r f r o m t h e s a m e fo r c e o r a n
How TO MAKE                                                                                            a n e x p l a n a t i o n . T h i s p r o c e s s o f t a l k i n g t h i n g s o u t is c alled
                                                                                                       i n f o r m a l r e s o l u ti o n . It's u p t o y o u t o d e c i d e w h e t h e r o r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o u t s i d e f o r c e if t h a t s e e m s d e s i r a b l e .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T h e M e m b e r d e c i d e s h o w t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n s h o u l d be
                                                                                                       n o t y o u a r e h a p p y f o r t h e c o m p l a i n t t o b e d e a l t w i t h in                     c a r r i e d o u t h a v i n g l o o k e d a t y o u r s t a t e m e n t a n d all
 A COM PLAINT___________________                                                                       t h is w ay.                                                                                               r e l e v a n t r e c o r d s a n d d o c u m e n t s , m e d i c a l e v id e n c e ,
                                                                                                             B u t if t h is is n o t a c c e p t a b l e t o y o u o r if t h e c o m p l a i n t                p h o t o g r a p h s , a n d a n y t h i n g e ls e t h a t m i g h t help. All this
 If y o u feel t h a t a p o l ic e o ff ic c r h a s b e h a v e d w r o n g l y o r                  c o n c e r n s a s e r i o u s m atte r , t h e r e will b e a full i n v e s ti g a ti o n .
 b a d ly , t h e n you a r c t h e o n e w h o m u s t m a k e t h e c o m p l a i n t .                                                                                                                         is i n c l u d e d in t h e final r e p o r t w h i c h is m a d e t o t h e
                                                                                                             T h i s s t a r t s w i t h t h e p o l ic e a p p o i n t i n g a s e n i o r o ffice r             supervising M em ber.
      First, d e c i d e w h a t y o u t h i n k t h e p o l ic e o ff ic e r d id
                                                                                                        t o find o u t w h a t h a p p e n e d .                                                                        T h e M e m b e r m a y visit t h e p l a c e w h e r e t h e in c id e n t
 w r o n g . For e x a m p l e , w a s t h e p o l ic e o ffice r r u d e t o y o u ?                        H e will ta l k t o y o u . a n d a s k y o u e x a c t l y w h a t y o u r                           h a p p e n e d ; m a y sit in o n i n te r v i e w s ; m a y s u g g e s t o r insisi
 D i d h e o r s h e d a m a g e y o u r p r o p e r t y ? O r in ju r e y o u                          c o m p l a i n t is. H e will a l s o ta l k t o t h e p o l ic e o ffice r                               th a t certain p r o c e d u r e s a re fo llo w ed o r th at a d d itio n al
 u n n e c e s s a rily . If s o y o u h a v e e v e r y r i g h t to c o m p l a i n .                 i n v o lv e d , a n d w i t h a n y o n e w h o h a p p e n e d t o s e c t h e
      But r e m e m b e r th.it t h e p o l ic e h a v e t o e n f o r c e t h e law.                                                                                                                              w i t n e s s e s a r c i n te r v i e w e d .
                                                                                                        i n c i d e n t o r h a s i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t it. H e will w r i t e all th is                       W h e n t h e i n v e s t i g a t i o n is c o m p l e t e d , t h e A u t h o r i t y
 S o m e t i m e s p e o p l e c o m p l a i n a b o u t t h e p o l ic e w h e n it is                 d o w n as th e in v estig a tio n proceeds.                                                               m u s t s a y w h e th e r th e y a r e satisfied o r not w ith th e w ay
 a c t u a l l y a p a r t i c u l a r la w t h e y d o n o t like.
 • Y ou c a n w r i t e a full a c c o u n t o f w h a t y o u s a y h a p p e n e d ,                                                                                                                             it w a s h a n d l e d .
       a n d s e n d it t o t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f t h e f o rc e to
       w h i c h t h e p o l ic e o ffice r c o n c e r n e d b e lo n g s ; o r if t h e
                                                                                                           W          hen           DO THE POLICE________
       p o l ic e o ffice r is a s e n i o r o ffice r a b o v e t h e r a n k o f C h i e f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A        c t io n tak en o n
       S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , t o t h e o ffice r s lo ca l p o l ic e a u t h o r i t y            COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
       o r in t h e c a s e o f o f f ic e r s o f t h e M e t r o p o l i t a n Police, to                                                                                                                        th e report                                                  __________
       the C om m issioner.                                                                                SUPERVISE INVESTIGATIONS?                                                                               T h e s e c o n d m a i n j o b o f t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i ty
  • If y o u d o n o t k n o w w h o o r w h e r e t h a t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
                                                                                                           A s w e h a v e a l r e a d y s a i d o n e o f t h e jo b s o f t h e P o lice                         c o n c e r n s p o l ic e d i s c ip lin e .
       o r local p o l ic e a u t h o r i t y is, y o u c a n s e n d y o u r
                                                                                                           C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y is t o s u p e r v i s e i n v e s ti g a ti o n s i n to             T h e re p o rt o f e v e ry in v estig a tio n in to a c o m p la in t
       c o m p l a i n t t o t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o r p o l ic e a u t h o r i t y
                                                                                                           t h o s e c o m p l a i n t s w h i c h a r e c o n s i d e r e d to b e t h e m o s t                  a g a i n s t a p o l ic e o f f i c e r is c o n s i d e r e d b y t h e A u t h o r i t y
       in y o u r o w n local a r e a , w h o will m a k e s u r e it is s e n t o n
                                                                                                           s e r io u s , a l t h o u g h t h e A u t h o r i t y h a v e t h e rig h t to o v e r s e e           w h e t h e r it w a s s u p e r v i s e d o r n o t.
       t o t h e rig h t place. T h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ’s a d d r e s s will
                                                                                                           imy c a s e t h a t is b e i n g i n v e s ti g a te d .                                                • If t h e r e p o r t o f a n i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n d i c a t e s t h a t a
       b e in t h e t e l e p h o n e b o o k b u t c o m p l a i n t s t o t h e lo ca l
                                                                                                           • If a p o lic e o ffice r is s a i d t o h a v e killed o r s e r i o u s l y                               c r im i n a l o f f e n c e m a y h a v e b e e n c o m m i t t e d b y a polic
       p o l ic e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d b e a d d r e s s e d t q t h e
                                                                                                                 i n ju r e d s o m e o n e , t h e A u t h o r i t y miisl s u p e r v i s e t h e                     officer, a n d t h e c h ie f o ffice r t h i n k s t h e o ffice r o u g h t t<
       H e a d q u a r t e r s o f y o u r C i t y o r C o u n t y C o u n c il .
                                                                                                                 i n v e s tig a tio n .                                                                                b e c h a r g e d h e h a s t o s e n d t h e e v i d e n c e to t h e C r o w n
  • Y o u c a n g o t o a n y p o l ic e s t a t i o n a n d tell t h e m y o u
                                                                                                           • If a p o lic e o f f ic e r is s a i d t o h a v e c o m m i t t e d a s e r i o u s                       P ro sec u tio n Service w h o a re co m p le te ly ind ep e n d e n l
       h a v e a c o m p l a i n t t o m a k e . A n o ff ic e r t h e r e will t a k e
                                                                                                                 c r im i n a l o ffe n c e , t h e A u t h o r i t y a r e a l w a y s i n f o r m e d                 o f tjie p o j i c ^ l f . h e d o e s n o t d o s o t h e A u t h o r i t y c a n
       d o w n t h e d e ta i ls f r o m y o u ,
                                                                                                                 i m m e d ia t e l y , a n d t h e n d e c i d e w h e t h e r t o s u p e r v i s e th e              insist            I n c a s e is se n t. T h i s c o u l d re sult in th e
  • Y o u r lo ca l C i ti z e n s A d v i c e B u r e a u c a n g i v e a d v i c e o n
                                                                                                                 in v e s tig a tio n .                                                                                 o f f ic e r c o n c e r n e d b e i n g p r o s e c u t e d .
        w h e t h e r y o u a p p e a r t o h a v e a v a li d c o m p l a i n t a n d
                                                                                                           • T h e A u t h o r i t y c a n s u p e r v i s e a n y in v e s ti g a ti o n w h e n                   • If t h e l a w h a s n o t b e e n b r o k e n , t h e n t h e c h ie f officer
        h o w t o g o a b o u t m a k i n g it. O r y o u c a n g o t o a
                                                                                                                  t h e y c o n s i d e r it w o u l d b e .in t h e p u b lic in te re st to d o so.                   o f t h e f o r c e h a s t o r e v i e w t h e c a s e t o s e e if t h e officer
       s o l i c i t o r if y o u w ish .
b r ig a d ie r j l p o w n a l l , obe           POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
DeputyChairman(Discipline)
                                                                        10 Great George Street
                                                                          London SW1P 3AE
                                                                         Telephone: 071-273^


  IN CONFIDENCE



  G Moore, Esq                                                   Your Ref: ACC(D<JtC)CJD
  Assistant Chief Constable
 S n k hHU?rl<Shire P° llCe                                      Our Ref: COM 91/131/39
 SHEFFIELD                                                                 Y m     , qq,
 S3 9LY                                                                      May» 1991




                                             i

                                          HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                               15 APRIL. 1989

1. The Authority have now completed a careful and detailed examination of the report
and the evidence relating to the individual complaints arising from the Hillsborough
tragedy on 15 April, 1989. We have considered Mr Anderson's memoranda, submitted to
us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act, 1984, and his letter of 10 April, 1991. We have noted your force’s
proposals not to prefer disciplinary charges against any of the officers who are the
subject of complaint and your reasons for these proposals. However, as I told Mr
Anderson on the telephone, the Authority were disappointed that he did not explain
your reasons more fully. We have also taken into account the views expressed by Mr
Sharp, the investigating officer.                                               y

c’ - 5 aVin^ con!idere<[ ithe evidence relating to the complaints against Police Constable
Smith, Police Constable Illingworth, Superintendent Marshall or Superintendent Green­
wood we have concluded that the evidence in respect of these four officers does not
justify disciplinary proceedings and we agree with your proposal.     %

3.  We have also considered those complaints which have been laid against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray which allege that they, were in
neglect of duty'. These complaints raise difficult issues. In reaching our conclusions
f'actofVamongst
factor  fm„nr^ others. A      decisi0ns
                          As you        of ,he
                                 are aware      Direc,or
                                            we do        01 Public
                                                   not accept       Prosecutions
                                                              th at culpable     as one
                                                                             misfeasance
Xr               dUty are COteT r Snor th a t’ even if they were, we would be bound (as
     as discipline is concerned) by the decision of the Director not to bring criminal
prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne in mind the definition of neglect of duty set
out in paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 of The Police (Discipline) R iu lation s- m j .
k.  The incident which gave rise to the tragedy a t the Hillsborough Stadium on
April, 1989 would not have occurred had sensible and simple steps been taken to secure
the safety of spectators in Pens 3 and 4 on the Leppings Lane Terraces. It is c ear
that the basic cause of the disaster was overcrowding in these pens.          We have
concentrated on this m atter.
5. In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m atters which can be
advanced as arguments for taking no disciplinary action on the grounds that to take
such action would be unfair and/or oppressive. Amongst such m atters we refer brie y
to the following:
           a. the passage of time since 15 April, 1989;

            b. the various consequences arising from the earlier hearings
            before Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner;
            c. the effect of the extensive media coverage of the incident
            itself, m atters associated with it and the hearings referred to in
            b. above;
            d. the perception that if any officer is charged he may be seen
            as a scapegoat carrying the blame for the acts or omissions of
            others;
            e. the recent promotion of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
            the fact that he took over the match arrangements devised by
            someone else and his belief th a t the plan had operated
            successfully before;
            f. the anguish which both Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
            Superintendent Murray must have experienced as the result of the
            tragic and unexpected events on 15 April, 1989, and

            g. the effec t th a t disciplinary action against any officer would
            have on the morale and well-being of the South             Yorkshire
            Police.
 6. Despite these factors it cannot be denied th at the police, under the control of Chief
 Superindent Duckenfield, assisted by Superintendent Murray, were de facto in control of
 the ground a t the relevant tim e Mid had responsibility for the safety of the spectators.
 In the opinion of this Authority there is sufficient evidence to support disciplinary
 charges on the following grounds:
            a. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, as the officer in overall
            command, failed to address himself properly to the problems
            involved in, and the plans for, crowd control even before the
            spectators arrived;
             b. failed to monitor the numbers of spectators entering Pens 3
             and 4;
                c. failed to take any action when Pens 3 and 4 became obviously
                overcrowded;

                d. au th o rised G ate 'C ' to be opened and, to g e th e r w ith
                Superintendent Murray, failed to take any steps to control the
                movement of those who entered the ground through this gate a t a
                time when it was, or should have been, clear to both of them
                that Pens 3 and 4 were, or were likely to become, overcrowded.

      a u t ^ie Vi ew °* ^ is Authority responsibility for the safety of those in Pens 3 and 4
  and blame for overcrowding in those pens should rest with those in the Police Control
           r °T ^ ^ 1 Pe n s c °uld be observed, the deployment of police manpower could
         irected and the decision to open G ate 'C' was made with its attendant responsibil-
  ™ I                  8 those who entered through it. The Authority are conscious of the
  complex circumstances which may have contributed to the tragedy, but we do not
                                 I that there may
                                               be others who are also in some way blameworthy
  should cause us to decide against the recommendation of charges under the R egdatL ns
  zv +t •?            evidence is available to support such charges. You will appreciate the
  the cmk +aref c o n c e r n .e d solely with the evidence in respect of the matters which are
  h r L th *        C°,mplaint and not Wlth mitigation which would only become relevant if a
I charge.          SClpllne were to be proved against an officer who is the subject of a


    ^ m ° V ! l ? SV r aSOnS ? a t the Authority have decided to recommend under Section
    93(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 that the following charges be
    brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

               i. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 o f,        ,
               the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed t o f t ) & / Q a ,
                           TY\
                                                                                                                  uo
               acquaint himself
               S m i   IAl n t
                                 with the planning and problems related to the* i T '
                                  h I   C o i f   tin' + k   — _J   ______ l _ l _____ _   •
                                                                                              ,__ -*
                                                                                               .   *   / ,¥


               control of the semi-final.

               “ * ~f^,lect ? f DutV " contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 o f,                               ^
               the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th at he failed t o f h
               monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4.

               ni. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 , , ,
               of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to M n h n r O S
               act when Pens 3 and 4 were obviously overcrowded.                   ■

)              iv. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
               of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th at he failed t                               o   /?
               control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening o r                                        -


9. We have, given separate attention to the degree of responsibility attributable to
Superindent Murray. We concluded that in view of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield-s
Sunlrinei n ! l l n f PPo ntmenI ^      Pronfl° tlon to his position as Divisional Commander,
Superintendent Murray had a special responsibility to assist and advise Chief Super­
intendent Duckenfield particularly in view of Superintendent Murray’s greater exper-
Gate 'C' P          ing a t Hlllsborough* He was aware th at authority had been given to open
*



      Act                                                     charged' I h h f 0'1”          Criminal Evide"Ce


                    j« & > w                             h
                                                         i s s r -£
                    the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate


     DuckenfeM wL ^ e i t f ^ ^ n X 1'''"?'                        M e g * ' i0 n   ,hat Chief Superintendent
      We do no, a ^ ^ with the ?nvest1^atinenlAffi ^e "“ ‘T * a"d members of the Public-
     substantiated. It is d e a r that Mr K^iiv m £ e+-S co']cfuslons that this m atter is not
     Superintendent Duckenfieid th at Gate           'C'
                                                      had h    T       j Mackrell were toid by Chief
     in-rush of Liverpool suDDorters Wh!f.                      f °!uCed'' and th at there had been an
     a hostile r e a c S o n w h i S S t im n e £ Z * * * ^        th? he did not wish to encourage
     Tayior that this did not r e a u i T anv ,n ? K W         W.!<      6 the ° pinion of Lord Justice
     explanation Jed to serious allegation*                   t0-      a *alsehood. This misleading
     causing grave offence and distress.           108     6 against LlverPooJ supporters in general


_ C rim T ^ !^                                               U" d*r   Section 93W of the Police and
# w ith :                                 th a t Chlef Superintendent Duckenfieid also be charged


                  ^ c ^ i ^ i e C o n d ^ - c o n tr a r y to paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of
                       Police (Discipline) Regulations 1 9 8 5 in th a t he acted in a
                  th e^ o lice service?1"*"® diSCredi' ° n ,h e rePu ,ati° " ° f * e force or

     13. I would be grateful for your response to our recommendations as soon as possible.


    exceptional c ^ rc u m s t^ ^ s 'a H e c tln g ^ W s 'c a ^ e ^ o ^ fre ^ t th a t'th 6 T ded’ in T * ° ‘ ,he
    tnbunal, in accordance with                                                                              *X 5




    3 L POWNALL
-CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY                                            &$
C H JE ^ cfp& T A B L E :   L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.


M y R eference:   CCfBMT

Your Reference:                                                                  P O L IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                           C A R L E T O N HALL
                                                                                                        P E N R IT H
           STRICTLY               C O N F I D E N T I A L                              C U M B R I A C A 10 2 A U
                                                                                 T E L E P H O N E : 0 7 6 8 - _______
           P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA                                                                 TELEX: 64240
           Deputy Chief Constable                                                          FAX: 0 7 6 8 - 2 1 7 0 9 9
           South Yorkshire Police
           Snig Hill
           SHEFFIELD
           S3 9LY


                                                                                  16 May 1991




          Dear Hr Hayes

          HILLSBOROUGH 1989

          In response to our recent telephone conversation on 10 May 1991 I write to
          say that I have now had the opportunity to study the copy of the Police
          Complaints Authority letter of 7 May 1991.
                   •
          I have set out, in this letter,         the detailed reasoning which lay behind the
          recommendations and conclusions         in my Complaints and Discipline reports in
          respect of Chief Superintendent         Duckenfieid and Superintendent Murray. In
          addition, I have made reference         to the points and issues raised by the PCA
          in its letter.

          It cannot be argued that the PCA is not bound by the decisions of the
          Director of Public Prosecutions in respect of the criminal conduct issues
          because the PCA has to consider whether or not the complaints are
          substantiated and whether disciplinary charges should be laid. However, it
          could be argued that if the evidence required to prove a criminal offence
          is identical to the evidence required to prove a disciplinary offence, and
          the decision of the DPP is that there is insufficient evidence to prove the
          criminal offence, then it follows that there will be insufficient evidence
          to prove the disciplinary offence.

          The PCA is of the view that the ancient criminal offence of "culpable
          malfeasance” is not coterminous with "neglect of duty". That is to say the
          least, arguable. Every malfeasance or culpable non-feasance of an officer
          of justice, which includes a police officer, in respect of his office, is a
          misdemeanour at Common Law.    The case-law arises predominently from very
          old cases which arose out of failure to do things required to be done
          because of the accused’s office, (see CROWTHER s CASE (1593) Cro. Eliz. 654
          and R v WYAT (1705) 1 Salk 380). The cases indicate there is an offence of
          a public officer wilfully neglecting to    perform aduty which he isbound to
          perform by common law or statute but the neglect has to be wilful and not
          merely inadvertent.   It has to be culpable in the sense of being without

                                                       1
;   *
reasonable excuse or justification.     In this sense culpability is not
restricted to corruption or dishonesty but has to be of such a degree the
misconduct impugned is calculated to injure the public interest. It would
be for the jury to decide whether the evidence revealed the necessary
degree of culpability in performing a duty badly which would include
"neglect of duty". (R v DYTHAM (1979) 2QB 722).

It does not appear to be necessary to prove that by so doing, or not doing,
the accused intended to gain some personal benefit or advantage but it may
be that in appropriate cases, e.g. a Registrar, there must be a beneficiary
to whose interest there has been no proper regard.

From that it can be argued that the offence of "culpable malfeasance"
requires proof of a degree of negligence or recklessness which is clo*ely
akin to "neglect of duty".    It is my view that the mental element required
to prove "culpable malfeasance" is the same as for the disciplinary offence
of "neglect of duty".       In view of the DPP’s decision in respect o
"culpable malfeasance" it would be quite wrong, in my view, to pursue
disciplinary charges of "neglect of duty", particularly as the Inquest Jury
brought in a verdict of "Accidental Death". The Inquest jury s verdict of
"accident" taken together with the DPP’s decision not to prosecute for
"culpable malfeasance" is a powerful argument, in *y view, for not
disciplinary charges of "Neglect of Duty".      It would appear that the PGA
has taken cognisance of the fact that each case should be considered on its
merits and has decided that in all the circumstances it is          fair and
appropriate" to bring disciplinary proceedings.         I find this v:lew a
difficult one to support but should such proceedings follow then it would
probably be appropriate for any accused officer to be served with a copy of
 the DPP.’s letter of decision, after consultation with the DPP.

There can be no argument about the definition of "neglect of duty        *8
clearly set out in Schedule 1 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.
The definition, I suggest, is one which rules out any suggestion that it is
one of the disciplinary offences where the mental element necessary *
finding of guilt is less than that for most criminal offences. The offence
requires proof of neglect, and it is at least arguable that it is not
sufficient merely to show that the act or omission was caused through a
 lack of due care.

 The PCA, in its letter at paragraph 4, makes it clear that its
 deliberations have been centred upon the core of the issue, that is to say
 the overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4, but in paragraph 7 of thei PCA letter it
 is recognised that there were "complex circumstances which may have
 contributed to the tragedy".    My view is that the core issues are too
 complex a matter to say that the tragedy would not have occurred had
 sensible and simple steps been taken to secure the safety of 8Pectato“ ;
 (Para 4 of PCA letter).    Hindsight is not appropriate, foresight is the
 issue.

 The passage of time since 15 April 1989, of itself,             is not an
 overwhelmingly persuasive issue, but taken with the decision of the DPP and
 the verdict of the Coroner’s Jury it is certainly very persuasive.

 Similarly, the earlier hearings before Lord Justice Taylor should not be
 conclusive either to prosecute discipline charges or to discredit them,
 should not be forgotten that those hearings were not based upon sworn
testimony, whereas the Coroner’s Verdict of accident, was-               ***
transcripts of the Inquest reveal is a matter for you, as are the words of
the Coroner and his Jury. I wonder if the PCA have had the J P P O r t w l ^
study these transcripts, particularly those of Chief Supeff^*“d*“
Duckenfieid and Superintendent Murray. Those transcripts of eJ id**c
over and above my Investigating Officer’s report which received the PCA s
certificate of satisfaction before the Inquests were concluded.          The
evidence given at the Inquest was probed thoroughly by 8killed
representing the complainants so they must be relevant to any consideration
as to discipline.
Neither would I dismiss so lightly the detrimental effect that the
extensive, and often contradictory media coverage has h a d o n the
possibility of a fair hearing for any accused officers. It is the ch
of a"fair trial" which is important, more so than the anguish of
accused officers or the morale and well-being of South Yorkshire Police.

Now to address the specific disciplinary offences proposed against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfieid.
(i)      Neglect of Duty in that he failed to a c q u a i n t himself with the
         planning and problems related to the control of the semi-final.

         The only clue in the PCA letter as to how this offence could be
         proved is at paragraph 6(a):-
         "Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid, as the officer in overall
         command, failed to address himself properly to the Probl*“8
         involved in, and the plans for, crowd control even before the
         spectators arrived."
        ' My report at paragrapahs R22 to R47 covers the aspects of w^ t e n
          instructions available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid before
          the event.    Paragraphs R48 to R58 cover what he actually did
          before the event. Although I have not studied the tran*crip£f
          evidence given at the Inquests, I am of the view ^                      ^ief
          Superintendent Duckenfieid did enough in his planning, o r d e r sand
          briefings to satisfy the requirements of the South Yorkshire
          Police Standing Instructions.     Time was short;       he was new y
          promoted into an area where Hillsborough events were prominent,
          to a considerable degree he had no reason not to take the well-
          tried and overtly successful South Yorkshire Police System as he
           found it; he received the best possible advice and followed it,
          and he knew that on the day he would have a        e x p e r i e n c e d team
                                                             v e r y


          working with him with reserve resources available to deal with
          unforeseen contingencies. It is difficult to see how the proposed
           disciplinary offence could be proved beyond reasonable doubt.

 (ii)     Neglect of Duty by failing to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and
          4.
          I can add nothing to paragraphs R91 to R98 of my report Given the
          facilities available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid on the
          day he did not, and could not monitor the crowd numbers in the
          fateful pens. The issue is linked to the question of whether he
          should have done so, an issue addressed at some length m my

                                           3
        report, and to the South Yorkshire Police policy of the day that
        the crowd would find its own level.
(iii)   Neglect of Duty by failing to act when Pens 3 and 4 were obviously
        overcrowded.


         r . : s - 5 “-rss'
         a».re that Pen,’ 3 .nd * «er« seriously « •
                                                               “ sTS
         h U to take action to .1lleviate it.      T    P       uould be in
         issue at some length and          th.      overcro>ding ,ight »ell
         trvine to prove such an assertion.                   ,
         have been obviou. to other., but that beg. the question.

(i„,     Neglect of But, by failing to control the mo.e«nt of supporters
         subsequent to the opening of Gate C.




         :r^epo«n      d’.X f f
         setting out the difficulties of proving the charge.


in so far as Superintendent Hurra, i. concerned the PCA i. proposing onl,
one disciplinary charge:-
(V)      • Neglect of Dut, b, failing to control the «ove.ent of supporter,
          subsequent to the opening of Gate C.




          s rs rc s -.:
          Superintendent
          Hillsborough.
                            Hurray’s   greater    experience
                                                                  “zzz
                                                                     v

          It is not absolutely clear but the PCA
          It was rieht that SuperintendentMurray should act    on tne orae
          of Chief SuPerintendent            o°e8i u r t L r Cby°vi^tu/ of his
          to be opened, but he should have gone further *                   be
          greater experience, and given or ers or p             gd the ground
          deployed to receive those spectator*
          through the open Gate C.




           to the opening of Gate C.


           =   .= ‘7. s ssss
           Superintendent Murray at paragraphs   Rll to R14.   The paragrap

                                       4
 +

             which relate to this particular disciplinary charge are at R.28 to
             R.36, but particularly R43 to R55 and paragraphs R43 to R55 and
             paragraphs R56 to R58.

             It could be argued that either the point of view of Chief
             Superintendent Duckenfieid is taken, i.e. that he had to rely on
             the officers in the command structure using their discretion to
             act to the situation as they saw fit, or he should have given
             specific orders'himself. If that be so, then it seems quite wrong
             that two senior officers should face a disciplinary charge arising
             from the seme failure to act.   The police structure of individual
             discretion, responsibility and accountability suggests that if any
             officer is to be disciplined for this offence, it ought to be one
             or the other.


Finally,  I turn      to   the   proposal   to   discipline   Chief   Superintendent
Duckenfieid for:-

(vi)        Discreditable Conduct by acting in a manner likely to bring
             discredit on the reputation of the force or the police service.

             The PCA feels that it is clear Hr Kelly, Mr Kirtin and Hr Hackrell
             were told by Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid that Gate C had been
             forced and that there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters.
             The PCA accepts there was a need to deter hostile reaction which
             might have impeded the rescue work, but this did not require the
             telling of any falsehoods.
        «
              The PCA suggests that the misleading explanation given by Chief
            . Superintendent Duckenfieid to the persons named above, resulted in
              serious allegations being made against Liverpool supporters in
              general causing grave offence and distress.

             Paragraph R233 of my report in respect of Chief Superintendent
             Duckenfieid addresses the point, and the paragraphs that follow
             indicate some of the possible defences (NOT mitigation) which
             Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid could raise should he be called
             to answer the disciplinary charge.

             I am not aware of what was said about the matter at the Inquests,
             if the matter was raised at all.   Also I would draw attention to
             my Complaints and Discipline Report in respect of Hr Walter
             JACKSON,  then an Assistant Chief Constable, where similar
             questions are addressed at paragraphs R47 to R50. In that report
             there is an explanation as to how a misunderstanding could have
             arisen (paragraphs R53 to R62). The report on Hr Jackson is with
             the South Yorkshire Police Authority because of the rank held by
             Hr Jackson at the time.

             In my report on Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid paragraphs R240
             to R244 discuss the question specifically.

In conclusion, may I say that the PCA letter points out that it is concerned
solely with the evidence in respect of the matters subject of complaint, and
not with mitigation.   Although the Inquest transcripts may bring to light


                                            5
matters not covered in my Complaints and Discipline Reports, the problems of
proving the disciplinary offences proposed by the PCA are formidable.

I hope that this letter will assist you with your considerations. All of
the information contained therein is covered in the Complaints and
Discipline Reports already submitted to you.

I shall be considering the PCA letter further in consultation with Detective
Chief Superintendent FOSTER of West Midlands Police and I will contact you
again in the near future.




Chief Constable




                                      6
                       Directorof Public Prosecutions    \                '   Deputy Director and Chief Executive
  " W                                AllanGreen Q.C.    9,            J D S Gandy CBOBE




                                             Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                        C. W. P. Newell



          The Chief constable                                                    Crown Prose™tion Service
          Snigg H U 1kShlrS Pollce                                               Headquarters Casework
          Sheffield                                                              io Furnival Street
          S3 8LY                                                                 London
                                                                                 EC4A1PE
                                                                                 Telephone 071-831-3038
                                                                                          Ext.



Y0UrRef                                   OurRef:                                           Date:

                                                 PGK.3341.89                                 30 A ugust 1990


        Dear Sir

        HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

      MHlfnH!Cp ° r 0f ?Kbli-C P1ro s e c u tio n s h as now receiv ed from th e West
      with          t^ V         fin al. r e p o r t in t h i s crim inal in v e s tig a tio n to g e th e r
      in A i    f foooa!uSUPIl0            g ev id en ce and docum entation. You will re c a ll
      fn iw v f     ??.          th e D irecto r r e q u e s te d a f u ll crim inal in v e s tig a tio n
       ollowing p u b lic a tio n o f th e In terim R e p o rt p rod uced a f t e r th e Public
      Enquiry conducted by Lord J u s t i c e T aylor in to th e circum stances
      surround ing th e d is a s te r a t H illsb o ro u g h Stadium, S heffield on 15th A pril


                   ^ f r e f u \ F o n s^d e ra tio n h a s b een given to a ll th e evidence and
     docum entation. The D irecto r h a s d ecid ed t h a t th e r e is no evidence to
     P n l i r ? Q W f-r i1I5ir! f 1/ r 0 ^eedingS b e in g i n s t i t u t ed a g a in st South Y orkshire
                   u         ? Wednesday F o o tb a ll Club, Messrs Eastwood and P a rtn e rs
     u -n u         1         y CounGl1 m co n n e c tio n w ith th e d is a s te r a t th e
     Hillsborough F o o tb a ll Stadium S h e ffie ld on 15th A pril 1989.

     The D irector h a s also concluded t h a t th e r e is in s u f f ic ie n t evidence to
     ju s tif y proceedings a g a in st any o f f i c e r o f th e South Y orkshire Police o r
     any o th e r p erso n fo r any offence.

     I am sending a copy of th is l e t t e r to you by FAX.

               se n d in g coPies to th e in v e s tig a tin g o fficer, Chief Constable
     eslie Sharp to th e Coroner Dr P o p p e r and to th e Police Complaints
    Authority. Copies will also be s e n t to s o lic ito r s re p re s e n tin g th e
    H illsborough S teerin g Committee, th e S h effield City Council, Sheffield
    Wednesday F o o tb all Club and M essrs E astw ood and P artn ers.
                                                - 2 -




       I also enclose a copy o f a p r e s s r e le a s e to be iss u e d by th e Crown
       P ro secu tio n Service P re ss Office a t 3.00pm today.

       Yours f a ith fu lly




       C J Cleugh
       Head o f Police C om plaints D ivision




V ..
                                       PRESS RELEASE
                          THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER


         Following a length y and d e ta ile d in v e s tig a tio n by th e West Midlands

         Police and close c o n s id e ra tio n of Lord J u s t i c e T a y lo r's r e p o rt, th e

         D irecto r of P ublic P ro se c u tio n s, Allan Green Q.C., h a s concluded t h a t

         th e r e is a ^ e v i d e n c e upon which a p r o s e c u tio n f o r m a n s la u g h te r o r any

         o th e r criminal offence may be b ro u g h t a g a in s t th e S o u th Y o rk sh ire Police,

         S heffield Wednesday F o o tb a ll Club, M essrs E astw ood an d P a r tn e rs o r

         S heffield City Council in connection w ith th e d i s a s t e r a t H illsborough
r        Fo otball Stadium S h effield on 15th A pril 1989.



         The D irector h a s also concluded t h a t th e r e is in s u f f ic ie n t evidence to

         ju s tif y th e in s t itu tio n o f proceedings a g a in s t any o f f ic e r in th e S outh

         Y orkshire Police force o r any o th e r p e rs o n f o r any offence.




■(   .




 EMBARGOED UNTIL 3PM 30TH AUGUST 1990

             NOTE

             Telephone message received froil Mr Kennedy (DPPs Office) at 4.10pm
             on 30.8.90 - the word "insufficient" will replace the word "no" on
             the fourth line of the above press release.

             DCC informed of the above.
■ m
                                           South Yorkshire Police
                                           POtlCI HIAOQUARTEM
                                           SNIQ Hitt
                                           SHIMlltO 83 8LY
                                           TltlPHONE (0742) 768522
                                           TltlX 84799®



      EMBARGOED UNTIL 3.00 PM, THURSDAY 30 AUGUST




      DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS' DECISION REGARDING
      THE CRIMINAL ENQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


      I am extremely glad that the Director has made his decision not least because
      the uncertainty until now has caused some officers and their families a
      great deal of distress.    The Director's decision is not a matter for self
      congratulation on the part of the South Yorkshire Police although it brings
      with it a measure of relief.

      I am all too acutely aware of the 95 souls who lost their lives and of the
      distress and grief of their families and friends.   Grief travels in many
      guises and South Yorkshire Police has known - since Hillsborough - its own
      particular form of suffering.

  It is now for other proceedings to determine what were the mistakes and
  failings which gave rise to the disaster.       The Inquest proceedings have
  yet to be finalised, a Civil Hearing is pending and questions of internal
  discipline have yet to be concluded.      So whilst the question of criminal
  liability has been dealt with by the Director of Public Prosecutions there
  are important issues still to be settled.

  I am handicapped from commenting in more detail because of the pending civil
  trial in which the South Yorkshire Police seek to recover a contribution
  from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood & Partners in respect
  of the compensation which has been voluntarily agreed to be paid by South
  Yorkshire Police to the bereaved and injured.




                                 Deputy Chief Constable
                                   for Chief Constable
    ** TX C O N F I R M A T I O N R E P O R T   **    AS    OF    10 APR    ’91     1^=05     P A G E .01

                                                                 SOUTH     YORK S    POLICE




                                TO/FROM              MODE        MIN/SEC    PGS       STATUS
„                    0.873B 4»I                      8 3 -S       ».M 9     0.
                                                                  South Yorkshire Police
                                                                    Police Headquarters
                                                                                Snig Hill
                                                                      Sheffield S3 8LY




    i
/
f
                          Facsimile Transmission




            COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT
                                     Ext. 3421


                               Head of Department
                       Acting Chief Superintendent Fell




    Thejollowing document consisting of   ..........   page(s) is for the attention of:-




     .       i .
                                                                         ACC(DiC)CJD

  PBRSOWAL 4 (XBfFIDBiTTAt,                                            10 April 1991

  Brigadier J Povnall OBB
  Deputy Chairman (Discipline)
  Police Cwim1»<n»«

  Lon<
  SW1




 Dear




 ass ss~ lr                                       ~           -£ w
 X^.r^.^r:nttafnv;:t«,0rob*rj5990t 1«■"—
how oy recommendations contained mi th» « ^          28 March 1991 1 outlined
not proposing OlsclDllnarv         <    *    ¥                       m
supervised Investigation report comnlSj.!!*!!!*! f "??* 1)086(1 8olely  the PCA
                                                 Leslie Sharp. My reason for
but i w o u w ^ t seek                          the evldenc* 18 insufficient
I Ull.ve, w £ l V “ . ^oru «                    f “ * ™                 nor,
vital consideration.             *         ' t0 do      1 thlnk tlwt *• a most


     sorry^o^feel          i ^ S * 8? Unbla8ed ^commendation in each case,
was not ay Intention nor do ^feel I h**** *hlS matter 8uraraarily. that certainly
the spirit of Section 90(5) and I cann^L?*"®     *°u *y 8ubffll88lon* were within



iTTo'l'o llZTtlyll     a^to^in^f    """I   ^                               let
the 18 October 1990.    I do wish to^e"** ^rth®rdel*y» « point again made on
to contact me at Zy    time!               *ll>fUl “ 1 Can* 80 do n<* hesitate
Yours
                                                       tobl
b r ig a d ie r j l p o w n a l l ,   o be               POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
D e p u ty 'Chairman (Discipline)


fp * e s >      la jf                                                                   London SW1
                                                                                      Telephone: 071-273




      PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL

      K S Anderson, Esq                                                                    /    April, 1991
      Assistant Chief Constable                                                            fO *
      South Yorkshire Police
      Snig Hill
      SHEFFIELD
      S3 8LY



                             Atv

                                                      HILLSBOROUGH

      On 28th March you sent us the memoranda in respect of the individual complaints
      relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

      As I told you on the telephone I was disappointed th at you had not set out more fully
      the reasons why you do not propose to prefer disciplinary charges against the officers
      complained about in accordance with Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal Evidence
      Act 198^. It seems to us surprising that in a case of such importance you have dealt
      with the m atter so summarily.

      You point out that                the Director of Public Prosecutions has considered the possible
      criminal offence of              culpable malfeasance, and has indicated that there is insufficient
      evidence to warrant              criminal proceedings. You say that, similarly there is insufficient
      evidence to warrant              disciplinary charges. I would make two points:

                      a. the disciplinary offence of neglect of duty is different from
                      that of the very rare offence of culpable malfeasance.

                      b. the case of Rhone and Madden makes it clear that a decision
                      by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to prosecute a police
                      officer who is the subject of complaint did not relieve the Board
                      [as it then was] of the duty to make their own decision as to
                      whether disciplinary charges should be brought, although they were
                      entitled to have Regard to the Director's decision. This same
                      point is made a t paragraph 5.16 in Home Office Guidance to Chief
                      Officers on Complaints and Discipline Procedures.
                                                           dd"    n w/ , h a v e in s u c h c a s e s - *«
t       explanation:                                   a         hoped  for a more fully reasoned

                  a.   as to why you consider the evidence falls short, and

                  that^there                     ' Sh° U' d be Prefcrred' « we conclude
                  proving the case at a disciplinary hearing? * reaSOnable chance of

                                                                   on t h e . matters. , am sure
    lightly.                                    incident such as Hillsborough cannot be treated




    3   L POWNALL
gdc



                                        O P I N I O N



                                  HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



                           PROPOSED DISCIPLINARY ACTION



                                                 INDEX



CH A PTER   I                                                           PAGE

      INSTRUCTIONS                                                        1

      CONCLUSIONS                                                         1



CH A PTER   II    -       D IS C IP L IN A R Y   PRO CEDURE

      SUMMARY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE                                        3

      STANDARD OF PROOF                                                   3

      PRIMARY EVIDENCE                                                    4

      EXPERT EVIDENCE                                                     4

      HEARSAY EVIDENCE                                                    4



CH A PTER   III       -    P R E V IO U S   PROCEDURES

      FOUR INVESTIGATIONS                                                 6

      UP-TO-DATE POSITION                                                 7



C H APTER   IV    -       P R O P O S E D CHARGES GEN ER A L M ATTERS

      THE CHARGES                                                         8

      THE ISSUES re: NEGLECT OF DUTY                                      9

      HAS A CHARGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE

       SAME AS "NEGLECT OF DUTY" BEEN

       REJECTED BY CORONER'S JURY

      AND/OR DPP?                                                         10
      CORONER'S JURY                                        10

      DPP DECISION                                          13

      HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE AS

      APPLIED TO JURY AND DPP

      DECISION                                              14

      COMMENT                                               15



CH A PTER V -   P A R T IC U L A R P R O P O SE D CHARGES

      INTRODUCTION                                          17

      FIRST CHARGE       (Appendix I)                       19

      SECOND CHARGE        (Appendix      II)               21

      COMMENT                                               23

      THIRD CHARGE       (Appendix IV)                      25

      FOURTH CHARGE        (Appendix       V)               27

      SIXTH CHARGE                                          31
gdc


                      O P I N I O N



                   HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



                        CHAPTER I



 INSTRUCTIONS



 1.   These are to advise on the merits in fact and law

 of the disciplinary charges of neglect of duty and

 discreditable conduct recommended by Police Complaints

 Authority by letter to Assistant Chief Constable Moore

 of South Yorkshire Police dated 7 May 1991.     The

 recommendation follows consideration by PCA of evidence ,

 and reports by Mr. Leslie Sharpe Chief Constable of

 Cumbria Constabulary and a memo by ACC Anderson formerly

 of SYP which concluded that complaints of such

 disciplinary offences were not substantiated.



 2.   The question now asked is whether there is

 sufficient evidence to support the proposed charges.



 CONCLUSIONS



 3.   None of the proposed disciplinary charges has a

 realistic chance to succeed.



 4.   The findings against the Police in the Taylor    l~ - J •


 Inquiry Interim report have not been supported by any

 other independent investigator 'and should not influence



                            -1 -
a decision on discipline.



5.   The best way to review the circumstances is to read

the evidence in the Appendices.   This includes some

repetition which is justified by the jeopardy of

Policemen before this evidence was collected.



6.   The Jury verdict of accident should be accepted as

true and treated as ruling out neglect of duty.



7.   A hearing of the disciplinary charges would be the

5th major investigation of the tragedy and would be

oppressive and unnecessary and fruitless.



8.   The tragedy occurred when there were two

consecutive unprecedented emergencies not foreseen by

anyone and for which no Police duty was prescribed.




                            -2-
                              CHAPTER II



                        DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE



SUMMARY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE



9.      The rules of evidence at a disciplinary hearing are

described in Paragraph 9.23 of the Home Office Guidance

to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and Disciplinary

Procedures 1985 edition.          This states in summary that

the hearing need not be bound by technical rules of

evidence.          It provides for the admission of agreed

evidence and includes a caution against use of hearsay

ev i d e n c e .



10.     Regulations 18 and 19 of the Police        (Discipline)

Regulations 19 85 provide for procedure and evidence by

agreed statements and Annex H of the Home Office

Guidance gives guidance about procedure and conduct of

the hearing.



11.     The above all boils down to the rule that contested

matters have to be proved by admissible evidence and

both sides may call witnesses.



STANDARD OF PROOF



12.     Beyond reasonable doubt,        Regulation 23.




                                  -3-
BODY OF EVIDENCE



PRIMARY EVIDENCE



13.       Witness statements and transcripts of unsworn

          evidence to Inquiry by the R t . Hon. Lord

          Justice Taylor   (    M   -   w i t n e s s e s ).



          Witness statements and transcripts of sworn

          evidence to Coroner's Inquest                        witnesses)



          Bundle of documents used at Taylor Inquiry

           (       documents)



          Bundle of Coroner's exhibits                          documents).



          Video tapes and bundles of photographs.



EXPERT EVIDENCE



14.   Reports by engineers Mr. Byrne

and by expert Police witnesses Assistant Chief Constable

of Devon and Cornwall Constabulary Mr. Phillips, and

former Senior Police Officer Mr. Stalker.



HEARSAY EVIDENCE



15.        Taylor Interim and Final Reports.



           Coroner's Summing up.



                                -4-
Reports by Chief Constable of Cumbria

Constabulary.




                -5-
                                 CHAPTER III



                             PREVIOUS PROCEDURES



FOUR INVESTIGATIONS



16.     Many combinations of the primary witness statements

transcripts and documents have now been considered on

four occasions i.e. by the Taylor Inquiry, Director of

Public Prosecutions,           Coroner's Inquest,   and Chief

Constable of Cumbria.            Relevant conclusions are as

f o l l o w s :-



(i)                Taylor Interim Report dated 1.8.89:   "Failure

                   to give the order to close the tunnel was a

                   blunder of the first magnitude",    ...   "the main

                   reason for the disaster was the failure of

                   Police control".



(ii)               DPP letter dated 30.8.90:   "Insufficient

                   evidence to justify proceedings against any

                   Officer of SYP or any other person for any

                   offence".



(iii)              Coroner's Jury verdicts 28.3.91: Accidental

                   Deaths.



(iv)               Chief Constable of Cumbria Constabulary

                   accepted and submitted to PCA by SYP 28.3.91:

                   Disciplinary complaints against Police



                                   -6 -
          unsu bst ant iat ed.



UP-TO-DATE POSITION



17.   From the above it will be seen that with the

exception of the Taylor Inquiry,       the conclusions of

those who have made an independent study of the primary

evidence do not attribute blame to any Police Officer.



18.   Because of the time of the sequence of inquiries,

none of the other investigators was able to take account

of the sworn evidence given at the Inquests,       or of the

Coroner's summing up.     This applied to PCA which was

also not in a position to be able to interpret the

significance of the verdicts of the Jury.        It was in my

opinion unfortunate that the then Assistant Chief

Constable of SYP did not accept the invitation of PCA by

letter dated 10.4.91 to set out his reasons more fully,

which could have included this important new material.




                                 -7-
                              CHAPTER IV



                 PROPOSED CHARGES      (GENERAL MATTERS)



THE CHARGES



19.   These are as follows:



      AGAINST CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD



      (i)            NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                     4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                     (Discipline)      Regulations 1985 in that he

                     failed to acquaint himself with the

                     planning and problems related to the

                     control of the semi-final.



      (ii)           NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                     4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                     (Discipline)      Regulations 1985 in that he

                     failed to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3

                     and 4.



      (i i i )       NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                     4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                     (Discipline)      Regulations 1985 in that he

                     failed to act when Pens 3 and 4 were

                     obviously overcrowded.



      (iv)           NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph



                                -8 -
                4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                (Discipline)     Regulations 1985 in that he

                failed to control movement of supporters

                subsequent to the opening of Gate "C".



      (v)      DISCREDITABLE CONDUCT - Contrary to

                Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of the Police

                (Discipline)     Regulations 1985 in that he

                acted in a manner likely to bring

                discredit on the reputation of the Force

                or the Police Service.



      AGAINST SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY



      (i)      NEGLECT OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph

                4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

                (Discipline)     Regulations 1985 in that he

                failed to control the movement of

                supporters subsequent to the opening of

                Gate "C".



THE ISSUES re; NEGLECT OF DUTY



20.   The defenition of this charge in Paragraph 4(a) of

the Discipline Code is "Where a member of the Police

Force without good and sufficient cause neglects or

omits to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of a

Police Force to attend to or carry out".




                               -9 -
21.    In the light of the proposed charges and

particulars,    3 questions arise:



(i)          What is the evidence of the imposition of the

             duty?



(ii)         What is the evidence of the breach of duty?



(iii )       Are the proposed disciplinary offences in

             substance the same as a charge considered and

             rejected by the Coroner's Jury, or Director of

             Public Prosecutions?



If so this will not be an absolute bar to disciplinary

proceedings under Section 104 Police and Criminal

Evidence Act 1984, but account should be taken of such a

decision by the Director, under Home Office Guidance

Paragraph 5.16 and in addition these previous

considerations provide guidance as to the likely outcome

of disciplinary proceedings.



22.      The evidence as to duty and breach will be

considered separately in Chapter V, and the rejection o£

previous charges dealt with below.



HAS A CHARGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE SAME AS "NEGLECT OF D U T Y ”

BEEN REJECTED BY CORONER'S JURY AND/OR DPP?



CORONER'S JURY




                              -10-
23.    3 options were left for the verdict of the Jury:



(i)                    Unlawful killing i.e. manslaughter by neglect.



(ii)                   Accident.



(i i i )               Open.



24.    As to unlawful killing the Coroner directed the

Jury in the terms of the judgment of Watkin L.J. in R . -

v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray                (1988)    1.Q.B.467 at

page 476G as follows:



           "What the Jury should have been told              was that when

       considering manslaughter by neglect,              they would

       have to be satisfied upon the evidence of these

       four ingredients of the offence.



           (1)              A Police Officer had the duty of

                            regarding the health and welfare of

                            Mikkelsen.



           (   2   )        He failed to do what in the circumstance

                            he ought to have done for the health and

                            welfare of Mikkelsen



           (3)              That his failure was a substantial cause

                            of Mikkelsen's death.



           (4)              That in failing to act for the benefit of



                                      -11-
                   Mikkelsen's health and welfare he acted

                   recklessly.     It should be explained that

                   to act recklessly means that there was an

                   obvious and serious risk to the health

                   and welfare of Mikkelsen to which that

                   Police Officer,       having regard to his

                   duty, was indifferent or, recognising

                   that risk to be present, he deliberately

                   chose to run the risk by doing nothing

                   about it.     It should be emphasised

                   however that a failure to appreciate that

                   there was such a risk would not by itself

                   be sufficient to amount to recklessness.



                   Further the Jury should have been

                   directed that they could return a verdict

                   on unlawful killing only if they could

                   attribute those       ingredients to a single

                   Police Officer whom they should on no

                   account name or otherwise identify".



25.   One   ofthe main points in         the Inquest was whether a

risk to health     and welfare was       obvious and serious.



26.   The ingredients of unlawful killing should be

compared with the definition of neglect of duty in

Paragraph 4(a) of the Discipline Code which includes

ingredients      (1) and   (2) but not    (3) and   (4).   However a

trial of these particular disciplinary charges will in

fact entail and be seen to include decisions upon all of



                                 -12-
the 4 ingredients of the criminal offence.



27.   As to ingredient   (3) this is because if there were

the neglect of duty charged then it is an inescapable

consequence that this neglect caused or contributed to

the deaths.



28.   As to ingredient   (4) all the Police accept that if

there were an obvious and serious risk of health and

welfare,    then failure to act would be a breach of duty.



29.   A common issue of fact in the manslaughter/unlawful

killing, and the proposed disciplinary offences,      is that

until it was too late, there was no planning or

operational duty to take any particular action because

no risk was obvious to any one in authority at all.        If

the disciplinary charges proceed, that the accused will

undoubtedly re-run the evidence given to the Inquests

some of which is collected in the Appendices.



30.   It will be seen above that      "unlawful killing" was a

live issue and it was rejected by the Jury in favour of

accident.     Thus the same issues that would arise in the

disciplinary proceedings have in fact been considered and

determined by the Jury, giving the result of "accident".



31.   Note that the above does not apply to proposed

disciplinary charges     (i) and   (v).



DPP DECISION



                              -13-
32.    The DPP ruled out any offences by the Police at

all.    The main potential offence considered must have

been manslaughter by neglect i.e. unlawful killing.             The

decision by DPP was made without having heard the

Inquest evidence,      and was vindicated by the Jury who

heard much more evidence than was available to DPP.



HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE AS APPLIED TO JURY AND DPP

DECISIONS



PARAGRAPHS 5.16      (re: DPP)



33.    The guidance provides that account should be taken

of the DPP's decision where the matters are

substantially the same as above, and where DPP has

decided that there is insufficient evidence.          This works

against disciplinary pr o c e e d i n g s .



PARAGRAPHS 5.13-15      (re: VERDICT)



34.    If there had been proceedings for a criminal

offence then whatever the result, disciplinary

proceedings would be ruled out by PACE Section 104 and

HO Guidance 5.13 and 5.14.          The only reason that this

outcome does not apply to the verdict of the Jury,         i&


that it was not a conviction or acquittal.



35.    However,   following ex parte Gray the Coroner left

the case to the Jury on the basis that the candidates



                                 -14-
for unlawful killing were the Control Room staff         (Day 77

p .105F-10 8 B ).   If the Jury had returned that verdict it

would undoubtedly have been widely regarded as the

equivalent of a conviction of those men of that criminal

offence.



36.    If the proceedings had in fact been a criminal

trial then the issues for the Jury would have been

exactly the same as those at the Inquest and there is no

reason to think that the result would have been

different i.e. the men would have been acquitted of

unlawful killing, ruling out disciplinary procedure.



37.    Altogether the effect of the above is twofold.



(i)         Although there is no statutory bar under

             Section 104 to disciplinary proceedings, there

             is a strong indication that such proceedings

             would not now be fair or appropriate under

             Home Office Guidance paragraph 5.16.



(ii)        Disciplinary proceedings if taken are likely

             to follow the same course as previous

             procedures probably with the same result i.e.

             case dismissed.



COMMENT.



38.Finally it may be useful to call        to mind the

findings     of the Taylor Interim Report that the failure



                               -15-
to give the order to close the tunnel was a blunder of

the first magnitude and the main reason fot the disaster

was the failure of the Police control.     If these words

are applied to the ingredients of unlawful killing/

manslaughter by neglect, then the offence would be

proved.     However having heard the evidence, the Jury did

not agree.    Nor did DPP.   Neglect of duty will go the

same way.




                             -16-
                          CHAPTER V



                 PARTICULAR PROPOSED CHARGES



INTRODUCTION



39.   Proof of the proposed charges would depend upon the

evidence called by both sides at the disciplinary

hearings.   Thus consideration of whether the charges

could be substantiated requires an examination of the

primary evidence.



40.   It will be appreciated that the body of evidence

available is huge.    The Taylor Inquiry occupied 31 days

sitting long hours.    The Inquest occupied 4 months

including some duplication of Taylor witnesses plus many

new witnesses.    Much of this material is relevant to the

issues which are outlined above.



41.   Short of a rehearsal of all this evidence, any

analysis is bound to be selective and this comment

applies to what now follows in relation to each

particular proposed charge.



42.   The policy of selection has been to collect.the

sworn evidence of witnesses under topics relevant to the

particular charges to enable the reader to form a

judgment of the likely course and outcome of a hearing.

There is no doubt that other selections could be made,

but the cumulative effect of the extracts in the



                            -17-
Appendices is likely to be decisive.



43.   This exercise proceeds on the basis that the reader

is already familiar with the independent reports of

Chief Constable of Cumbria, and his recommendations

against proceedings.   The exercise concentrates on the

sworn evidence and documents given to the Inquests.

Each charge will be dealt with below by stating the

charge, then dealing with the merits and giving a

summary of the evidence which may be read in the

Appendix.




                           -18-
FIRST CHARGE   (Appendix I)



44.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: NEGLECT OF DUTY -

Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police

(Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he failed to

acquaint himself with the planning and problems related

to the control of the semi-final.



45.   A request for further particulars of the charge may

be expected i.e. of which aspects of the planning are

referred to, and what were the problems.         Such a request

would expose the weakness of the charge because the

evidence is that before the event no-one was aware that

any problem of control existed.         Nor was anyone aware of

any need to plan for the tragedy^ and the planning did

not include anything which would have made any

difference to the outcome whether Mr. Duckenfield were

aware of it or n o t .



46.   If an answer could be given to the request for

particulars then in summary the evidence on the charge

is that the ground and procedures used in 1987 and 1988

were believed by everyone to be safe to be used again in

1989 without amendment.       This was the belief of the

Club, Engineer,   Football Association,       City Council,

Officer Working Party, visiting clubs,         spectators, and

Police.   These procedures did not include any

preparation for the tragedy.          Mr. Duckenfield inherited

the situation 19 days before the match, and briefed

himself by reference to his predecessor Mr. Mole, the



                               -19-
Operational Order which was already in place, and senior

Officers including Mr. Murray, Chief Inspector Beale,

Inspector Sewell, plus attendance at two matches at the

ground and an inspection of the ground with Inspector

Sewell.   Then he prepared and gave pre-match briefings

to senior and all other Police.



47.   The charge can be tested by asking if the

unforeseen tragedy had not happened, whether anyone

would have even thought of the idea that Mr. Duckenfield

did anything wrong in his preparations.    This test shows

that the charge is with hindsight.    It is no answer to

say that the tragedy brought planning defects and

problems to light,   because that comment applies to a

decade of blindness by all the officials listed above,

not 19 days of preparation by Mr. Duckenfield.



48.   The above is illustrated and proved by the evidence

extracted in Appendix I to which the reader is referred.



49.   The trial of this charge would be long, and as it

proceeded, the evidence would grow stronger against the

charge, which could not be proved.
SECOND CHARGE    (Appendix II)



50.    Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:     NEGLECT

OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of

the Police    (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he

failed to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4.



51.    A request for further particulars of this charge

may be expected asking the following questions:



             Whereabouts was the duty to monitor numbers

             imposed?



(ii)         What were the numbers which had to be

             monitored?



(i i i )     How, when and where was anyone in the Police

             ever informed of what numbers were permitted

             in Pens 3 and 4?



(iv)         What was the means of monitoring the numbers

             which ought to have been used?



             If the charge is meant to refer to crowd

             density, what were the.means provided to the

             Police to make any reliable judgment of

             density?



(vi)         What training, or instruction was given



                              -   21-
            anywhere, to any Police Force as to the means

             by which this duty could be performed?



(vii)       Who in the decade before the tragedy ever drew

            attention to any of the above questions?



52.     The questions above are not capable of a sensible

answer, and will paralyse the charge.     If it proceeds

the following will apply.



53.     The evidence is extracted in Appendix II of some of

the witnesses who gave evidence at the Inquest on the

subject of monitoring crowd numbers and density.       This

includes the evidence of experienced football spectators

about football crowd behaviour, and the evidence of

spectators in various parts of the crowd mostly in Pens

3 and 4 about their own perception of the crowd density

at the time of the tragedy.     In summary the points made

are as follows.     (Please note when reading the evidence

that the location of most of the spectators can be found

in the diagram Appendix III).



54.     No safe capacity for Pens 3 and 4 was stated in the

Safety Certificate issued by the local authority

Sheffield City Council, and there was no means of

counting numbers in those Pens.     The guidelines about

Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity in Chapter 16 of the

Green Guide had not been applied by any of the

authorities to the capacity of Pens 3 and 4.




                             -22-
55.   The Police had to rely on visual impression of

overcrowding to react if they became aware of a problem.



56.   There was a wide range of opinions among both

spectators and Police about the stage at which any

particular density became overcrowded.       The Coroner

correctly stated    (Day 77 p . 54-55) that the vast majority

of witnesses said that the distressing situation did not

occur until the players came out onto the pitch or

later.



57.   The authorities i.e. Police,   Club,   Engineer,   City

Council,   believed that the system of "find your own

level" had worked previously and was safe without

intervention without stewards or the Police.       (See also

First Charge Evidence a b o v e ).



58.   It will be appreciated that evidence under the

other charges is also likely to be relevant to the topic

of monitoring crowd numbers.



COMMENT



59.   The effect of the evidence given at t h e 'Inquest

including the above was that the overcrowding was not

seen by anyone in authority until it was too late, and

this applied also to a large number of spectators.         The

evidence of the BBC television personnel, was the same.

If this disciplinary charge proceeds to trial, then the

evidence called by the accused will probably include the



                              -23-
above with the result that the chance to prove the

charge is very slight.




                          -24-
THIRD CHARGE       (Appendix IV)



60.     Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:          NEGLECT

OF DUTY - Contrary to Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule I of

the Police       (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he

failed to act when Pens 3 and 4 were obviously

overcrowded.



61.    There is an overlap between this charge and the

second charge and the same points apply plus the

f ol low ing .



62.    There will be a request for further particulars of

the charge including what is meant by overcrowded, and

how was this to be determined in the surging mass of

uncounted spectators seen on the video film, many of

whom   (see the evidence)       thought the situation was normal

until it was too late.



       Also to whom the overcrowding was obvious and when,

and what was wrong with the Police reaction as soon as

they realised what had gone wrong?          What more or

different could usefully have been done by M r .

Duckenfield when the tragedy was seen and understood?



63.    The answer to the above requests will be that the

overcrowding was not obvious to anyone in authority or

to most spectators until it was too late.          The reason

was that no-one was expecting overcrowding,         and everyone

thought the ground and procedure were safe, and the



                                   -25-
surging of massed uncounted spectators was normal.

Criticism is voiced only with hindsight.        These answers

or any similar particulars will make it impracticable to

prove breach of duty by Mr. Duckenfield.



64.   The question of what was obvious and to whom and

when, were issues left to the Inquests Jury under the ex

parte G r a y , in relation to the Control Room personnel

including Mr. Duckenfield.        If the evidence had proved

that the overcrowding was obvious before it was too

late, there can be no doubt that the Jury would have

found unlawful killing.      That was a major point of the

long Inquests.   (See e.g. the Coroner's summing up on Day

75 p . 54-55 and Day 78 p . 125-127).



65.   Thus the matters for the decision of the Jury

included the point of this charge.        If it proceeds the

outcome is likely to be the same as the verdict i.e.

dismissed.



66.   The relevant evidence includes the extracts in

Appendix II,   III,   IV and V.




                              -26-
FOURTH CHARGE           (Appendix V)



67.      Against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and

Superintendent Murray:           NEGLECT OF DUTY - contrary to

Paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the Police              (Discipline)

Regulations 1985 in that he failed to control the

movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate

"C " .



68.      The first problem here is to identify the duty.             It

is nowhere stated in the 1989 operational order or any

other operational order.               The opening of Gate "C" was

unprecedented           (see e.g. MacKrell in Appendix I).     The

late arrival of large numbers of pushing spectators was

also unprecedented            (see the summary of evidence below

and Appendix V ) .           There was nothing in the 1989

operational order to describe the duty of the Police to

control the movement of supporters inside the ground at

all.      The only prescribed duty to have any bearing on

the situation was set out in Paragraph 2.1 of the 1989

operational order viz.



         "It is the intention of the Police to allow this

         match to take place and to ensure public order and

         safety both inside and outside the football

         g r o u n d . .."



69.      The duty to ensure public safety inside the ground

was intended to be performed by compliance with the

operational order, and by' reaction by individual Police



                                       -27-
Officers when they observed any threat to public order

or safety.               (See e.g. the evidence of Greenwood,

Creaser, Marshall,             Goddard,   Bichard,   and Murray in the

A p p e n d i c e s ).



70.      In practice          "reaction" required the use of

individual initiative,and in the end this proposed

offence boils down to the allegation that Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray

neglected their duty by failing to use the right

initiative,outside the terms of the operational order

and planning^ to control the movement of supporters ,

subsequent to their use of the correct initiative to

break the operational order and planning to avert an

unprecedented tragedy at the turnstiles by ordering the

opening of the g a t e s .



71.      Another formulation designed to bring out the true

meaning of this proposed disciplinary charge would be as

follows:         "That whilst using their initiative to react to

an unforeseen life threatening emergency outside the

turnstiles,              the Officers neglected their duty by failing

to use their initiative to improvise a procedure to

prevent another tragedy inside the ground which was

unforeseen by anyone".



72.      It is not likely that any such disciplinary offence

of failing to improvise in a crisis does exist.                   Many

other men in the same situation would have done the

same.        Others may have done better,            but that would not



                                       -28-
prove the existence of a duty under this charge.



73.   It is the case that at the Inquests there was

evidence that on previous occasions the entrance to the

tunnel had been closed on the initiative of Police

Officers on the concourse.       However none of the senior

Officers Duckenfield, Murray,      Greenwood, Mole, or

Marshall was aware that this had happened,      and it was

not reported in any of the de-briefing memoranda that

were discovered,    or in the Operational Order.    Such a

procedure had never previously been linked with the

opening of any exit gates.       The result in the crisis was

that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent

Murray were without any precedent or guidance to perform

the duty alleged in the c h a r g e .



74.   In support of the contention that the failure to

make the correct improvisation does not amount to a

breach of duty,    is the evidence of the junior Officers

in the Control Room Sergeant Goddard and P c . Bichard

that they did not at the time see any danger.       (See

Appendix Iltf) .   The same applies to the Police Officers

on the concourse and also to the gate men who were

knocked over or pushed aside by the entry of.the crowd.

(See Appendix V).



75.   Since there was no duty prescribed in the

Operational Order to control the movement of supporters,

the charge means that the duty only arose in the

unprecedented emergency.       For the reasons given above it



                               -29-
is not likely that such a duty exists to support the

disciplinary offence,   and breach of such a duty is not

likely to be proved when it did not cross the mind of

anyone at the time.




                            -30-
SIXTH CHARGE



76.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: DISCREDITABLE

CONDUCT - contrary to Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of the

Police   (Discipline)   Regulations 1985 in that he acted in

a manner likely to bring discredit on the reputation of

the Force or the Police Service.



77.   A request for further particulars of the charge may

be expected.    These particulars would have to be based

on evidence which is capable of proof at the hearing,

i.e. what action exactly is complained of and what was

wrong with it and why was it likely to bring discredit

on the Service?



78.   If the charge refers to the statement by Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield that Gate     "C" had been

forced, and that there had been an inrush of Liverpool

supporters,    then particulars will be needed to explain

why this was likely to bring discredit,when the true

situation was that the order by Mr. Duckenfield to open

the gates had in fact probably saved the lives of

supporters caught in the crush outside the turnstiles.



79.   The topic of this potential charge was considered

in the report by the Chief Constable of Cumbria at

paragraphs R230-R245 in the context of a charge under

Discipline Code paragraph 5 of falsehood or

prevarication^which on the face of those words appears



                              -31-
to describe what the charge has in mind.         His conclusion

was that there was insufficient evidence to support the

charge and for the reasons given by Mr.         Sharpe this may

be expected to be the result of disciplinary

proceedings.



80.   In the context of the other charges,        the proposed

charge under this head is subsidiary,      and if the other

charges do not proceed for the reasons set out above,

then it is unlikely that it would be fair and

appropriate for the case to proceed on this charge alone

in the light of paragraph 5.16 of the Home Office

Guidance.   One reason is that consideration of the

meaning of this charge would be likely to open up most

of the topics in which proceedings would not be fair and

appropriate as above.




                                RICHARD PAYNE

24 The Ropewalk
Nottingham

21.6.1991




                        3 i .
            re: HILLSBOROUGH
          DISCIPLINARY ACTION

  CHEIF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD

          SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY




                O P I N I O N




Ref:   SW/NJP

Stephen Walker Esq
Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY
gdc
                              / \                         IC    ^ S .

                                         O P I N I O N



                                    HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



                            PROPOSED DISCIPLINARY ACTION



                                                  INDEX



C H A PTER   I                                                          PAGE

       INSTRUCTIONS                                                       1

       CONCLUSIONS                                                        1




C H A PTER   II    -       D IS C IP L IN A R Y   PROCEDURE

       SUMMARY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE                                       3

       STANDARD OF PROOF                                                  3

       PRIMARY EVIDENCE                                                   4

       EXPERT EVIDENCE                                                    4

       HEARSAY EVIDENCE                                                   4



C H A PTER   III       -    P R E V IO U S   PR O C ED U R ES

       FOUR INVESTIGATIONS                                                6

       UP-TO-DATE POSITION                                                7



C H A PTER   IV    -       P R O P O SE D CHARGES G ENERAL M ATTERS

       THE CHARGES                                                       8

       THE ISSUES re:                   NEGLECT OF DUTY                  9

       HAS A CHARGE SUBSTANTIALLY THE

       SAME AS "NEGLECT OF DUTY" BEEN

       REJECTED BY CORONER'S JURY

       AND/OR DPP?                                                       10



                                                   -1 -
      CORONER'S JURY                                                     10

      DPP DECISION                                                       13

      HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE AS

      APPLIED TO JURY AND DPP

      DECISION                                                           14

      COMMENT                                                            15



C H A PTER V -   P A R T IC U L A R   P R O P O SE D CHARGES

      INTRODUCTION                                                       17

      FIRST CHARGE             (Appendix I)                              19

      SECOND CHARGE             (Appendix II)                            21

      COMMENT                                                            23

      THIRD CHARGE             (Appendix IV)                             25

      FOURTH CHARGE             (Appendix V)                             27

      SIXTH CHARGE                                                       31




                                                                7 <   , 7 ? .
                           -    >l-


 /tfPgrCbrf J V                                                 4o-^<r.
                                                               ^ 6 - 1 *}°
gdc



                          APPENDIX I



G.H. MacKRELL      SWFC Secretary               1-5

D.M. BOWNES        Sheffield C.C.               6

A. BUTLER          Sheffield C.C. Surveyor      7-9

D.J. LOCK          SWFC Security & Former SYP   10

W.W.W.JACKSON      ACC.    SYP                  11-12

B.L. MOLE          Ch.Supt.      SYP            13-16

R. MARSHALL        Supt.     SYP                17-18

R.W. CREASER       Insp.     SYP                19-20

B.D. MURRAY        Supt.     SYP                21-22

R.L. GREENWOOD     Supt.     SYP                24-25

G. SYKES           Insp.     SYP                26

G. McKAY           Insp.     SYP                27

R. PURDY           Insp.     SYP                28-29

F.N. GRUNHILL      Mounted Liverpool Police     30

K.E. HORSEFIELD    SWFC Gateman                 31

D.G. DUCKENFIELD   Ch.Supt.      SYP            32-42
                                                                   28

                                               G.   H.   M A C K R ELL



Q. You are quite clear in your mind that that was being
   said within the Police Control Box? - A. Within the
   Police Box. Mr. Duckenfield was telling the Police
   Officer to keep talking to the crowd, yes.

Q. I think you also heard some comments about some bolt
   cutters and the deployment of people at the perimeter
   fence? - A. Yes.

Q. After that really you became involved with FA
   officials, club managers and people like in the
   decision taking as what should happen to the match? -
   A. That was it because obviously it was pretty
   apparent straight away that the game would have to be
   cancelled. The Police were anxious that that should
   be done at the right time so that people then would
   not attempt to leave the ground which would block the
   entry route for emergency vehicles and ambulances.

Q. What you are saying is that the Police wanted people
   to stay within the ground? - A. At that stage, yes.

Q. At that stage so that the roads would remain clear? -
   A. Obviously it would be logical or else you would
   get may be tens of thousands of people trying to
   leave the ground, go back to their cars, things like
   this and would block the local neighbourhood.

Q. I am   going to leave it there. We will break for the
   time   being. We will break for coffee and then we
   will   turn the ladies and gentlemen over there and
   give   them an opportunity to ask you questions.  Is
   that   all right? - A. Yes, thank you.

Q. We are breaking for coffee but you are on Oath. So
   technically you are still in the witness box. Have
   coffee and talk about anything you like other than
   the evidence, is that all right? - A. Yes, sir.

                      Short Adjournment

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Q. Mr. Mackrell, I wonder if you could help me please to
   do this exercise? I want you to put yourself if you
   can ~ I know it is artificial — into the state of
   mind that you were before the disaster occurred and I
   am going to ask you a series of questions about your
   state of mind before the disaster happened. Do you
   follow? - A. I understand, yes.

Q. First of all, did you believe that the ground was
   safe to be used to its full capacity? - A. Yes, sir.




                                                                    I
                                           G.   H.   M A C K R EL L



Did you know that the Fire Service and the Officer
Working Party had worked out a system for evacuation
of the ground in the event of an emergency? - A. I
was aware that a system had been drawn up. I was not
party to the drawing up of that  system, sir.

But you knew there was a system for the evacuation of
the ground in an emergency? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you know that a time had been worked out for the
safe evacuation of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
Yes, sir.

Did you know what it was? - A. No, sir.

We have been told by Mr. Seamenfrom the Fire Service
that the time was eight minutes. Leaving aside the
particular period, did you believe before the
disaster that if an emergency occurred the Leppings
Lane terrace could safely be evacuated? - A. Yes,
sir.

Before the disaster I want to just run round the
number of people who were interested in the safe
operation of the ground. Under the Safety
Certificate had Dr. Eastwood been appointed as
consulting engineer to provide for, among other
things, an annual certificate as to the safety of the
ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Had he provided that annual Safety Certificate? - A.
Yes, sir.

You have already mentioned that there was an Officer
Working Party which made twice yearly inspections of
the ground? - A. Mainly annual inspectors but there
were obviously individual parties made &S hoc further
inspections as and when required.

Represented on the Officer Working Party there were
representatives of the South Yorkshire Police? - A.
Yes.

The Fire Service? - A. Yes, sir.

The Local Authority? - A. Yes.

And from time to time Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, sir.

You knew there was a Safety Certificate as you have
mentioned. Had anyone from any of those official
bodies before the disaster ever said anything to you
to suggest that he could foresee that there was a
                                                            30

                                                G. H. MACKRELL


     risk of death by overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
     terrace? - A. No, sir.

Q. I am asking you this question as the Secretary so
   that it is not only from your own knowledge but also
   from your knowledge of the records of the Club and
   your own enquiries.  So far as you know in the
   history of the ground has there ever been an occasion
   prior to 15th April 1989 when the exit gates have had
   to be opened in order to relieve the risk of death by
   crushing outside the turnstiles? - A. I was not aware
   of it, sir.

Q. Since the disaster have you ever heard that has ever
   happened in the history of the Club before? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. What? - A. No, sir.

Q.       THE CORONER:    Did you say no? - A. No.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Before the disaster had anything
     ever happened in your job as Secretary or in your
     meetings with these various official bodies which
     caused you to expect that a disaster of this sort
     could possibly occur? - A. No, sir.

Q. Before the disaster in your own mind drawing on your
   meetings with these other official bodies in your job
   as Secretary did you ever imagine any circumstances
   in which there would be an obvious risk of death to
   spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace from
   overcrowding? - A. No, sir.

Q. That deals with one topic to try to illuminate your
   state of mind and the state of mind of the other
   people you spoke to before the disaster and I wonder
   if you would just now please run through one or two
   provisions of the Green Guide and give your comments
   to the Jury.  I think there is a copy of the Green
   Guide available for you, and it is C.382. - A. Yes.

Q. The Jury have looked through this guide in some
   detail and they know it is not law. The words are
   not to be interpreted literally or exactly and it is
   only to be used for guidance? - A. That is right.

Q. Can you look at paragraph 1 which says that the
   booklet provides guidance to ground management, local
   authorities and technical specialists such as
   engineers on measures for improving spectator safety
   at existing sports grounds and it is a voluntary code
   and has no legal force. Were you aware of the
   existence of this Green Guide? - A. I was.
                                                                                         38

                                                                    G. H. MACKRELL

           "Dr. Eastwood sa y s le a v e the c a p a c i t y a t Leppings
           Lane end as i t i s p rovid in g p o l i c e have g a t e s under
           West stand open so th a t p e o p le can d i s t r i b u t e
           throughout th e t e r r a c e e v e n l y ."
    I s t h i s the message you r e c e i v e d , Hr. Mackrell? - A. Yes,
    it is.
Q. Did you a c t upon t h a t a c c o r d i n g l y , l e a v in g the c a p a c i t y
   a t Leppings Lane end as i t was? - A. Yes.
Q. And n o t taking any fu r th e r a c t i o n t o a l l o c a t e any
   p a r t i c u l a r numbers, c a p a c i t y numbers, to the d i f f e r e n t
   pens? - A. No, because the pens were open.                      People could
   t r a n s f e r from one pen to another pen.
Q. R ig h t, t h i s i s a very important p o i n t , Mr. M ackrell, and
   I am g r a t e f u l to you f o r p a y i n g t h a t .  I s t h i s the true
   p o s i t i o n t h a t having made t h i s in q u ir y from t h i s time
   onwards, the c l u b ' s a t t i t u d e was t h a t provided th e r a d i a l
   g a t e s were open and locked open, then the s p e c t a t o r s
   could move f r e e l y from one pen to another? - A. So I
   understood i t .
Q. And so d i s t r i b u t e them selves over the t e r r a c e as they
   wished? - A. W ell, they could d i s t r i b u t e them selves over
   th e t e r r a c e .    I d o n 't say as they wished because there
   might have been a c o n s t r a i n t put upon them, but they
   could d i s t r i b u t e th em selves over th e t e r r a c e .
Q. What do you mean, a " co n stra in t" ? - A. W ell, i f the
   P o l i c e f i l l e d one p a r t i c u l a r a r e a .
Q. Oh, I s e e , u n le s s they were stopped? - A. Yes.
Q. I f they were n o t stopped and i f t h e g a t e s were j u s t
   locked open and l e f t open a t the back o f each r a d i a l
   f e n c e , so fa r as the c lu b were concerned was the idea
   then th a t the fans cou ld d i s t r i b u t e them selves ev e n ly as
   they wished a c r o s s the terrace? - A. They would have to
   because they would have to be moving from one area to
   another to take advantage o f t o i l e t and refreshm ent
   fa c ilitie s.
Q. Yes, th a t i s what was intended t o happen? - A. Yes.
Q. I s t h a t the system which was in e f f e c t fo r the three
   s e m i - f i n a l s you have been t a l k i n g about? - A. Yes.
Q. Did the clu b b e l i e v e t h a t th a t system was p e r f e c t l y safe?
   - A. I had no reason t o doubt o t h e r w is e .
                                                                                 39
                                                                G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Now the e x p r e s s io n has been used during the c a s e o f what
   i s c a l l e d 'f in d your own l e v e l " , have you heard th a t
   expression ? - A. I have heard i t , y e s .
Q. As we understand i t , i t means t h a t the crowd can even
   i t s e l f o u t, i f i t wants t o , or p eo p le want t o , by the
   means you have j u s t d e s c r i b e d .   Do you a c c e p t that? - A.
   I think th a t happens to a d e g r e e , y e s , s i r .
Q. Now th a t being th e system , i t f o l l o w s , and everybody
   knows, there was no p a r t i c u l a r s a f e c a p a c i t y number ever
   worked out f o r the i n d i v i d u a l pens? - A. That i s c o r r e c t .
Q. I s the reason fo r t h a t because in the mind o f the c lu b i t
   was not n e cessa ry b ecau se the p eo p le were f r e e to
   d i s t r i b u t e th em selv es as you have j u s t explain ed ? - A.
   T h a t's r i g h t , because there would not b e, as I understood
   i t , any reason to a c t u a l l y d e f i n e each i n d i v i d u a l pen
   because people were c o n s t a n t l y moving from one pen to
   another to the t o i l e t or fo r refreshm ent or whatever.
Q. A fter the time o f t h i s memorandum, and a f t e r the two
   s e m i - f i n a l s th a t le d up to t h i s d i s a s t e r , d id anyone to
   your knowledge ever say anything t o you - t h a t i s t o sa y ,
   anyone from the O f f i c e r Working P arty, Dr. Eastwood, the
   c lu b s who atten d ed and played in th e matches, the l o c a l
   a u t h o r i t y , the F ir e S e r v i c e , did anyone ever c r i t i c i s e
   t h i s system? - A. No, s i r .
Q. Can we go on to the n e x t t o p i c under the Green Guide,
   which I would l i k e you t o look a t and can you turn to 62.
               THE CORONER:        Members o f the Jury, one o f your
     c o l le a g u e s has a q u ery.   Did you want a C number?     Yes,
     i t i s C.483 fo r both o f them t o g e t h e r .
Q.            MR. PAYNE:     Now page 25, number 62.           Now I am j u s t
     going to touch on t h i s , Mr. M ackrell, because i t i s a
     s u b j e c t which keeps coining up in th e s e I n q u e s t s . These
     says:
           "All doors on an e x i t r o u te should always be capable
           o f opening outwards so th a t crowds can escape in an
           emergency.          T his i s p a r t i c u l a r l y important fo r
           doors w ith in covered stands and a t the f o o t of
           s t a ir w a y s ."
     Now the doors in q u e s t i o n are th e b ig blue doors a t the
     concourse end o f the tu n n e l.     Can you bring them to
     mind? - A. The big b lu e doors a t the concourse end o f the
     tunnel?
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, s i r .
                                                              66

                                                 D. M. BOWNES



Q. Did you attend that? - A. I did.

Q. Was that useful? - A. It was helpful, yes.

Q. Did you acquaint yourself with the appropriate way,
   as you saw it, of administering this system? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Over the years did you have all the professional
   input which was made available to you by the other
   Authorities? - A. Yes. ■ >

Q. Were you, that is you as an individual, aware before
   this tragedy of any defect that related to matters of
   safety in the Safety Certificate? - A. No.

Q. Had you been aware of any such, would you have done
   something about it? - A. Yes.

Q. The same question, if I may, that the learned Coroner
   put to you when he asked you whether you were aware
   of any risk of serious danger that might affect
   anyone attending the ground and I open it up even
   more broadly; were you aware of any risk of harm
   that might affect any person attending that ground? -
   A. No, none whatsoever.

Q. Had you been aware of any such risk would you have
   done something about it? - A. I would.

Q. What? - A. Depending on the nature of the risk I
   would have possibly the Council to issue a
   Prohibition Notice which it is entitled to do under
   the legislation.

Q. I want to turn now and finally to the question of
   crowd capacity and crowd control and I begin, if I
   may, by giving you a little more detail of the
   question that Mr. Isaacs did indeed put to Mr. Butler
   and where Mr. Butler did indeed say that he had not,
   in fact, sought information from any other person
   about the assessment of crowd capacity. Do you
   remember that exchange between you and Mr. Isaacs,
   first of all? - A. Yes.

Q. You were asked, "Were you surprised that that was the
   answer?"? - A. Yes.

Q . I have access to the transcript of what was said at
    page 68 of the relevant date (Day 36-68A) and the
    full question and answer is this:




                                                          6
                                                                                  34
                                                                       A. BUTLER

     r e l e v a n c e to the i s s u e t h a t t h i s Jury have to d ea l
     w it h .
              MR. PAYNE:       I accept that in terv en tio n . I t i s
     q u i t e r i g h t and I sh ou ld n o t have f o llo w e d up the p o in t
     about th e Kop. I a p o l o g i s e .
             THE CORONER:    I a g r e e w ith Mr. Maxwell.             Perhaps
     I s h o u ld have stopped you.
Q.             MR. PAYNE:           In t h i s q u e s t i o n about the s a f e
     c a p a c i t y then, c o n f i n i n g your answers under paragraph
     12 t o th e Leppings Lane en d , Mr. B u t l e r , do you know
     whether any s t e p s were taken a t a l l a f t e r the Council
     took r e s p o n s i b i l i t y to a s s e s s how many p eo p le could
     s a f e l y be accommodated i n th e d i f f e r e n t s e c t i o n s o f the
     Leppings Lane te r r a c e ? - A. I am not aware o f any, s i r .
Q.   I f t h a t had been done by anybody, i s t h a t something
     which would have come to t h e a t t e n t i o n o f your
     department? - A. I would have assumed s o , y e s .
Q. I f i t had been done, by which department would i t have
   been done? - A. The a d m i n i s t r a t i o n p r o c e s s would have
   been d e a l t w ith by th e A d m in istr a tio n and Legal
   Department.
Q. Would the A d m in istra tio n and Legal Department have
   a s s e s s e d how many p e o p le can be s a f e l y accommodated in
   d i f f e r e n t s e c t i o n s o f th e ground? - A. They would have
   sought a d v ic e on t h a t .
Q. From whom? - A. From a l l members o f th e Working Party
   o f th e Advisory Group.
Q. Which department in the C ity Council would have been
   r e s p o n s i b l e fo r the jo b o f a s s e s s i n g how many people
   can be s a f e l y accommodated? - A. That would have come
   to th e Department o f Land and Planning w it h i n the
   B u ild in g and Surveyors D i v i s i o n .
Q. I s t h a t your department? - A. As w it h in the C ou n cil,
   yes, s i r .
Q. Can you look a t the o th e r paragraph in th e Green Guide
   which d e a l s w ith t h i s c a p a c i t y p o i n t , which i s 101? Do
   you s e e th a t t h i s sa y s :
            "A ground should be d i v i d e d i n t o s e c t i o n s to
            p r e v e n t p o t e n t i a l l y hazardous m ig r a tio n s by
            s p e c t a t o r s . Each s e c t i o n o f the ground has i t s
                                                                                  tt
            own l i m i t o f s a f e c a p a c i t y ( s e e Chapter 16) . . .
     which works out how you work o u t the c a p a c i t y -
                                                                                      35
                                                                            A. BUTLER

            " . . . . and a major m ig ra tio n can c a u s e dangerous
            o v ercrow d in g. Each s e c t i o n o f th e ground, fo r
            exam ple, each end or s i d e , sh o u ld be s e l f -
            c o n ta in e d w ith i t s own e n t r a n c e s , e x i t s and
            to ilet/refresh m en t f a c i l i t i e s .      For s o c c e r grounds
            in p a r t i c u l a r th e r e should be no a c c e s s from one
            such major s e c t i o n to a n o th e r , e x c e p t in an
            em ergency."
    And i t g o e s on about greyhound r a c i n g .            Did you
    c o n s i d e r the a p p l i c a t i o n o f th a t paragraph to the
    l a y o u t o f th e Leppings Lane end a t th e H illsb o r o u g h
    Stadium, Mr. B u tle r ? - A. At what t im e , s i r .
Q. A fte r you had been appointed in 1986 - S h e f f i e l d C ity
   C ouncil had been appointed as r e s p o n s i b l e fo r the
   S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e . - A. Are you r e f e r r i n g to a t the
   time o f the 1986 in s p e c t i o n ?
Q. Then and a f t e r th a t? - A. Up to what d a t e , s i r .
Q. To the d a te o f the d i s a s t e r ? - A. Hot d i r e c t l y , s i n c e
   t h e r e had been r e c e n t works c a r r i e d o u t on th a t t e r r a c e
   in 1985, where both c o l l e a g u e s o f mine and a l l o th e r
   members o f th e Working Party had been p r e s e n t to
   d i s c u s s th e e f f e c t i v e n e s s and the i n s t a l l a t i o n o f th ose
   works, and p a r t i c u l a r l y the need f o r t h o s e works was
   p r im a r ily from th e P o l i c e .
Q. Does t h a t mean t h a t your c o l l e a g u e s a u t o m a t i c a l l y did
   what the P o l i c e asked w ithout r e f e r e n c e to the Green
   Guide? - A. I d id n o t i n f e r th a t and c e r t a i n l y did not
   mean t h a t in any answer th a t I have g i v e n to you, s i r .
Q. Did anybody i n t h e C ity C ou n cil, as f a r as you know,
   c o n s i d e r the a p p l i c a t i o n o f t h i s paragraph, 101, to the
   new l a y o u t on t h e te r r a c e ? - A. I b e l i e v e th a t a l l
   members o f th e Working Party would have c o n sid ered th a t
   a t the time t h a t th o s e d e t a i l s were put in f r o n t o f the
   Working P a r ty .
Q. And a l l members o f the Working Party i n c l u d e a
   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f the F ire S e r v i c e , i s t h a t r i g h t ? - A.*
   The P o l i c e , F i r e , Local A u th o r ity , and a t th a t time the?
   County C o u n c il.
Q. When you became in v o lv e d y o u r s e l f were you aware o f any
   r e p o r t or comment by any o f th ose p e o p le or
   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s t h a t the new la y o u t r e q u ir e d a new
   a ss e ssm e n t o f s a f e ca p a c ity ? - A. No, s i r , and nobody
   r ep o rted to me e i t h e r a t th a t time o r subsequent to i t ,
   up t o and ind eed a f t e r the time o f th e d i s a s t e r , th a t
   the numbers which were s p e c i f i e d were a c t u a l l y more
   than what c o u ld s a f e l y be s u s t a in e d w i t h i n th ose a r e a s .


                                                                                      *
                                                                                        74
                                                                              A. BUTLER


                      Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:
Q. Mr. B u t l e r , i t f o l l o w s from t h a t t h a t you always b e l i e v e d
   t h a t s p e c t a t o r s would e n t e r through the t u r n s t i l e s ? - A.
   Y es, s i r .
Q. T h e r e fo r e t h a t no-on e e v er s u g g e s t e d to you t h a t
   s p e c t a t o r s m ight en ter, through a g a t e such a s Gate C? -
   A. C e r t a in ly n o t , s i r .
Q. By no-one I mean no-one from the C o u n c il, the County
   C o u n c il , the C it y C o u n c il, th e P o l i c e A u t h o r it y , th e Fite
   A u th o r it y and, as they might have done i f they had chosen
   s o t o do, th e c l u b , Dr. Eastwood.               A b s o lu t e ly no-one? -
   A. A b s o lu t e ly n o - o n e , s i r .
Q. I f anyone had known o f t h a t p o s s i b i l i t y would you have
   e x p e c te d such a p o s s i b i l i t y to be made known a t the
   ■ e e t i n g s o f t h e O f f i c e r Working Party? - A. Very much s o ,
   sir .
Q. Had such a p o s s i b i l i t y been made known, i s i t a m atter
   t h a t you th in k you would have been i n t e r e s t e d i n i n terms
   o f ground s a f e t y ? - A. Y es.
Q. Were you aware, t h a t i s , you, Arthur B u t l e r t o your
   i n d i v i d u a l know ledge, were you aware th e r e was any r i s k
   o f overcrow ding on the Leppings Lane t e r r a c e s ? - A. No,
   sir.
Q. Or any r i s k o f a b a r r i e r b ein g damaged in th e way t h a t i t
   i s understood occurred? - A. No, s i r .
Q. Or any r i s k o f l e t h a l c r u sh in g on th o s e t e r r a c e s ? - A.
   No, s i r .
Q. I f anyone e l s e had known o f such a r i s k would you exp ect
   t o have been t o l d about i t a t th e O f f i c e r Working Party
   m eetin gs? - A. I c e r t a i n l y would h a v e , s i r .
Q. Had t h a t o ccu rred i s t h a t something again you would have
   had an i n t e r e s t in in terms o f ground s a f e t y ? - A. Very
   much s o , s i r .
Q. Would you have wanted t o ta k e a c t i o n about such m atters?
   - A. Very much s o .
Q.    Were you aware b e f o r e th e 15th o f A p r i l , 1989, o f any
     d e f e c t , fla w , c a l l i t what you w i l l , a f f e c t i n g t h e S a fe t y
     C e r t i f i c a t e ? - A. No, s i r .
Q.    Had you been aware o f any such would you have wanted any
     a c t i o n t o be taken about i t ? - A. Y es, s i r .
                                                                                    75

                                                                         D. J . LOCK

Q. P rio r to the d i s a s t e r had anyone ever su g g ested to you
   t h a t he could fo r e s e e a r i s k o f death by crushing in the •
   Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I am not q u i t e s u r e .                       I t is
   r in g in g a b e l l that somebody s a i d something about
   c r u s h in g , not in those p a r t i c u l a r t e r r a c e s but a g a i n s t
   the fe n c e s g e n e r a l ly around the ground.
Q. You were worried about the p erim eter fences? - A. Yes.
Q. I know what you may have in mind.                Do you remember th a t
   the c lu b r e c e iv e d a l e t t e r from somebody who had in v en ted
   a system of e x p l o s iv e b o l t s a t the bottom of the^
   p erim eter fence so that they cou ld be dropped q u ick ly i f
   an emergency occurred? - A. Y es, s i r , i t may have been
   that.
Q. In a l l your h i s t o r y o f co n n ectio n w ith the ground have
   you ever known of a c a se where they have had to open the
   e x i t g a t e s to r e l i e v e a crush in g s i t u a t i o n o u t s id e the
   t u r n s t i l e s , apart from t h i s one? - A. No, s i r .
Q. Has anything ever happened - and t h i s i s a very broad
   q u e s t io n - has anything ever happened to cause you to
   exp ect any circum stances in which a d i s a s t e r l i k e t h i s
   could occur? - A. None w hatsoever.              The only thing th at
   ever caused me to worry about a major d i s a s t e r was on an
   o c c a sio n when we had a bomb hoax and we were informed
   th a t a bomb was in the West Stand.             Within seconds o f
   our p u t t in g the emergency ev a cu a tio n procedure in to
   e x i s t e n c e we got a c a l l back to say i t was a h o a x . . .
Q. That i s q u i t e a d i f f e r e n t s o r t   of thing though, i s n ' t i t ?
   - A. I t i s .
Q. That i s an e x p lo s io n you are t a l k i n g about? - A. Yes, but
   th a t i s the only time when I could have fo reseen a r a a l l y
   s e r i o u s i n c id e n t .
Q. C e r ta in ly nothing l i k e t h i s was ever in contemplation? -
   A. No.                            '
            MR. PAYNE:         Thank you, Mr. Lock.
           THE CORONER:            Yes, go ahead.
           MR. ISAACS:        I wasn't go in g to go ahead, s i r .    I
    was going to see i f you would grant rae an in d ulgence.            I
    need to take i n s t r u c t i o n s on some o f the evidence that
    has been g iv en .     In those circum stances I would prefer
    i t i f I could go out of turn, and I think probably
    tomorrow morning having regard to the len gth of time that
    people are l i k e l y to be.         I wonder i f you would grant me
    that indulgence?
                                                                                         81
                                                                    W. W. W. JACKSON

                        Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q. Mr, J a ck so n , can you do som ething which a number o f o th e r
   w i t n e s s e s have attem p ted to d o , and i t i s not t e r r i b l y
   e a s y , and th a t i s t o put y o u r s e l f back t o th e frame o f
   mind and th e s t a t e o f knowledge you had b e f o r e t h i s
   d i s a s t e r occurred and i n t h a t s t a t e o f mind t r y and
   answer t h e s e q u e s t i o n s which I have put to a number o f
   o t h e r w i t n e s s e s who have an im portant r o l e i n th e c a s e .
   Here they a r e .             You have t o l d th e Court a lr e a d y , you
   have mentioned i n t h e c o u r s e o f your e v id e n c e th e S a f e t y
   C e r t i f i c a t e and th e f a c t t h a t th e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e
   a l l o c a t e d v a r io u s c a p a c i t i e s t o d i f f e r e n t p a r t s o f the
   ground.             Did you b e l i e v e y o u r s e l f t h a t th e Leppings Lane
   t e r r a c e was s a f e t o be used t o i t s f u l l c e r t i f i e d
   c a p a c ity ? - A. Y e s, I d i d ,
Q. Did you know t h a t t h e r e had been c a l c u l a t e d an emergency
   e v a c u a tio n time w i t h i n which t h a t t e r r a c e c o u ld s a f e l y be
   c l e a r e d in the e v e n t o f an emergency? - A. I knew t h a t in
   August o f 1988 t h e emergency s e r v i c e s , our O f f i c e r s and
   the ambulance s e r v i c e had met t o d i s c u s s e v a c u a t i o n ,
Q. I suppose th e e x a c t e v a c u a t i o n time would not be
   something you would be d i r e c t l y concerned with? - A, No,
   i t w asn 't,
Q. You were aware t h a t t h a t p o i n t had been co n sid e r e d ? - A.
   Yes,
Q, Did you b e l i e v e i t h a vin g been c o n s id e r e d by_ t h a t group
   o f p e o p l e , i f t h e r e were an emergency then th e Leppings
   Lane t e r r a c e would be a b l e t o be evacuated w it h in th e
   time t h a t they had worked ou t? - A. That i s c o r r e c t , s i r .
Q. T h is group o f p e o p le you mentioned - j u s t t o b r in g i t
   t o g e t h e r , you were aware t h e r e was an O f f i c e r Working
   Party? - A. Y es, I was.
Q, I t was made up o f r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f th e S h e f f i e l d
   M etro p o lita n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il , th e South Y orkshire County
   C o u n c il, the F ir e Brigade and t h e P o l i c e Force? - A. That
   i s correct, s ir .
Q. I t met r e g u l a r ly t o i n s p e c t t h e ground and c o n s id e r a l l
   s a f e t y a s p e c t s o f t h e u se o f th e ground? - A. That i s
   correct, s ir .
Q. Did you know a l s o t h a t under th e S a fe t y C e r t i f i c a t e an
   e n g in e e r had been ap p oin ted who a l s o made annual
   i n s p e c t i o n s o f t h e s t r u c t u r e o f th e ground? - A. Y e s, I
   d id .




                                                                                        1/
                                                                                      82
                                                                  W. W. W. JACKSON

Q. Now from any o f t h o s e so u r c e s d id you e v e r , b e f o r e the
   d i s a s t e r , r e c e i v e any r e p o r t t h a t anyone had s a i d th a t
   they c o u ld f o r e s e e t h a t w ith th e l a y o u t o f th e ground
   t h e r e was a r i s k t h a t th e r e might be a d i s a s t r o u s
   c r u s h in g i n c i d e n t i n th e Leppings Lane te r r a c e ? - A. No,
   s i r , c e r ta in ly n ot.
Q. The n e x t q u e s t i o n i s t h i s : d id you know t h a t i n the
   h i s t o r y o f th e ground th e r e had n ever p r e v i o u s l y been any
   o c c a s i o n when i t had been n e c e s s a r y t o throw open the
   e x i t g a t e s in o r d e r t o r e l i e v e a c r u s h in g d i s a s t e r
   o u t s i d e th e t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. That i s c o r r e c t , s i r .
Q. You d id know th a t ?               We have been t o l d t h a t by th e
   r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f th e c l u b . Had you ev e r r e c e i v e d a
   r e p o r t from any o f t h e s e p eo p le we h ave been m entioning
   which had caused you to ex p e c t any c ir c u m s ta n c e s in which
   a d i s a s t e r l i k e t h i s one on th e Leppings Lane t e r r a c e
   co u ld occur? - A. No, s i r .
Q. F i n a l l y , u n t i l t h a t a fte r n o o n d id you e v e r e n v i s a g e any
   c ir c u m s ta n c e s i n which th ere would be an obvious r i s k o f
   d e a th t o p e o p le on t h a t t e r r a c e from overcrowding? - A. I
   d id n o t , s i r .
Q. Even when you went a lo n g to the C ontrol Box, as you have
   d i s c u s s e d , a t t h a t tim e you s t i l l d i d n ' t r e a l i s e what had
   happened? - A. That i s c o r r e c t , s i r .
Q. Now t h e n ex t t o p i c i s t h i s : Your a t t e n t i o n was drawn by
   Mr. King to th e O p e r a tio n a l Order.            In e f f e c t i t was put
   to you t h a t th e O p e r a tio n a l Order was not concerned w ith
   m a tte r s o f s a f e t y .     You gave your answer to t h a t , but I
   would be g r a t e f u l i f you would am p lify i t a l i t t l e by
   lo o k in g a t some p a r t i c u l a r p a r ts o f th e O p e r a tio n a l
   Order, j u s t as examples o f what you were s a y i n g .                     I am
   not g o in g t o spend to o long on t h i s b ecau se the Jury has
   s e e n q u i t e a l o t o f th e O p eration al Order.            They have
   not looked a t i t from t h i s p o in t o f view on the q u e s t io n s
   you a r e b e in g asked about, whether i t r e f e r r e d to s a f e t y
   m atters.         J u s t a s an example, can you look a t th e very
   f i r s t p a r t o f t h e d e t a i l e d Orders, S e r i a l 1 , Sub-Sector
   1, which i s on our page 19? - A. Y es.
Q. S e r i a l 1 has g o t some n a r r a t i v e and then a t th e bottom o f
   phases 1 and 2 t h e r e i s some heavy t y p e , u n d e r lin e d ,
   which th e Jury h a s looked a t b e fo r e :
           "NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM
           TtiE T E M C fig UITtfoUT C6HSEAT ¥ " A 5ENI6R 6FFICE8T
           (ifCFffy-TgnftfeCfeivEnmilt mmnmr ---------
    Now d o es t h a t p a r t o f the i n s t r u c t i o n have a s a f e t y
    a s p e c t ? - A. Y es, i t d o e s .
                                                                                            -45
                                                                                 B. L. MQr.E


                          C r o ss-E x a m in e d   bv   MR.   PAYNE

Q. Mr. Mole, on b e h a l f o f t h e Chief. C o n s t a b l e , can I ask
   you some q u e s t i o n s p l e a s e which I have a l r e a d y asked o f
   a number o f o t h e r w i t n e s s e s who have g i v e n e v i d e n c e
   from t h e i r v a r i o u s d i f f e r e n t p o i n t s o f view ? I t i s a
   s e r i e s o f q u e s t i o n s and i n order t o answer them you
   need t o do t h i s l i t t l e mental e x e r c i s e .          I want you t o
   p u t y o u r s e l f i n t h e s t a t e o f mind t h a t you were b e f o r e
   t h e d i s a s t e r o c c u r r e d , some time b e f o r e 15th A p r i l
   1989, so t h a t you d id n o t know a l l t h e t e r r i b l e
   in fo r m a tio n t h a t we have now, do you f o l l o w ? - A. Yes.
Q. You were i n t h e s t a t e o f mind which you have s p e n t some
   tim e t h i s morning d e s c r i b i n g in answer t o t h e Coroner
   based on your p r e v i o u s e x p e r ie n c e i n t h e jo b o f
   p o l i c i n g t h e ground. - R ig h t, s i r .
Q. Here we g o . The f i r s t q u e s t i o n , b e f o r e t h e d i s a s t e r
   d id you b e l i e v e t h a t t h e ground was p e r f e c t l y s a f e t o
   be used f o r a f u l l c a p a c i t y crowd? - A. I d id , s i r ,
   yes.
Q. The second q u e s t i o n , d i d you b e l i e v e t h a t i f t h e r e were
   an emergency on t h e Leppings Lane t e r r a c e then t h a t
   t e r r a c e c o u l d be e v a c u a te d w ith in t h e s a f e tim e worked
   o u t by th e F i r e S e r v i c e ? - A. That was my
   u n d ersta n d in g , s i r , y e s .     I b e l i e v e t h a t t h a t was
   correct.
Q. The t h i r d q u e s t i o n , b e f o r e t h e d i s a s t e r d id you e v e r
   hear anyone say t h a t h e c o u ld f o r e s e e t h a t t h e r e was a
   r i s k o f d e a th by c r u s h in g on t h e L eppings Lane t e r r a c e ?
   - A. No, s i r , n o t t o me.
Q. The next question, in all your association with the
    ground and p o l i c i n g matches t h e r e , had you e v e r been in
    a s i t u a t i o n where you had been co m p elled t o throw open
    t h e c o n c e r t i n a e x i t g a t e s i n order t o r e l i e v e a r i s k o f
    c r u sh in g o f p e o p l e o u t s i d e t h e t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. No,
    s i r , I had n o t .
Q. The n e x t q u e s t i o n , i n a l l your a s s o c i a t i o n w it h th e
   ground and a l l t h a t you know about i t a s you have
   d e s c r i b e d t h i s morning, had anything happened which had
   e v e r caused you t o e x p e c t any c ir c u m s ta n c e s i n which a
   d i s a s t e r l i k e t h i s c o u ld occur? - A. No, s i r .         I don't
   th in k a d i s a s t e r l i k e t h i s a t a l l , no.
Q. Finally, this is a different aspect of the same
    q u e s t io n b u t I need t o ask i t fo r i t may have l e g a l
    i m p l i c a t i o n s , d id you f o r e s e e any c ir c u m s ta n c e s in
    which t h e r e would be an o b viou s r i s k o f death o r i n j u r y
                                                                  46

                                                      B. L. MOLE

   to people by crushing on that terrace? - A. I did not
   foresee any circumstance where that would occur, sir,
   but like all large crowds there is always a risk of
   some factor.

Q. Did anyone ever say to you before the disaster that
   there are circumstances in which there would be an
   obvious risk of crushing on the terrace? - A. No, sir.

Q. Several times in the course of those questions I have
   used the word 'anyone' and taking the question beyond
   yourself and asking you whether you had heard anyone
   else say anything to this effect and you have answered
   no. Does that include the members of the Officer
   Working Party? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. The representatives of the Fire Service? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. The engineer? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. The Local Authority? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And representatives of visiting football clubs who had
   attended at other big matches? - A. That is correct,
   sir, yes.

Q. You never heard anyone from any of those groups express
   concern about the possibility of a risk of such a
   disaster? - A. No, sir. The only time I ever had
   concern was with regard to the Kop, which I described
   earlier, where I took positive action and the Club
   responded.

Q. I am going to move on to a different topic now and this
   relates to the responsibility of various parties for
   the systems of capacity and control of the crowds.   You
   have given your evidence based on your recollection of
   events and so really going back over the past decade
   and so have a number of other witnesses relying on
   their memory. The Jury will have observed that there
   are differences of recollection not only between you
   and other witnesses but also between other accounts
   which have been heard. So I am going to try to put
   aside reliance on memory after the event and I am going
   to ask you to look at some documents which were written
   at the time and before anybody knew that any disaster
   like this was going to happen to see whether they help
   to see what the true state of mind was of people at the
   particular times. These are mostly documents with
   which the Jury are already familiar and I hope I will
   be able to take it reasonably shortly.  It will be




                                                            I V
                                                                                   55
                                                                        B. L. MOLE

    Saturday 2nd May, 1987, k i c k - o f f , 3 p.m. So i t i s a
     C c a t e g o r y match, r o u t i n e le a g u e f i x t u r e in May '87?
    - A. Y es.

Q. The P o l i c e O p era tio n a l Order s t a r t s o f f w it h th e
   in fo r m a tio n given a n t i c i p a t e d a tt e n d a n c e , q u i t e modest,
   and then i t s a y s , "Away S u p p o rters" , and under th a t
   h ead in g, number, d e t a i l s a t b r i e f i n g , c o l o u r s , b lu e and
   w h ite , accommodation in th e ground, south pen on
   Leppings Lane t e r r a c e and p a r t o f West Stand,
   in fo rm a tio n regard in g away fa n s g e n e r a l l y good, d e t a i l s
   of travel at b rie fin g .           In f a c t , t h i s i s what you s a i d
   in your e v id e n c e t h i s morning. J u s t e x p l a i n what
   a c t u a l l y i s being c o n te m p la te d here? - A. The south pen
   was to be used fo r th e v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s , and a
   s e g r e g a t e d area o f the West Stand o f s e a t i n g - u s u a l l y
   we used maybe 20 s e a t s from th e south end, l e f t a gap
   fo r o th e r p e o p le , f o r a s t e r i l e a r e a , and then home
   su p p o rters in the o t h e r p a r t o f i t .
Q. J u s t go over to th e n e x t p a g e, which i s 512B. We have
   jumped a l o t o f pages h e r e , we have not g o t th e whole
   O p eration al Order b e c a u se we d o n ' t need i t , but here we
   have g o t S e r i a l 6 , Leppings Lane T errace, Phase 1,
   Before Match - m aintain o r d e r , ensure pens a re f i l l e d
   in accordance w ith i n s t r u c t i o n s from C o n tr o l, occupancy
   o f pens by away/home fa n s w i l l be given a t b r i e f i n g .
   I s t h i s th e kind o f t h in g t h a t you were t a l k i n g about
   in your e v id e n c e t h i s morning? - A. That i s c o r r e c t .
   The i n s t r u c t i o n s from C o n trol would be t h a t i t would
   s t a r t o f f w ith maybe th e so u th pen as t h i s Order
   r e l a t e s t o , and i f t h a t became e x c e s s i v e , as i t were,
   we would d e v e lo p i n t o th e n e x t pen, and th ey would
   r e c e i v e i n s t r u c t i o n s from C ontrol to th a t e f f e c t .
Q. So t h i s i s an example o f th e s e g r e g a t io n system or th e
   a l l o c a t i o n o f pens system b e in g put i n t o e f f e c t ? - A.
   That i s c o r r e c t , s i r , y e s .
Q. At an o rd in a ry lea g u e match? - A. That i s r i g h t , s i r ,
   y es

Q. Thank you very much. You have ex p la in ed t h a t a t sem i­
   f i n a l matches a d i f f e r e n t system was o p erated when i t
   was known th a t the whole o f th e end was t o be d e d ic a te d
   to one p a r t i c u l a r l o t o f fa n s ? - A. That i s r i g h t , s i r .
Q. And in t h a t c a s e th e t e r r a c e was l e f t open fo r a c c e s s
   by fans wherever th ey wanted to go? - A. That i s
   correct, s i r , yes.

Q. That i s your e v id e n c e and you have e x p la in e d t h a t from
   the p o in t o f view o f th e P o l i c e . I want you j u s t to
   spend a moment lo o k in g a t a document to s e e how t h i s
                                                               57


                                         B.L. MOLE
           * **                              m§


Q.    So this is in the run-up, is it, to the     1987 semi-final?
     - A. Coventry v Leeds sir.

Q.    I am guessing at that.   Do you actually know that? - A.
     No, I mean ....

Q. It is possible that’ the teams weren't known yet? - A.
   Looking at the date I would have thought they weren't.
   I would normally have not as much notice as that.
   More like four weeks at the most of when the semi-final
   was. Now whether they played earlier, and in fact it
   was in April the semi-final in 1987, whether they played
   earlier and achieved that position because Coventry
   is mentioned I don't know.

Q. You see it might in fact relate to a league game.

           MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, perhaps I could help.  If
     one looks at the top of the very first memorandum it
     actually says:  "Ground Capacity for possible Semi-final"
     and is the Coventry/Leeds match.  It is in anticipation
     of the Coventry/Leeds semi-final.

            THE WITNESS: I would think sir if it is helpful
     that may be one Club had got through Coventry to the
     point. Leeds had not been determined but was determined
     later.

Q.         MR. PAYNE: Well we are right then.   So we are
     definitely talking about the semi-final here and that
     is the context in which this question is being asked.

           Now go over to 483B and here is the answer a few
     days later from Mr. Strange back to Mrs. Lane.

           Now we have got to bear in mind that Dr. Eastwood
     has given evidence and Dr. Eastwood has disowned most
     of this paragraph 3. Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Saying that it is a misunderstanding or a mistake by
   his Assistant Mr. Strange, but what I want you to do is
   just look at it with me please and then say how it
   squares or not with what in fact the system truly was.
   Do you see at 3:

           "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
           Leppings Lane end as it is providing police
           have gates under West stand openso that
           people can distribute throughout the terrace
           evenly."

     Now what is your comment about that in the light of the
     system which you did in fact operate? - A. That is exactly
     the system I operated sir.
                                                              R.   MARSHALL




- A. Not at a l l and the reason I say that was because
there were f i v e or s i x d i f f e r e n t places that people
could have gone, having entered througn the g a t e s .
They could have gone round the south corner of the west
stand to the area by the p o l i c e control cabin; through
the tunnel; through tne gate in the d ividing wall which
goes across the concourse; i f they had gone through
gate B they would nave gone in to pens 5 and 6, or pen
7; entrance through gate A would have taken them in to
the north stand; and of course there were the two
entrances to the west stand which fed into the
concourse e ith e r s id e of the d iv id in g w all, so there
was not j u s t tne one place that people could have gone
to .
I t i s not d i f f i c u l t to see with hindsight that things
might have been done d i f f e r e n t l y but at the time, in
the l i g h t of the knowledge that you then had, did i t
cross your mind that t h i s was going to cause any risk
of injury to anyone i n s id e the ground? - A. No, s i r .
               Cross-Examined bv HR. ISAACS
Mr. Marshall, ju s t one or two p oints i f I may so I can
see i f we can put t h i s in p e r s p e c tiv e . Following your
experiences in 1988 there was nothing that you learnt
of which caused you to think that the operation had not
been a su ccessfu l one? - A. No, s i r .
Nothing that on the face of i t appeared to be necessary
by way of change to any future arrangement, any
operational order, so far as the p o lic in g of
Hillsborough for a s e m i-f in a l was concerned? - A. No,
sir.
You had been in the ground in 1988 and so far as in tne
ground was concerned, no reason to do anything
d i f f e r e n t l y in 1989? - A. No,s i r .
You were asked by the Coroner about the tran sfer of
people from the terracing at Leppings Lane to the
stand, and as I understand your evidence you say t h i s ,
tnat to see as a p o lic e o f f i c e r people tr a n s fe r r in g ,
being helped up by frien d s or by people they don't
know, but by people who are in the stands, i s not
unusual? - A. That i s r i g h t , s i r .
People often want a b e tte r          view? - A. Yes.
Or they merely want a fr e e stand - and by stand Imean
s i t t i n g down seat - as opposed to a place on the
terraces? - A. That i s         r i g h t , y es.
                          / 0 . P a r tic u la r ly . . . .




                                                                         n
                                            R.   MARSHALL


But p r e - k ic k - o f f , they were not expected to be on the
terraces? - A. No s i r .
Was there any reason fo r that that you were aware o f ,
or did you have any reason why you did not put - that
might be a b e tt e r way o f pu ttin g i t - the o f f i c e r s
onto the terra cin g in 1988 p r e -k ic k -o ff? - A. No, I
cannot v i s u a l i s e a s e r i a l o f o f f i c e r s walking about on
that terrace p r io r to k i c k - o f f . The reason fo r that
i s that the fans were g e n e r a lly expected to fin d th e ir
own p o sitio n s w ith in the te r r a c e . There was a s e r i a l
of o f f i c e r s , or probably more than one s e r i a l , two
o f f i c e r s , in the concourse area behind the terra ces
who had a v a r ie t y o f jobs to f u l f i l .
I w i l l come to th a t in a moment, i f I may, but. can you
t e l l me, you have mentioned that the fans l i k e to find
th eir own p o s i t i o n , I think you said? - A. Yes.
Can you t e l l me whether there i s any methodology for
ensuring that the fans fin d th e ir own p o s i t i o n i n ,
f i r s t o f a l l , a s e m i- f in a l? - A. Well, the is s u e of
overcrowding b a s i c a l l y should not a r is e a t a semi­
f i n a l because the c a p a city o f the ground, as approved
by the Local A u th ority, i s known and only that number
of t i c k e t s have been sold by the clubs involved and,
th erefore, i t i s assumed that the ground w i l l f i l l to
i t s sa fe capacity and, th e r e fo r e , there i s not the
need to a n tic ip a t e overcrowding within the ground
itse lf.
I f you look at the ground as a whole, I think your
lo g ic must be r i g h t , but did you know in 1988 that the
Leppings Lane t e r r a c e s were divided in to segments by
radial fences? - A. Yes s i r .
And the main en tra n ce, I think, to those te r r a c e s i s
through a tunnel which lead s in to the centre two pens?
- A. Whether that i s the main entrance i s again a
matter of op in ion . There are three.
It i s a major entrance? - A. I t i s a major entrance.
You would agree w ith that? - A. Yes.
Perhaps I ought to j u s t deal with that fo r a moment.
The concourse area was in your province? - A. In 1988,
yes.
Do you r e c o l le c t what sig n in g arrangements to d ir e c t
fans were in e x i s t e n c e in the concourse area as the
fans entered through the t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. I have no
r e c o lle c t io n o f t h a t , s i r . I t would not be f a i r or
r e lia b le to say.
                                                                              62




                                                                 R.   W.   CREASER




                F u rth er   C ross-E xam ined   by   MR.   PAYNE:

Q. Mr. C reaser, you have g iv e n e v id e n c e t h i s morning about
   your v i s i t to what we are c a l l i n g the c o n t r o l box where
   you saw S u p erin ten d en t Murray and asked what system was
   to be used to f i l l the p en s, or words to t h a t e f f e c t ? -
   A. Y es, s i r .
0. You have to ld th e ju ry t h a t the e f f e c t o f h i s r e p l y was
   t h a t th e same system as in 1988 was g o in g t o be used and
   fans were going to be l e f t to fin d t h e i r own l e v e l ? - A.
   Yes.          This i s a t r i e d and t r u s te d method which was found
   a c c e p t a b l e the p r e v io u s y ea r and th e r e was an agreement
   th a t th a t was th e a c t i o n which would be ta k en , s i r .
Q. Can you j u s t e x p l a i n to the court what th a t means, "find
   your own le v e l" ?         What i s goin g t o happen? - A. That
   th e fans would not be denied a c c e s s to a l l pens bar one
   and th a t each pen would not be f i l l e d p r o g r e s s i v e l y .
0 . They would not be denied a c c e s s to a l l pens bar o n e, the
    one i s th a t narrow s t r i p , i s i t ? - A. They would be
    allow ed a c c e ss to a l l the pens s im u l t a n e o u s l y .
0 . What does i t mean " fin d your own le v e l" ? - A. W e ll, i t i s
    perhaps not a very apt an a lo g y , but as water i s poured
    i n t o a g l a s s i t w i l l find i t s own l e v e l .
0 . How in f a c t was i t envisaged th a t they were goin g to do
    th at?          How would they f in d t h e i r own l e v e l in the
    d i f f e r e n t pens? - A. I c a n ' t f o l l o w .  They would walk on
    t o the t e r r a c e s and o b v io u sly i f - i t was noted t h e r e was a
    problem with compaction a t a p a r t i c u l a r a r e a , then some
    a c t i o n would be ta k en , but th e r e would be no r e s t r i c t i o n s
    on th e fa n s.        One of the prime reasons fo r which would
    be because t h i s i s what had taken p l a c e the p r e v io u s
    year.
0 . Y es, I s e e .    Of co u rse c r i t i c i s m i s now made of t h i s
    sy stem , as you a p p r e c i a t e .    I would l i k e to ask you
    t h i s , Mr. C reaser: b efore the 1989 event had anyone ever
    s a i d anything t o you to th e e f f e c t th a t t h i s system was
    not safe? - A. No, s i r .
0 . Had you ever heard th a t s a i d by anyone? - A. No, s i r .
Q. Of c o u rse the ground belongs to the S h e f f i e l d 'Wednesday
   F o o tb a ll Club. - A. I t d o e s , s i r .
0 . The layou t o f the pens i s on the t e r r a c e s o f th e c lu b ,
    o b viou sly.      Had you ever heard anybody from the c lu b
    sa y in g t h i s system was not safe? - A. U-o.              I can only
    assume th a t in c o n s u l t a t i o n w ith the c l u b , both the
                                                                                           63




                                                                            R.   W.    CREASER      -



     p o l i c e and th e c lu b deemed i t from e x p e r ie n c e to be a
     s a t i s f a c t o r y method.
Q. Had you known i t to be used on o th e r o c c a s io n a p art from
   1988? - A. Y e s , s i r .
0. Over what p e r io d o f time? - A. I t was c e r t a i n l y used in
   1987 fo r some tim e.                 I am aware th a t d i f f e r e n t
   Commanders would adopt d i f f e r e n t t a c t i c s a t d i f f e r e n t
   matches.          I t i s d i f f i c u l t to say th a t any two p o l i c e
   o p e r a tio n s a r e i d e n t i c a l .  F ootball m a tch es...
0.    The jury i s on ly r e a l l y i n t e r e s t e d in over what p e r io d
     had t h i s system been in u s e . - A. To my knowledge perhaps
     two/two and a h a l f y e a r s .
0.    D isregard in g the 1938 o c c a s io n had anyone ever c r i t i c i s e d
     the system in any c o n t e x t th a t you ev er heard? - A. No,
     sir.
0. A gainst t h a t , and I ought to ask you t h i s : did you
   b e l i e v e y o u r s e l f th a t the system would work? - A.
   C e r ta in ly , s i r .       I f I thought o th e r w is e then I would
   have voiced th o s e o p i n i o n s .
0. Did you b e l i e v e i t was s a f e to l e t the fans f in d                     th eir
   own l e v e l? - A. C e r t a i n l y , s i r .
0. Your a t t e n t i o n has been d i r e c t e d by way o f c o n t r a s t to
   the nature o f th e p o l i c i n g at lea g u e matches and you have
   been asked about the p r a c t i c e o f d i r e c t i n g t h e f a n s to
   p a r t i c u la r pens at lea g u e matches.           I would l i k e you to
   e x p la in to th e ju ry what the d i f f e r e n c e i s between th o se
   league matches and t h e s e b ig o c c a s i o n s in 1988 and 1989
   and the o t h e r s t h a t you mentioned? - A. The d i f f e r e n c e i s
   a matter o f d e g r e e .     The s e m i - f i n a l s were a l l - t i c k e t
   matches.           In th eory we knew e x a c t l y how many p e o p le were
   goin g to come b ecause they were the t i c k e t h o l d e r s . At a
   league match th a t i s almost i n v a r i a b l y not tne c a s e .
0. J u s t take i t in s t a g e s . At t h i s match i t was an a l l -
   t i c k e t match? - A. That i s c o r r e c t , s i r .
0.    The jury w i l l hear in due c o u r s e , and I th in k i t has
     already been mentioned th a t t h i s p a r t i c u l a r s e c t i o n , the
     t e r r a c e , has g o t a p a r t i c u l a r s a f e c a p a c i t y a l l o c a t e d to
     i t and the ju ry w i l l hear th a t i t i s in the S a f e t y
     C e r t i f i c a t e , th a t a p a r t i c u l a r number a p p l i e s t o the
     whole o f the t e r r a c e .           When i t i s an a l l - t i c k e t match, I
     suppose i t f o l l o w s th a t th at number of t i c k e t s would be
     sold? - A. That number would be p r i n t e d .                        It d o esn 't
     fo llo w th a t a l l the t i c k e t s would be s o l d .
0.   But no more would be available for sale? -                           A. No,       sir.


                                                                                           X9
                                                                        B. D.MURRAY

Are th o s e th e m a tte r s which you f e l t worthy o f r e c o r d in g
a f t e r th e e v e n t and a f t e r th e b r i e f i n g s which you had
r e c e i v e d from o th e r O f f i c e r s ? - A. They were th e m atters
t h a t r e a l l y a f f e c t e d o th e r d e p a r tm e n ts, other than th e
su b -d iv isio n .         I t h i n k I have a lr e a d y sa id t h e r e t h a t
a p a r t from th e l o c a l l e s s o n s , t h e r e were a l s o t h e s e we
sh o u ld ad d ress our minds t o .
I want to ask you a s e r i e s o f q u e s t i o n s .          F i r s t as to
th e s t a t e o f mind o f y o u r s e l f b e f o r e th e d i s a s t e r . Do
you fo llo w ?           We a re g o in g back now t o put y o u r s e l f in
th e frame o f mind you were im m ediately b e fo r e the
t e r r i b l e ev en t took p l a c e . Did you b e l i e v e a t t h a t tim e
t h a t th e ground was s a f e to be used f o r i t s f u l l
c e r t i f i e d c a p a c ity ? - A. Y es.
Did you b e l i e v e t h a t i n th e e v e n t o f an emergency on the
Leppings Lane t e r r a c e , t h a t t e r r a c e c o u ld be s a f e l y
evacuated? - A. Y es, I d i d .
F o llo w in g th e 1987 s e m i - f i n a l and th e 1988 s e m i - f i n a l ,
w e r e y o u aware o f any r e p o r t havin g been made by anyone,
meaning from th e O f f i c e r Working P arty or the ground
s a f e t y e n g in e e r , or e i t h e r o f th e f o o t b a l l c l u b s who
a t t e n d e d , or t h e i r management, were you aware o f any
r e p o r t from th o s e p e o p le to warn you o f the r i s k o f
s e r i o u s overcrowding on th e Leppings Lane te r r a c e s ? - A.
No, s i r .
Did anyone from t h a t group o f p e o p le or the F o o t b a l l
A s s o c i a t i o n or anyone e l s e , make any adverse comment
about the system o f p o l i c i n g which was used i n 1987 and
1988? - A. Not th a t I am aware o f , s i r .
L ik e w is e , a f t e r t h o s e s e m i - f i n a l s or a t any tim e b e fo r e
th e d i s a s t e r were you aware o f any c r i t i c i s s b ein g made
by any o f th o s e p e o p le t o t h e e f f e c t t h a t the la y o u t o f
t h e ground was n o t s a f e ? - A. No, s i r .
Did you y o u r s e l f b e l i e v e t h a t th e p o l i c i n g system which
had been used in 1987 and 1988 had produced a s u c c e s s f u l
r e s u l t ? - A. I had c e r t a i n l y se e n i t i n 1988 and y e s , i t
was s u c c e s s f u l .
Did you b e l i e v e i t was s a f e t o f o l l o w th e same system in
1989? - A. I th in k i t was ob viou s t o f o l l o w th e same
sy stem because o f th e a u th o r s o f i t .
Now come to th e e v e n t i t s e l f p l e a s e .      At the tim e o f the
f i r s t order o f th e o p en in g o f th e g a t e s , which in c lu d e d
th e opening o f Gate C, a t t h a t tim e was i t obvious to you
t h e r e was a r i s k o f i n j u r y by c r u s h in g to people in pens
3 and 4? - A. I th in k what I had t o do was r e l y on the
e x p e r ie n c e o f th e O f f i c e r s who were out th e r e . There
                                                                                            18

                                                                              B. D.MURRAY

     was S u p e r in te n d e n t M a rsh a ll. There were a l s o O f f i c e r s
     who p o l i c e d t h a t area o f Leppings Lane every week, every
     match.        I c o u ld n o t s e e what was happening.       I had to
     take heed o f t h e i r demands, t h e i r a d v i c e and t h e i r
     req u irem en ts and t h a t i s what I d i d .
Q. From your p o s i t i o n i n th e C ontrol Room, w ith th e view you
   had from th e C o n tr o l Room, and th e t e l e v i s i o n s c r e e n s you
   had w it h i n th e room, was i t ob viou s to you th e r e was a
   risk    o f i n j u r y t o p e o p le i n th o s e pens a t t h a t time? - A.
   In pens 3 and 4?
Q. Y es,       a t th e time o f the opening o f t h e g a te s ? - A. No.
Q. Here          i s a q u e s t i o n which I have t o ask you:            were you
   i n d i f f e r e n t t o th e r i s k o f in ju r y t o p e o p le     in pens 3 and
   4? - A. A b s o lu t e ly n o t , s i r , no.
Q. One l a s t m atter o f f a c t , p l e a s e . Within th e C ontrol Box
   one o f th e s c r e e n s showed you a view o f th e Leppings Lane
   approach and L eppings Lane t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. Y es, s i r .
Q. You have been asked about whether you saw c e r t a i n
   I n s p e c t o r s a t a l a t e r s t a g e when, a f t e r th e d i s a s t e r had
   taken p l a c e , you went round to th e back o f th e stand t o
   t r y and h e l p r e l i e v e th e p r e s s u r e from th e back.              I want
   to ask you about t h o s e I n s p e c t o r s a t a s l i g h t l y e a r l i e r
   s t a g e , a t a time b e f o r e th e g a t e s were ordered to be
   opened.            Did you s e e a t t h a t tim e o u t s i d e th e ground a
   number o f I n s p e c t o r s who were a tt e m p tin g t o d e a l w ith the
   c o n g e s t io n t h a t had b u i l t up? -A. I do n o t th in k I saw
   any p a r t i c u l a r O f f i c e r who I c o u ld i d e n t i f y o u t s i d e the
   ground.
          MR. ISAACS:              Do you want t o pause now, s i r , b e fo r e
     I start?
            THE CORONER:            Y es, very w e l l .
                                ( Short adjournment)
                        Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:
Q. Mr. Murray, I would l i k e t o ask you q u e s t io n s and s p l i t
   up the q u e s t io n s I am g o in g to ask you i n t o a number o f
   s e c t i o n s i n th e way t h a t Mr. Payne has been doing
   throughout th e c o u r s e o f th e s e I n q u e s t s .           I f I c o u ld
   s t a r t o f f w ith your e x p e r i e n c e , p l e a s e , and p a r t i c u l a r l y
   your e x p e r ie n c e o f c o n t r o l l i n g f o o t b a l l games a t
   H ills b o r o u g h .   You t o l d us you s t a r t e d a few weeks
   b e fo r e th e 1988 s e m i - f i n a l ? -A. That i s c o r r e c t .
Q. You s t a r t e d t h e r e i n the C ontrol Box? - A. Y es, I d id .



                                                                                         tv
                                                                                              ' i5 8

                                                                            R- L. GREENWOOD

     S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e i n f o r c e f o r t h e ground? - A. In my
     tim e a t t h a t D i v i s i o n I knew t h e r e was a S a f e t y
     C e r t if ic a t e in fo r c e .
Q. Did you know t h a t th e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e in c lu d e d
   c a p a c i t i e s which have been worked o u t f o r each s e p a r a t e
   p a r t o f t h e ground? - A. Y es.
Q. You o b v i o u s ly knew a f t e r t h e 1981 e p is o d e t h a t th e
   t e r r a c e had been d i v id e d up i n t o p e n s, as we have heard
   during th e In q u est? - A. Y es.
Q. And fu r t h e r s u b d iv id e d i n 1985? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you b e l i e v e t h a t t h e p u rp o se o f t h e in t r o d u c t i o n o f
   t h o s e pens had been t o p r e v e n t any r e p e t i t i o n o f th e
   1981 e p iso d e ? - A. That was my understanding l a t e r ,
   yes.
Q. A lso t o a s s i s t t h e P o l i c e i n t h e s e g r e g a t io n o f
   d i f f e r e n t groups o f s u p p o r t e r s ? - A. Yes.
Q. So f a r as you knew s i n c e t h o s e pens had been in tr o d u c e d
   had th e r e been any r e p e t i t i o n o f t h e 1981 problem? - A.
   No, t h e r e h a d n ' t .
Q. Mr. Greenwood, I a p p r e c i a t e t h e s e q u e s t io n s are p r e t t y
   ob viou s but I need t o j u s t g e t on t h e record your own
   knowledge. Did you know t h a t t h e ground was r e g u l a r l y
   in s p e c t e d by r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e O f f i c e r Working
   P arty as i t was c a l l e d ? - A. Y es.
Q. Did you know t h a t an e n g i n e e r was appointed under t h e
   S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e who made r e g u l a r i n s p e c t i o n s o f t h e
   ground? - A. Yes, I knew Dr. Eastwood.
Q. And produced S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s ? - A. Yes, I had met
   Dr. Eastwood.
Q. Had any o f t h e s e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s — and indeed I w i l l
   make i t a v ery wide q u e s t i o n — had anyone ev er s a i d t o
   you over t h e p e r i o d t h a t we a r e t a l k i n g about, t h a t i s
   th e te n y e a r s le a d in g up t o t h e d i s a s t e r , t h a t th e
   i n tr o d u c tio n o f t h e s e pens had made any d i f f e r e n c e t o
   th e s a f e c a p a c i t y o f t h e t e r r a c e ? - A. No, no.
Q. In consequence d id you, l i k e ev eryon e e l s e , b e l i e v e
   b e fo r e th e d i s a s t e r t h a t t h e Leppings Lane t e r r a c e was
   s a f e t o be o ccu p ied by t h e c e r t i f i e d c a p a c i t y crowd?
Q.             THE CORONER: Can you j u s t answer th e q u e s t io n i n
     r e s p e c t o f your own knowledge? - A. Yes, I b e l i e v e d t h e
     t e r r a c e s t o be s a f e .



                                                                                      Vf
                                                                                                '60

                                                                              R.   L.   GREENWOOD




          THE CORONER: F i n i s h t h e q u e s t io n and th e n l e t me
     say a word b e f o r e you answer.
Q.        MR. PAYNE:           I n d iffe r e n t to a r isk o f in ju ry to
     sp ectators?
Q.             THE CORONER:         Mr. Greenwood, t h i s i s a n o th e r
     q u e s t io n which may te n d t o in c r im i n a t e you and s o you
     do n ot have t o answer i t i f you do not w is h . - A. No.
     The answer t o t h a t i s I was n e v e r , and n ev er would b e ,
     even now as an o v e r a l l Commander o f a f o o t b a l l ground,
     i n d i f f e r e n t t o any r i s k t o t h e s a f e t y o f p e o p l e who go
     i n t o such a stad iu m .
                           Cross-Examined           bv MR. ISAACS

Q. Mr. Greenwood, I j u s t want t o ask you about t h e
   b r i e f i n g s t h a t to o k p l a c e on t h e Saturday and on t h e
   Friday b e f o r e t h a t .       The F rid a y b r i e f i n g g i v e n by Mr.
   D uckenfield was a b r i e f i n g t o whom? - A. That was a
   b r i e f i n g as I r e c a l l t o I n s p e c t o r s , C hief I n s p e c t o r s
   and S u p e r in te n d e n ts .
Q. Was t h a t b r i e f i n g f o l l o w e d by any o th er b r i e f i n g t o t h e
   same group o f p e o p le ? - A. Yes, t h e Friday b r i e f i n g I
   took my I n s p e c t o r s and C h ie f I n s p e c to r s on one s i d e and
   t a lk e d t o them about problems and I th in k l i k e w i s e th e
   o th e r S u p e r in te n d e n ts d id a s w e l l .
Q. On t h e Saturday a s i m i l a r form at e x c e p t t h a t t h i s tim e
   Mr. D u ck en field spoke t o a l l t h e men? - A. Y es, he
   spoke t o everybody who was concerned w ith t h e f o o t b a l l
   o p e r a tio n a t H ills b o r o u g h .
Q. A fte r t h a t b r i e f i n g t o a l l t h e men were t h e r e th e n
   o th e r b r i e f i n g s ? - A. Yes, a s I s a i d in terms o f my
   p a r t i c u l a r p a r t t h e r e , t h e r e were I n s p e c to r s and I
   th in k two C h ief I n s p e c t o r s who had not been a t t h e
   Friday b r i e f i n g and s o I spoke t o them. There were
   oth er b r i e f i n g s . The normal p r a c t i s e a t H ills b o r o u g h
   i s t h a t th e I n s p e c t o r s or t h e S ergean ts or b o th w i l l
   b r i e f t h e i r s e r i a l s on t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s f o r t h e
   day.
Q. I th in k t h a t on t h e Saturday a f t e r Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d ' s
   b r i e f i n g t o a l l t h e men, Mr. Murray gave a b r i e f i n g t o
   a l l t h e men? - A. Yes, he d id in d eed .
Q. Then th e men s p l i t up i n t o t h e groups you have t a l k e d
   about? - A. No, t h e r e was a f u r t h e r b r i e f i n g .           There
   was an i n t e l l i g e n c e b r i e f i n g I th in k by D e t e c t i v e
   Sergeant Charlesworth on d e a l i n g w ith t h e s u p p o r t e r s .
                                                                                             7

                                                                              G. SYKES




                           C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR. PAVNE
            /


    Q. In sp ecto r Sykes, you mentioned in the co u r se o f your
       evid en ce yesterd a y th a t you, o f co u rse, atten d ed the
       b r i e f i n g in the stadium on the morning o f the match? -
B      A. Yes, s i r .
    Q. And a l s o you mentioned th a t you were r e s p o n s ib le for
       s e v e r a l s e r i a l s who were p osted o u ts id e th e t u r n s t i l e s ?
       - A. That i s c o r r e c t .
    Q. And each o f th ose s e r i a l s was under the comnand o f a
       Sergeant? - A. Y es, s i r .
    Q. There were i n s t r u c t i o n s in the O perational Order, which
       the Jury has s e e n , as to what the d u t i e s o f those
       various s e r i a l s were? - A. Yes, th a t i s c o r r e c t .
    Q. You b r i e f e d your own d e t a i l as t o what t h e i r p a r t i c u la r
       fu n c tio n s were? - A. Yes, s i r , about 11 o * clo ck that
       morning.
    Q. You a l s o to ld the Jury th a t as fa r as you were
       concerned t h i s was exp ected t o be a rep ea t o f the 1988
D      carbon copy match? - A. Yes, v i r t u a l l y .
    Q. And t h a t broadly sp eaking th e same procedures were
       going to be used? - A. E xactly the same.
    Q. And 1988 had gone o f f , had been a s u c c e s s f u l event? -
       A. Yes, no problems.
    Q. You were e x p e c tin g th a t the 1989 event would fo llo w tne
       same pattern ? - A. That was my i n t e n t i o n , or my
       an ticip a tio n .
    Q. Q uite, th e r e f o r e a t the t i n e o f th e s e b r i e f i n g s did i t
       even c r o s s your mind th a t l a t e r on th at a ftern o o n ,
       s h o r t ly before th e match was due to kick o f f , there was
       any r i s k th a t such a la r g e crowd would assemble o u ts id e
       the t u r n s t i l e s t h a t i t would cause a r i s k o f crushing
       to p eop le o u ts id e the t u r n s t i l e s ? Did i t even c ro ss
       your mind th a t t h e r e was such a . . . . - A. No, s i r , I
       had no inform ation and no i n t e l l i g e n c e t h a t they would
       descend a t the time and in the manner th a t they d id .
    Q. No, and I suppose i t f o llo w s from th a t i t c e r t a i n l y was
       not obvious to you th a t th ere was a r is k t h a t such an
       overcrowding event would occu r, as did a c t u a l l y happen?
       - A. Ho.
    Q. You d id n * t a c t u a l l y , from th e p o s i t i o n you were in you
       saw Gate A opened and went over to s e e what had
       happened? - A. Yes, th a t i s c o r r e c t .




                                                                                                 at
                                                                       G. McKAY


oood n atured, although I have to say th ere were la r g e
numbers o f p eople who were the worse for d n n * a r r i v i n g
We are t a l k in g about 1988? - A. 1933, y e s .               A rrivin g in
s u c h numbers th a t e x c lu d in g them would have heen rig._             _
out of the q u e s t io n .     You wouldn t have had the ^npower
to d e a l with th ose numbers.          N e v e r tn e le s s tney wen.
and th ere was no problem.
Now on the 15th o f A p r il , 1989, you were a ssig n ed to the
same ta s k , so to speak? - A. Yes.
As fa r as you were concerned i t was a d u p l i c a t e , i f I can
use th a t word, o f the 1983 s i t u a t i o n ? - A. Yes, th a t s
tr u e .  I t made s e n s e to u s e e x a c t l y t h e 3 a m e j a c | i s s
th at had Wotked so w e l l the year b e f o r e .            Everythin,,
appeared to be the same. There were no p erceiv ed
problems th a t could a r i s e and w h e r e there were problems
you made refin em en ts which would a d ju s t to tnose
problems.        C e r ta in ly my approach to my                           f ” ?on
was changed because we had had so m a n y crimes
to p ick p o ck ets and t h e f t s o f motor v e h i c l e s .

So you upgraded your a t t e n t i o n to th a t r J i      nl v
problem, i s th a t what you are saying? - A. I c e r t a i n l y
d id n ’ t have more men but I changed the way I used tnem.
J u st so we can be a b s o l u t e l y c l e a r about i t , th f s e men
were there for a s p e c i f i c ta s k , nothing to do w ith
c o n t r o l and in f a c t w e r e presumably d ressed in ordinary
c l o t h i n g , not in p o l i c e c lo th in g ? - A. That s r i g h t .
Eight of the men were forming pickpocket squads.
We have no need to go i n t o how they did i t . - A. I
mention th a t b ecause they were my reason for going bacK
to th a t a rea .      My ex p e r ie n c e of the previous year na _
tended to show th a t that was the area w e r e we were going
to g e t p ick p o ck ets i n , i f at a l l , and i t made sense
me to go back to th a t area at that p a r t i c u l a r time.
 You went to the b r i e f i n g , I presume, l i k e everybody e l s e
 at e le v e n o ' c l o c k ? - A . Y e s .
 Then you s a t about combing the area , but we are not too
 concerned about th a t because you had a very s p e c i f i c
 ta s k .       I think I am r i g h t in saying th a t e v e n tu a lly you
 f i n i s h e d up a t the P o li c e Club and had .some luncn.
 No, I didn t f i n i s h up a t the P o lic e Club Lor luncn.
 I r e a l i s e t h a t , but you went on from t a e r e . -
 was a reason for me to go to the Police Club.                           s ■
 there a few minutes and then went for some luncn in t.i«-
 2 ,y:anasium.




                                                                               %
                                           R.   PURDY




th ere was an aim t h a t they wanted t o g e t i n t o th a t f o o t b a l l
ma£ch . That was the aim o f the su p p o rters t h a t they wanted
to atten d the match and they attem pted t o ach iev e t h a t aim.
P a r t i c u la r l y by doing what? - A. By pushing t o the t u r n s t i l e s
to g e t to the t u r n s t i l e s .
Now then In sp ecto r Purdy j u s t one or two o th er m a tters.
You have t o l d th e jury t h a t you a tten d ed the b r i e f i n g
in the morning and then th e r e was a s u b - b r ie f i n g which
was p r i n c i p a l l y c a r r ie d o u t by I n s p e c to r Sykes? - A. That
i s correct, s i r .
Because of his experience the previous year? - A. Yes sir.

Now a t th a t time when th o s e b r i e f i n g s were taking p la c e
were you aware t h a t an O perational Order had been drawn up
as to the deployment and f u n c t io n s o f the various S e r i a ls ?
- A. Yes s i r .
Did i t occur t o you a t the time t h a t th e s e b r i e f i n g s were
taking p la ce t h a t th ere was any r i s k o f such a huge crowd
assembling s h o r t l y b efo re th e k i c k - o f f causing t h i s
crushing s i t u a t i o n ? - A. No s i r , I th in k I have t o l d the
Court th a t the s i t u a t i o n a t 2 .3 0 I n i f u s t b®y©*«<l I expected i
t o continue i n a manageable f a s h io n but we would be
extremely busy as you would e x p e c t t o be on a match day
and th a t i t would fu n c tio n l i k e t h a t .
Did you think for a aoment that anything like thi* wa*
going to happen? - A. No sir.

I f you had not taken the a c t i o n t h a t you did to i n s t i g a t e
the opening o f Gate C what, from your o b se r v a tio n , would
have been the consequence? - A. I can j u s t say I have had
some 18 months to think about t h a t and I can say a t the time
and I w i l l s t i l l say now t h a t i f I had not taken th a t
a c tio n then p eop le would have been in ju red and I b e l i e v e
k i l l e d a t th ose t u r n s t i l e g a t e s .
So the gate was opened to cope - I am p u ttin g words in to
your mouth but I think t h i s i s ob viou s - th a t i t was
opened to cope w ith the d readful emergency which had arisen?
- a . That is correct sir.

Now   a t th a t time when you were coping w ith t h a t emergency
did   i t occur t o you fo r a moment t h a t by opening the gate
and   l e t t i n g p eop le in t h i s would cause any problem or danger
for   people i n s i d e the ground?
         THE CORONER: The O f f i c e r was n o t i n s i d e the ground.
 He can say what he thought but i t w on't a c t u a l l y h elp us
 because i t does not a c t u a l l y m atter what he thought on
 th a t a sp ect.
                                                                                44



                                                  R.   PURDY



                   MR.   PAYNE:   Q u ite .

                   THE CORONER:      You should not pursue t h a t , I d o n 't
       th in k .
             MR. PAYNE: S i r , I do have in mind th e q u e stio n of
B      what was ob viou s s i r because as you w i l l have in mind in
       due course th e q u e s t io n o f what i s obvious i s something
       which may have t o be addressed f a i r l y and sq u a r e ly .
              THE CORONER: Well i f you could j u s t put i t t o him
       ex ceed in g ly s h o r t l y , was i t obvious to him t h a t opening
       the ga te . . . .
                   MR. PAYNE:     Perhaps I may put i t t h a t way.
    Q. You have g o t th e q u e s t io n , In sp ecto r Purdy.
       to you t h a t b y io p e n in g th e g a te any cru sh in g would occur
       to people i n s i d e the ground? - A. No.
                   MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.

                            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:
D
    Q. In sp ecto r, o b v io u s ly i t was a known f a c t as to how many
       Liverpool p eo p le were is s u e d or how many peop le indeed
       were issu e d w ith t i c k e t s f o r the L iverpool end o f the
       ground. You knew how many were to come through the
       t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. That i s c o r r e c t s i r .
    Q. And you have d e sc r ib e d a sc e n a r io o f a b u ild -u p , a l i t t l e
       sm aller than you thought o r i g i n a l l y , but th e photograph
       a t 2.30 showing th e e x t e n t o f the queueing and a s i t u a t i o n
       th a t you knew was busy but one which was in your mind's
       eye the s o r t o f s i t u a t i o n t h a t you would have to d ea l w ith
       when people turned up t o go in? - A. That i s c o r r e c t s i r .
    Q. And o f course i t i s no s e c r e t t a l k in g in non-emotional
       terms t h a t th e y had o f course a l l come w ith a common
       purpose, namely t o go and s e e a match and t o g e t i n t o
       the ground f o r t h a t purpose? - A. C e r ta in ly s i r , y e s .
    Q. But what you are sa y in g d i f f e r e n t from t h a t i s a d e t e r ­
       mination beyond th e w ish t o g e t in t h a t t h e r e i s an i n t e n t
       to g e t in? - A. You are asking me r e a l l y t o answer what
       i s in the minds o f o t h e r s who are a t the rea r pushing
       forward.
    Q. I am asking you to i n t e r p r e t the movement t h a t you saw,
       the pressure forward, what you were d e s c r ib in g as the
       con tin u in g p r e ss u r e forward? - A. There was a con tin u in g
       pressure forward from the rear which seemed t o me a t the
       fr o n t w ithout regard f o r th ose a t th e f r o n t .
                                                                                 14


                                                                  F. N. GRUNHILL


Q. What I want to know i s during th a t p erio d b efore the
   ev en ts t h a t you have been d w e llin g on in your e v id e n c e ,
   during th a t p eriod d id i t seem to you th a t the
   p rep aration s fo r the a r r i v a l o f th e crowd were f o llo w in g
   a normal pattern? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. Q u ite.      Nothing out o f the ordinary a t a l l ? -A. No.
Q. From th e p o l i c e p o in t o f view , th a t i s what I am asking
   you, from th e p oin t o f view o f the p o l i c e the p o l i c i n g o f
   th e s i t u a t i o n , did i t appear t o you th a t the p rep a ra tio n s
   were proceeding q u i t e normally? - A. From ray s i d e o f i t ,
   from the mounted s i d e o f i t , y e s .
Q. Q uite normally? - A. Y es.
Q. I f someone a t about two o ' c l o c k had s a i d to you            th at in
   f o r t y - f i v e minutes th e r e was goin g to be such a          crush
   th a t p eop le were goin g to be in danger o f t h e i r             liv e s,
   what would you have s a i d a t two o 'c lo c k ? - A. I              didn t
   think i t would be.
Q. At th a t time th ere was no reason to th in k th at anything
   was going t o go wrong a t a l l ? - A. As fa r as I can
   remember - to me t h i s i s e a r l y on?
Q. That i s what I am t a l k i n g ab ou t. - A. I t j u s t seemed to
  . be l i k e a normal f o o t b a l l match.
Q. I want to ask you two o th e r m atter judging by your
   e x p e r ie n c e . The f i r s t i s t h i s , when th ere was a
   t e r r i f i c crush a t th e fr o n t but peop le were s t i l l pushing
   from the back and you were a p p ea lin g to them to e a s e
   back, you have sa id they didn t respond, t h a t ' s r ig h t? -
   A. T h a t's r i g h t .
Q. I want you to compare t h i s w ith your normal e x p e r ie n c e .
   P o l i c i n g b ig crowds depends on c o - o p e r a t io q between the
   crowd and the p o l i c e , d o e s n ' t i t ? - A. We have always
   s a i d s o , in my e x p e r ie n c e o f 30-odd y e a r s , th a t we p o l i c e
   crowds w ith the crow d's c o n s e n t .
Q. How does the behaviour o f t h i s crowd in response to vour
   appeals compare w ith o rd in ary behaviour? - A.                  l l t y.
   always say th e sa n e , s i r , " I t ' s n ot me. I t s n o t ist.
   You cannot make a crowd sto p pushing i f they don’ t want
   to s to p .
Q. T h a t's what happened h e r e , i s i t ? - A. T h a t's what
   happened t h e r e .
Q. On the q u e s t io n of your h orse and the r e a c t io n of your
   horse on t h i s o c c a s i o n , can you t e l l the jury how long
   you have known t h i s p a r t i c u l a r horse? - A. I have had
                                                                                     92




                                                                   K. E. HORSFIELD


    Q. Have you e v e r e x p e r ie n c e d such a cr u sh in g taking
       p l a c e a t th e t u r n s t i l e s b e fo r e ? - A. No, s i r , never.
H   Q. Your response when you saw Gate A was opened was one
       o f r e l i e f you have a lr e a d y t o l d t h e Court? - A. Yes,
       sir.
    Q. Because i t r e l i e v e d t h e cru sh in g p ressu re? - A.
       O utside.
    Q. I f t h a t had not been opened what d id i t appear t o you
       was going t o happen next? - A. When I was stood up
       a g a i n s t th e w a ll b e f o r e I made my way t o th e f r o n t t o
       t r y t o c l o s e t h e g a te I was concerned f o r my own
       s a f e t y and th e s a f e t y o f t h e o th e r p eo p le around me.
       People were going t o g e t s e r i o u s l y in ju r e d u n le s s
       something was done. I went t o t r y t o c l o s e th e g a te
       and I was r e l i e v e d when I saw t h e l a r g e g a t e s open
       and th e crush was e a s e d .
    Q. A l o t o f p eo p le streamed i n t o t h e ground? - A. Yes.
D   Q. Through th e open g a te ? - A. Yes, s i r .
    Q. At t h a t moment d id i t occur t o you by t h e s e people
       going i n t o th e ground. . . .
            THE CORONER:          Mr. Payne, I do not want him t o e x p r e ss
    any o p in io n s . Can you phrase th e q u e s t io n in such a way so
    t h a t i t i s e i t h e r what he observed or what he knows.
    q.             MR. PAYNE: Did     i t c r o s s your mind a t t h a t time
         when th e p eo p le went     in through t h i s open g a te t h a t
         t h i s would cau se any     r i s k o f cru sh in g t o people
         i n s i d e th e ground? -   A. No, s i r . The g a te I saw
         opened was I b e l i e v e   Gate A which le a d s t o th e rear
         o f th e North Stand.        I was unaware t h a t any other
         g a te had been opened       a t t h a t tim e . I j u s t saw one.
     Q. Did i t c r o s s your mind by opening t h e g a t e t h a t would
        cause any cru sh ing i n s i d e t h e ground? - A. No, s i r .
     Q. I t c e r t a i n l y was not obvious t o you? - A. No, s i r .
               THE CORONER:            Enough on t h a t l i n e I th in k . It is
     d i f f i c u l t I a p p r e c ia te but I th in k I have t o be f a i r
     between a l l th e p a r t i e s .       I cannot sto p Mr. King asking
     q u e s t io n s about o p in io n s and then a llo w you t o do so .
          MR. PAYNE: Of c o u r s e , s i r , I a c c e p t your r u lin g but
     you w i l l be c o n s c io u s , as I am c o n s c io u s , t h a t in due




                                                                                          3 1
                                                                                 33
                                                                D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    nature and s e c o n d l y , o f course i t does tend to slow down
    p ro ceed in gs.
           THE CORONER:     Can I j u s t turn to Mr. Is a a c s and
   check?       Are you happy i f we do what we did w ith
   Mr. Murray, which i s to g i v e the reminder i n t e r m i t t e n t l y ,
   j u s t to keep i t in the f o r e f r o n t o f Mr. D u c k e n fie ld 's
   mind?
        MR. ISAACS:             S i r , I am. I f you would s a y , fo r
   example, when the time came when you f e l t i t was
   important, "You are not o b lig e d to answer th a t" , th a t
   would be s u f f i c i e n t fo r my purposes.
            THE CORONER:                As I sa y , we d o n 't want to have
   n e e d le s s r e p e t i t i o n   o f words, i n e f f e c t :
Q. The point i s , Mr. D u ck en field , th a t merely because I have
   not warned you does not n e c e s s a r i l y mean th a t the
   q u estion i s n ot in c r im in a tin g .    I f you p e r c e iv e i t to be
   s o , indeed i f Mr. I s a a c s f e e l s i t i s and he f e e l s i t i s
   unwise f o r you t o answer, he w i l l no doubt r i s e and say
   something. - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. I t i s a p r i v i l e g e which you are e n t i t l e d to e x e r c i s e and
   you must do so i f you think i t i s a p p ro p ria te.
         MR. ISAACS:         S i r , I only wish to s t r e s s again what
   I think my f r i e n d Mr. Manning s a id y e s te r d a y .   The f a c t
   th at a q u e s t io n may have a tendency to in crim in a te does
   not meant t h a t th e answer does.
        THE CORONER:   Indeed, I q u i t e understand t h a t .
   This has always been one o f the problems w ith the ru le:
Q. Now we have e s t a b l i s h e d who you are and th a t you are in
   the South Yorkshire P o l i c e .       I think you w i l l be ab le to
   confirm f o r me th a t you were appointed Chief
   Superintendent i n March 1989? - A. That i s r i g h t , s i r .
Q. Was i t the 27th as fa r as I remember? -A. As fa r as I can
   r e c o l l e c t i t was Easter Monday and I think th a t was the
   27th of March, 1989.
Q. You were i n f a c t taking over Mr. Mole's job? -A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. One of Mr. M ole's task s had been and, in d eed , whoever was
   in th a t s e a t , was H illsborough F o o tb a ll Stadium and the
   running o f matches there? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. Of course by th e 27th of March i t had already been
   decided th a t the s e m i - f i n a l between L iverpool and
                                                                                   34
                                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    Nottingham Forest was g o in g to take p la c e a t H illsborough
    on th e 15th o f A pril? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. You knew th a t because I th in k you had been i n v i t e d to
   attend a planning meeting on th e 22nd o f March? - A. Yes,
   sir.    Mr. Mole, as you have p r e v io u s ly heard, already
   knew o f the arrangements and c a l l e d a planning meeting on
   the 22nd, which he c h a i r e d , and I attended as an
   ob server.
Q. You had p o lic e d a t H illsb o ro u g h p r e v io u s ly but i t was
   q u ite a few years ago, would t h a t be r ig h t? - A. That i s
   p e r f e c t l y tr u e , s i r . I f my memory s e r v e s me c o r r e c t l y I
   was th ere in the l a t t e r p a rt o f 1979 and the e a r ly p a r t
   of 1980.           I was then a C hief In sp ector a t the Hamer ton
   Road S u b -D iv isio n , which i s the S u b -D ivision formerly
   commanded by Mr. Murray, which a c t u a l l y covers the
   ground.           However, a t th a t s t a g e I was merely a Chief
   In sp ector and my r o l e i n f o o t b a l l was l i m i t e d .
Q. J u st so we can g e t t h i s r i g h t , you w eren't th ere in
   1981,were you? - A. No, s i r .                  In 1981 I think I was a t
   A t t e r c l i f f e P o li c e S t a t i o n .
Q. In the in terim between 1980 and 1989, I think you had
   done some f o o t b a l l p o l i c i n g a t the other stadium in
   S h e f f i e l d , i s th a t r ig h t? - A. Yes.       Perhaps I can
   ex p la in i t a l i t t l e more a c c u r a t e l y .   W hilst Comnander
   o f th e A t t e r c l i f f e S u b -D iv isio n i t was not ray d i r e c t
   resp o n sib ility .          Then I l e f t th ere and went to West Bar
   P o li c e S ta tio n as the Deputy D i v i s i o n a l Commander and so
   w h i l s t the S h e f f i e l d U nited F o o tb a ll Ground was in the
   C entral D iv isio n and commanded by the C entral D iv is io n
   Superintendent, I had an i n d i r e c t o v e r a l l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
   because I was the Deputy D i v i s i o n a l Commander.                 On
   o c c a sio n s I would go to the f o o t b a l l ground a t Bramall
   Lane, but I think i t i s f a i r to say th at a t th a t sta g e
   S h e f f i e l d United were in th e Third D iv i s io n .
Q. I f we add a l l th at t o g e t h e r , you have had some ex p e r ie n c e
   o f f o o t b a l l matches, but i t was r e l a t i v e l y lim ited?
   Would th at be a f a i r summary? - A. I think th a t i s f a i r
   to s a y , s i r , y e s .
Q. In any event you were appointed t o your appointment not
   because o f your f o o t b a l l e x p e r ie n c e but because the Chief
   Constable decided you were the r i g h t man to run that
   p a r t ic u la r D iv isio n ? - A. I f I can expand a l i t t l e on
   th a t , s i r . The r o l e o f a Chief Superintendent in the
   South Yorkshire P o l i c e , in g e n e r a l terms they a r e , s h a l l
   we sa y , g e n e r a lly - an over use of the word - they are
   g e n e r a l i s t r o l e s , as opposed to s p e c i a l i s t . If I d efin e
   s p e c i a l i s t as being the Head of CID or the Head of
   T r a f f i c , then they are th e s p e c i a l i s t r o l e s .   However,
                                                                                      35

                                                                D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    in my p a r t i c u la r c a s e , I think th a t lo o k in g a t the r o l e
    of the Commander o f a D i v i s i o n , which i s Hammerton Road,
    then there are many and v a ried t a l e n t s th a t are req u ired .
    I am not w ish in g to promote my own image, fa r from i t ,
    but in d e s c r ib in g th e job s i t u a t i o n i t i s one of
    commanding in the region o f 300 P o l i c e O f f i c e r s , managing
    the p u b lic order s i t u a t i o n o v e r a l l - I mean the Saturday
    n ig h t row diness, the crime s i t u a t i o n , the t r a f f i c
    problems - and b eing something o f a diplom at l i a i s i n g
    w ith the community and com m ittees.
    Now the f o o t b a l l p o l i c i n g r o l e i s only one f a c e t o f a
    v a st array o f d u t i e s and r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and i t i s my
    view th at the C hief C onstable promoted me probably fo r my
    g e n e r a l i s t q u a l i t i e s as opposed to my s p e c i f i c a b i l i t y
    w ith regard t o f o o t b a l l .
Q. You have to ld me you went to the meeting w ith Mr. Mole
   and various o th e r people on the 22nd o f March as an
   observer.    Indeed, Mr. Mole i n v i t e d you because he knew
   you would very soon be in h i s ch air? - A. Yes.
Q. At th a t meeting were the g e n e r a l p r i n c i p l e s o f what was
   going to happen d isc u sse d ?               Can you remember that? - A.
   In f a i r n e s s , s i r , my memory i s a l i t t l e vague.       I can
   probably g i v e you an o u t l i n e as to my r e c o l l e c t i o n .
   Mr. Mole had i n v i t e d a l l th ose a g e n c ie s he con sid ered
   n ecessary to draw to g e th e r in the form o f a p artn ersh ip
   to d r a f t the Order fo r a s u c c e s s f u l o p e r a tio n .   I t was
   j u s t not c o n fin e d t o members o f the P o l i c e S e r v i c e .   My
   r e c o l l e c t i o n was the people from the Transport Department
   were th e r e .          I think probably someone from the B r i t i s h
   R ail P o l i c e , and people o f th a t order, peop le you might
   co n sid e r in th e normal co u rse o f even ts were p er ip h e r a l
   o r g a n is a t io n s , but v i t a l l y important to ensure th at
   everybody who had an input knew e x a c t l y what was going to
   take p la ce on th e day.
Q. I am not too i n t e r e s t e d in the p r e c i s e d e t a i l o f th a t
   m eeting, but a t t h a t m eeting, or subsequently b efo re you
   took over, were you given any - I use the word
   " b r ie f in g ", I d o n ' t l i k e i t , a c t u a l l y - but did you have
   any d i s c u s s i o n s w ith Mr. Mole about the s o r t o f problems
   you might have to fa c e in your command r o l e a t
   Hillsborough?             I r e a l i s e i t w a sn 't the only thing in
   l i f e , but i t was an important e v e n t . - A. We had the
   meeting on th a t day and I think i t f a i r t o say he s e t the
   scene and drew up the p la n s .                 A fte r th a t time we had
   another m eeting, but on t h a t p a r t i c u l a r meeting as fa r as
   I can r e c o l l e c t , we d is c u s s e d many m a tters.          I am so r r y ,
   I cannot bring to mind s p e c i f i c c o n v e r sa tio n s about
   s p e c i f i c problems a t H illsb o ro u g h .           I was g iv en to
   understand th a t the plan was w e l l l a i d , th at the team
   doing i t knew what they were d o in g , i t was a t r i e d and




                                                                                     I 'f -
                                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD

tru sted plan and th a t I would be w e l l served by the
In d iv id u a ls who would be making th e n ecessa ry
arrangements.         Nothing was drawn to my a t t e n t i o n a t th a t
time th a t caused me to th in k th ere were to be any
d iffic u ltie s.
In f a c t we know th a t Mr. Murray and variou s o th er peop le
s e t about working on the O p era tio n a l Order fo r 1989? - A.
Yes, s i r .
Did you have any reason t o assume th a t i t was in any way
d i f f e r e n t - s u b s t a n t i a l l y - I do n o t mean in d e t a i l , but
s u b s t a n t i a l l y , from the p r e v io u s Orders which had been
drawn? - A. No, s i r .                   I th in k on the Wednesday f o llo w in g
my appointment I c a l l e d a m eeting w ith Mr. Murray, Chief
In sp ector B ea le and In s p e c to r S e w e ll .          We had a meeting
in my o f f i c e , the f i n e d e t a i l o f which I cannot remember
other than to say th at b ein g the new man I asked
q u estio n s about the Order, I d i s c u s s e d m atters w ith them
g e n e r a lly and as to p r o g r e s s , and they gave me, in the
l i g h t o f my l im i t e d e x p e r ie n c e o f th a t H illsborough
Order, they assured me t h a t m a tte r s were p r o g r e ss in g
s a t i s f a c t o r i l y and th at t h e r e would be no s u b s t a n t i a l
d ifferen ces.
In due course the Order was put in fr o n t o f you and you
e v e n tu a lly sign ed i t ? - A. Y es. I think probably I made
a couple of adjustm ents, which were minor, a c t u a l l y .                     If
I can d e s c r ib e one o f them w hich, w ith h i n d s i g h t , may not
be a major i s s u e - there are a co u p le a c tu a lly ,.                I had
p rev io u sly worked a t West Bar P o l i c e S t a t io n where we
always had a log fo r e v e n t s and I suggested we should
have a lo g .         Of c o u r s e , not f u l l y a p p r e c ia tin g the
s i t u a t i o n and the con fin ed area i n the Control Box, I
think we subseq u ently found th a t my s u g g e s tio n and my
idea probably w asn't such a good idea because o f the
space d i f f i c u l t i e s .
The other one was that b e a r in g i n mind t h a t on th e day of
the b r i e f i n g o f the 801 P o l i c e O f f i c e r s , fo r the Saturday
match, i t concerned me t h a t i t would n o t be very
p r o f e s s io n a l i f 801 P o l i c e O f f i c e r s a l l a r r iv e d f o r a
b r i e f i n g at 10.00 am and they were j u s t to fin d t h e i r own
p la ce and s i t down.           I t i s a minor m atter, r e a l l y , but I
thought th a t p r o f e s s io n a lis m d i c t a t e d th a t we would
a l l o c a t e a row and we would a l l o c a t e s e a t numbers to
S e r i a l s so th a t when an I n s p e c to r or a Sergeant g o t out
o f t h e i r t r a n s i t from D oncaster or B arn sley, wherever i t
may b e, they would en ter by Gate 0 , they would walk i n t o
the North Stand, they would f i n d t h e i r row and they would
sit.
There were minor th ings but r e a l l y nothing s u b s t a n t i a l .
                                                                                     37

                                                                  D. G. DUCKENFIELD


 . Would I be r i g h t i n s a y in g as f a r as you knew p r i o r t o
   th e match t h e r e were no p a r t i c u l a r problems w ith regard
   t o th e order? - A. No, s i r .
 . The gen eral format? - A. No, s i r .               I was t o l d t h a t th e
   order was a t r i e d and t e s t e d O p era tio n a l Order. I was
   t o l d - and when I say t h i s p l e a s e d o n ' t th in k I am
   moving any r e s p o n s i b i l i t y away from me - i t was a t r i e d
   and t e s t e d o r d e r . I was t o l d t h a t t h e plan was t r i e d
   and t e s t e d and I th in k i t f a i r t o sa y t h a t i t should
   not be changed f o r c h a n g e 's sake and r e a l l y i t i s an
   e s t a b l i s h e d p r a c t i c e . Everybody know th e p r a c t i c e and
   i t works.
Q|. Did you, b ecau se we might as w e l l grasp t h i s now,
    understand what I w i l l c a l l th e ' f i n d your own l e v e l '
    system which was g o in g t o be used i n th e Semi F in a l? -
    A. The d i f f i c u l t y I f i n d w ith t h a t , s i r , i s t h a t I am
    not so sure a t th e tim e p r i o r t o t h e day. There i s a
    degree o f u n c e r t a i n t y i n my mind t h a t I knew what t h a t
    s i t u a t i o n was. As I understood i t , t h e ground had a
    S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e , th e ground had been p a ssed as b ein g
    s a f e by a l l concerned and th e y have s p e c i f i c c a p a c i t i e s
    fo r s p e c i f i c a rea s and I th in k when I r e c a l l th e ' f i n d
    your own l e v e l ' t h e r e was some c o n v e r s a t io n , I th in k
    probably on th e match day. I know Mr. Murray does n ot
    remember i t probably but I thought t h a t somebody had
    s a i d , "Is i t going t o be ' f i n d your own l e v e l ' ? " , as t o
    when th a t occurred or w hat, and I th in k t h a t t h a t was
    on match day.
 . Are you t h in k in g o f Mr. C reaser coming t o th e Control
   Box, i s t h a t what you have g o t i n mind? - A. I t i s
   d i f f i c u l t . One o f th e d i f f i c u l t i e s I f i n d , and I make
   no excuse, i s t h a t w ith t h e p a ss a g e o f time some o f th e
   th in g s I thought were a c c u r a te ten d n o t t o be on
   o ccasion s and so a l l I can say i s t h a t on t h e day in
   q u estion I have a view t h a t somebody s a i d , "Are we
   operating ' f i n d your own l e v e l ' ? "
Q. I take i t t h a t you went round t h e ground a t some p o i n t .
   In f a c t I th in k you p o l i c e d two matches p r i o r t o th e
   Semi F in al but th e y were sm all o n e s . I th in k t h a t i s
   r i g h t , i s i t not? - A. Yes, I th in k on th e f i r s t
   occa sio n , s i r , i t was a Saturday a ftern o o n game w ith
   M illw a ll and I met w ith I n s p e c to r S e w e ll and, as had
   been normal under Mr. Mole, I th in k Mr. Murray was
   probably i n th e C ontrol Box running th e match because
   i t was a match t h a t d i d n ' t a t t r a c t an awful l o t o f
   a t t e n t io n and t h e r e w e r e n 't many f a n s . I d id probably
   what most Commanders do. I p ic k e d up I n s p e c to r S e w e ll
   who was th e ex p e r ie n c e d I n s p e c to r who d e a l t w ith t h e s e
   m atters and s a i d , a s I say l i k e any new boy, "Give me a
                                                                                             38

                                                                         D. G. DQCKENPTET.n


    Cook's to u r , i f you l i k e , o f t h e area" and I d id t h a t
    lo o k in g around th e ground. So I v i s i t e d th e ground and
    walked w ith him on t h a t p a r t i c u l a r Saturday a ftern o o n .
    I th in k a f t e r t h a t t h e r e was a Tuesday even in g match
    w ith Wimbledon but I d i d n ' t p l a y a r o l e in t h a t as
    such. I went t h e r e probably much t h e same as Mr.
    Jackson. I t was a n ig h t match.                 I c o u l d n ' t s e e an
    awful l o t and I s o r t o f observed i t more from a
    s p e c t a t o r ' s p o i n t o f view but c e r t a i n l y popped my head
    in a t v a r io u s p l a c e s . I cannot r e c a l l to o much.
Q. Did you r e a l i s e t h a t Mr. Mole had s p e c i f i c a l l y chosen
   th e S u p erin ten d en ts and a l l o c a t e d them t o jo b s because
   he r e a l i s e d t h a t you y o u r s e l f had l i m i t e d e x p e r ie n c e o f
   H illsb orou gh or d id you not understand th a t ? - A. Yes,
   I d id , s i r , a c t u a l l y . What happened was I th in k even
   by th e tim e o f th e m eeting on t h e 22nd b e f o r e I was
   promoted, t h e th in g I r e c a l l from my own memory i s t h a t
   p eo p le had been chosen t o f i l l command p o s i t i o n s .
   People were f i l l i n g t h o s e p o s i t i o n s and i t was a l l done
   and I looked a t i t .              I suppose a s any new Commander,
   you look a t i t and th in k , "Well, i t has a l l been
   arranged" and I q u e stio n e d him about i t .                 I d o n 't say
   t h a t i n a d i s r e s p e c t f u l way. I s a i d , "You have picked
   a l l t h e s e p e o p l e . What i s th e s i t u a t i o n and why?" and
   he s a i d , "Well, I know th e p e r s o n a l i t i e s , I know t h e i r
   c a p a b i l i t i e s and I have seen them i n a c t i o n " . He s a id
   words t o th e e f f e c t , "With no d i s r e s p e c t t o you, I know
   what th e y can do and where th e y sh o u ld b e " . He s a i d ,
   "I am h e lp in g you o u t by doing th a t " and so I was
   g ra tefu l.
Q. Did you a l s o have an o p p o r tu n ity t o speak t o th e Club
   p e o p le , Mr. Mackrell and Mr. Lock i n p a r t i c u l a r ? P rior
   t o th e match I mean? - A. I am s o r r y , s i r ?
Q. P rio r t o th e match, b e fo r e th e match? - A. Mr. Mole and
   I had an arrangement whereby he would ta k e me t o th e
   Club and in tr o d u c e me t o Mr. Lock and Mr. M ackrell. I
   suppose in a p r o f e s s i o n a l s e n s e , t h a t i s i n p o l i c i n g
   term s, I knew Mr. Lock because he had been a se r v in g
   P o l i c e O f f i c e r although I do n o t th in k we had ever
   worked t o g e t h e r c l o s e l y . Mr. Mole was t o arrange fo r
   me t o go t o th e Club but f o r some reason t h a t meeting,
   p r i o r t o ta k in g o v er, d i d n ' t ta k e p l a c e and I cannot
   th in k why n o t . I mean i t i s one o f t h o s e t h i n g s in
   b u s in e s s sometimes.
Q. You had walked round th e ground w ith I n s p e c to r
   S ew ell? - A. Yes, s i r .




                                                                                        r?
                                                                                          39

                                                                         D, G. DUCKENFIELD


Q. How good an image, i f t h a t i s th e r i g h t word, d id you
   have o f th e geography o f t h e ground? I know you may
   have a very good image o f i t now? - A. Yes.
Q. I want you t o t r y and th in k back t o 15th A p r il 1989? -
   A. I th in k t h a t - how can I put i t i n c o n t e x t ? I t i s
   not a f o o t b a l l ground I have v i s i t e d on r e g u la r
   o c c a s i o n s , s h a l l we s a y , and i f you c o n s id e r i f fo r
   in s ta n c e I might have v i s i t e d th e ground a t t h e o th e r
   end o f town as a Policeman and as a s p e c t a t o r whereas
   a t th e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday ground I th in k i t i s s a f e t o
   say t h a t my v i s i t s were c o n f in e d t o my v i s i t a t th e
   Semi F in a l i n 1980 I th in k i t was and then a f t e r t h a t
   t h a t one to u r round i t .           So, on th e one hand, i f you
   say t o me, do I know th e ground and do I know th e
   f e a t u r e s , I know where p l a c e s are but i f you want t o
   t i e me down t o s p e c i f i c s then I am l i m i t e d .
Q. Would I be r i g h t i n sa y in g you had r e c e i v e d no, in
   P o li c e p a rla n ce, i n t e l l i g e n c e t o i n d i c a t e t h a t t h i s
   match would be any d i f f e r e n t t o p r e v io u s y e a r s or had
   you r e c e iv e d any i n d i c a t i o n t h a t t h e r e would be any
   a l t e r a t i o n , major a l t e r a t i o n s ? - A. Yes. As you may
   know, s i r , we l i a i s e w ith o t h e r P o l i c e F orces and
   ob ta in i n t e l l i g e n c e about f o o t b a l l su p p o rters and we
   did have an i n t e l l i g e n c e document in r e l a t i o n t o th e
   v i s i t i n g f o o t b a l l fa n s but i f I can j u s t , t o be f a i r ,
   c o n fin e my remarks t o m a tters t h a t concern t h i s
   In q u est.
Q. Yes, in d eed . - A. About p u b l i c order m a tters then I
   th in k in f a i r n e s s , s i r , we d i d n ' t r e c e i v e any
   i n t e l l i g e n c e t h a t r e l a t e d t o p u b l ic order m a tters as
   such.
Q. You I th in k made arrangements t o have a b r i e f i n g
   s e s s i o n w ith s e n i o r O f f i c e r s on 14th A p r il , i s th a t
   r ig h t? - A. That i s th e day b e f o r e th e f o o t b a l l match,
   yes, s i r .
Q. I th in k t h a t th a t was a c o n v e n tio n a l t h in g a s w e ll? -
   A. There had been I th in k an a c c e p te d p r a c t i s e and th e
   main reason was t h i s t h a t a t t e n o ' c l o c k on Friday
   morning p r io r t o t h e match i t had been p r a c t i s e t o
   gath er to g e t h e r a l l o f th e s e n i o r O f f i c e r s o f In sp ector
   and above t o s i t them in th e North Stand, a c t u a l l y in
   th e ground, t o l e t them g e t t h e f e e l o f th e p l a c e . The
   reason b ein g i s t h i s ; w h i l s t I have s a i d t h a t Mr. Mole
   had hand picked h i s O f f i c e r s who knew th e ground and
   knew th e p l a c e s t h e r e were o t h e r p eo p le coming along
   who were In s p e c to r s and probably C hief I n s p e c t o r s who
   may not have been s o c o n v e r s a n t . The id ea b e in g th a t
   on th e Friday morning I would g i v e a b r i e f i n g t o them
                                                                                           40
                                                                        D. G- Dnf!KENFTET.n


     and during t h a t b r i e f i n g p o i n t t o , f o r i n s t a n c e , *"That
     i s Leppings Lane end on my l e f t , t h a t i s th e South
     Stand behind me" and p o i n t o u t t h o s e f e a t u r e s . Those
     peop le would have read t h e i r O p era tio n a l Order by t h a t
     time and would know what t h e w r i t t e n word s a i d .
             I t would be p a r t o f my job t o g i v e them an o v e r a l l
     b r i e f i n g , a broad brush p i c t u r e o f th e s i t u a t i o n , and
     then a t th e c o n c lu s io n say t o them, "Ladies and
     gentlemen, walk th e ground, f o r want o f a b e t t e r term,
     go t o your l o c a t i o n s , look a t your a rea s and acquaint
     y o u r s e lv e s w ith them so t h a t tomorrow when you a r r iv e
     a t te n o ’c l o c k a f t e r th e b r i e f i n g s when you have g o t
     your men you know where you are g o in g , you know what
     you are doing and you know th e s i t u a t i o n " . To th a t
     e x t e n t we had l a i d on t r a n s i t vans f o r th o s e people who
     were working in o u t l y i n g a r e a s t o be put i n t o th o se
     vans and be d riven around t o lo o k a t t h e s i t u a t i o n and
     g e t a f e e l o f th e a r e a . That was th e purpose.
            There was j u s t one o th e r p o i n t as w e l l , o f co u rse,
     t h a t i f any one o f th o s e s u p e r v is o r y O f f i c e r s had read
     something in t h e i r order and then having gone t o t h e i r
     p a r t i c u l a r l o c a t i o n t o do t h e i r p o l i c i n g we would have
     a t l e a s t 24 hours t o overcome any d i f f i c u l t i e s th a t
     th ey foresaw .
Q. As a m atter o f i n t e r e s t d id you g e t any feedback t h a t
   req u ired any major changes? - A. I p e r s o n a l ly did n o t,
   sir.
Q. In t h a t b r i e f i n g d id you d i s c u s s a s p e c t s o f s a f e t y w ith
   your s e n i o r O f f i c e r s ? - A. Yes, I d i d , s i r . I have g o t
   a typed b r i e f i n g n o t e . May I r e f e r t o i t ?
Q.   Yes, by a l l means. - A. I am s o r r y , I handed i t t o                  th e
     West Midlands P o l i c e a t th e tim e o f t h e Inquiry.
Q. You have not g o t i t now. - A. The o r i g i n a l i s m issin g
   but i f you have a copy?
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I have g o t i t , s i r . Can you j u s t bear
   w ith me so t h a t I can j u s t g la n c e over i t ?
Q. Yes, c e r t a i n l y , and     remember you do n o t have             t o answer
   any q u e s t io n ou t o f      t h i s b r i e f i n g n o te which may tend
   t o in c r im in a te you?       - A. Yes, s i r . S i r , I am in a
   p o s i t i o n t o comment      upon i t i f you w ish .
                                                                              41
                                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q. What I would l i k e you to do i s to t e l l me, f i r s t of
   a l l , you have alread y t o l d me p a r t l y what your
   o b j e c t i v e was o f having t h i s b r i e f i n g , but what were
   your o b j e c t i v e s w ith regard to t h i s pre-match b r i e f i n g
   on 14th A p r il , and secondly what were your views w ith
   regard to r e s p o n s i b i l i t y towards the p u b lic in general?
   - A. R igh t. I think the s i t u a t i o n , s i r , i s t h i s , that
   anyone who has seen the O perational Order, and the
   th ic k n e ss o f i t , and the inform ation i t c o n t a i n s , must
   be w e ll aware th a t we cannot c a t e r fo r every
   e v e n t u a l i t y and i t i s important fo r me as a Commander
   to s e t out what my o b j e c t i v e s are on the day, so people
   are q u ite c l e a r where we a r e . In th a t r e s p e c t I
   prepared a b r i e f i n g . Now another unusual fe a t u r e i s I'
   typed t h i s b r i e f i n g , because I was new and I wanted to
   g e t i t r i g h t I typed i t out and what have you, so t h i s
   i s the b r i e f i n g I prepared. I went down i t and
   b a s i c a l l y i t was to o u t l i n e , f i r s t o f a l l , the f a c t
   th a t i t was a 54,000 - I am jumping paragraphs which
   are not r e l e v a n t .
Q. Yes, we d o n 't need e v e r y th in g . - A. I t o l d p eople about
   the crowd, how many people we e x p e c te d , d e sc r ib e d to
   them the la y o u t o f the Ground, and I t o l d them about
   e x tr a time being played , the d i f f i c u l t i e s w ith the same
   c o l o u r s . Then I came to what I con sid ered to be a very
   r e le v a n t part and I sa id s p e c i f i c a l l y to them:
           " It i s our i n t e n t i o n today th a t t h i s match w i l l
           take p la c e without any p u b l ic d iso r d e r and we must
           ensure the s a f e t y of the p u b l ic both i n s i d e and
           o u t s id e th e ground and s e g r e g a t e the opposing
           fan s".
   and I ta lk ed about o b s t r u c tio n o f the highway.           I then
   went on to say:
          "I want the p u b lic to be tr e a t e d p roperly but
          th ose who tr a n s g r e s s should be d e a l t w ith firm ly
          but f a i r l y w ith in the law."
    Then, sir, I went on to say:

          "I cannot s t r e s s too h i g h ly the word ' S a f e t y ' .
          This ground w i l l be f u l l to c a p a c ity today and
          some o f you may never have experienced a f o o t b a l l
          match o f t h i s nature b e fo r e
Q. Does i t say "before" there? - A. I am so r r y , no, i t
   d o e s n 't :
          "OUr job i s to ensure the s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s and
          you must make sure you know the escape r o u t e s , the
          problem a r e a s , and th at you are f u l l y conversant
                                                                                      42
                                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD

           w ith your r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s should a c r i s i s a r i s e .
           There w i l l be a tremendous atmosphere w ith in the
           ground but you must not be caught up in t h i s or
           the e v e n ts th a t are taking p la c e on th e f i e l d you
           must remain detached and c l e a r headed a t a l l times
           to respond to e v e n t s ."
    I then went on, s i r , to d i s c u s s m atters g e n e r a l ly and
    p oin t out the in d iv i d u a l r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s o f the S e c to r
   Commanders, th a t i s who was in charge in the Control
   Room, I s a i d th at the Control Room would be commanded
   by Superintendent Murray, and I went on g iv in g
   in form ation , I th in k , th a t has already come b e fo r e t h i s
   Inquest.
Q. Yes. - A. I did make the p o in t th a t ---- I am so r r y ,
   s i r , j u s t bear w ith me a moment. Another, I b e l i e v e ,
   r e le v a n t paragraph i s th a t I s a id :
          "All In s p e c to r s . . . . "
   - and t h i s was on the Saturday b r i e f i n g -
          "All In s p e c to r s who attended b r i e f i n g y e s t e r d a y ,
          th e s e o f f i c e r s w i l l , a t the end of t h i s p a r t i c u la r
          b r i e f i n g , speak to t h e i r r e s p e c t i v e c o n tin g e n ts
          and a d v is e them o f what they expect and o f the
          p a r t i c u l a r problems in t h e i r a rea ."
   I went on to say:
          "Any d i f f i c u l t i e s or any d e c i s i o n s w ith in those
          areas w i l l be taken by
   - and t h i s , s i r , says S e c tio n Superintendent. I think
   i t i s a m is r e p r e s e n ta tio n in the t r a n s c r ib i n g . I t
   r e a l l y should be S ecto r S u p erin ten d en ts, so i t should
   read:
          "Any d i f f i c u l t i e s or any d e c i s i o n s w ith in those
          areas w i l l be taken by S ector S u p erin ten d en ts."
   I then went on to make mention of CID m a tte r s. I
   talked about tr a in tim e s, t r a v e l l i n g arrangements and I
   think a t the bottom of page 5, s i r , I emphasised at
   t h i s p o in t something th a t has probably come out
   p r e v i o u s ly . I sa id :
         "Gentlemen, the order covers most e v e n t u a l i t i e s and
          I c a n ' t in t h i s l im i t e d time cover e v e r y th in g , but
          th ere w i l l be a d d i t io n a l b r i e f i n g s by your
          Supervisory O f f i c e r s and your In sp e c to r s have a
          copy of the o p e r a tio n a l order and are f u l l y
          conversan t w ith what our i n t e n t i o n s are today."
                                                                                      43
                                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    I f i n a l l y s a id to them, s i r , in the f i n a l couple of
    sen ten ces or so:
            "Firm but f a i r p o l i c i n g w ith th e c o r r e c t a t t i t u d e .
            S afety of su p p o rters in t h i s ground i s paramount.
            Nobody g e t s in w ith ou t a t i c k e t .
            Nobody takes a drink or banners i n t o the ground
            and nobody goes in who i s drunk."
    and th at was the c l o s i n g o f my b r i e f i n g , s i r .
Q. I t i s only a very minor p o in t and i t i s not important:
   the paragraph where you say th a t a l l In s p e c to r s who
   attended the b r i e f i n g y e s t e r d a y , th a t presumably was
   included in your b r i e f i n g on the Friday as w e l l , w a sn 't
   i t , but I take i t you changed th e words when you spoke
   i t ? - A. Yes, s i r . What happened was t h i s , th at I had
   a d r a f t and when I gave the b r i e f i n g on the Friday i t
   had to be changed s l i g h t l y and in the t r a n s c r ib in g the
   odd word i s i n c o r r e c t , but i t i s s u b s t a n t i a l l y c o r r e c t .
Q. You used the same form at, but I th in k somewhat
   shortened, on the Saturday, i s th a t r ig h t? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. That was, of co u rse, addressed to the 800-odd people
   who were in the Stadium? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. I think j u s t so th a t we d o n 't m islea d anybody you
   a c t u a l l y l e f t out out one paragraph which d e a l t w ith
   the s a f e t y a sp e c t, d i d n ' t you, in th e Saturday
   b r ie fin g ? Is that r i g h t ?          Doyou want to have a look?
   - A. Which one?
Q. I am not in any se n s e com plaining about i t , i t i s j u s t
   that I d o n 't want to have anym isunderstandings. My
   understanding i s t h a t you did n ot d e a l w ith , I cannot
   s t r e s s too h igh ly the word 'S a fe ty '" ? - A. Are you
   su g g estin g th at I did n ot say th a t on the Saturday?
Q. I am asking you. - A. As fa r as I am concerned, s i r , i t
   i s my view that I s a i d i t . The only d i f f i c u l t y I have
   i s th a t my o r i g i n a l papers were handed in and I make no
   complaint about t h a t , but I have only g o t the
   tran scrib ed versio n and I c a n ' t check back.
Q. I may be wrong. - A. I t i s my view , s i r , th at I . . . .
Q. Yes, you did say i t .        I t i s in the tr a n s c r ib e d v e r s i o n ,
   I beg your pardon, I take i t back. I t i s c e r t a i n l y in
   the tr a n s c r ip tio n anyway. - A. Yes.
                        APPENDIX II



D.N. BOWNES         Sheffield CC      43-44

R.W. CREASER        Insp.   SYP       45

R. MARSHALL         S u p t . SYP     46

L. TUDOR            Spectator         47

SINGLETON           Spectator         48

M. HORROCKS         Spectator         49-50

G.I.   SEDDON       Spectator         34

D. PERRY            Spectator         52

N.M.   SAVAGE       Spectator         53

J.E.   SHREWSBURY   BBC Producer      54-55

J.W. MOTSON         BBC Commentator   56

M. ROBERTSON        Spectator         57

J.L. CASE           Spectator         58

A. DUNCAN           Spectator         59

C. JONES            Spectator         60

M.A. DICKENSON      Spectator         61

A.M. GRIER          Spectator         62

R.E.   SEPHTON      Spectator         63

A. BOOTH            Spectator         64

R.A. KNOWLES        Spectator         65

D.A. LACKEY         Spectator         66

D.A. RICHARDS       Spectator         67

R. JOLLY            Spectator         68-69

J. FITZPATRICK      Spectator         70

G.I.   SEDDON       Spectator         71

R.N. WRIGHT         Spectator         72

S.P.T.   SWEENEY    Spectator         73




                              - 1 -
                   APPENDIX II (page 2)



K.P.   RAWLINSON     Spectator            74-75

D.R. LYCETT          Spectator            76

A.J. BENNETT         Spectator            77
                                                                                       15
                                                                        D, N.‘ BOWNES


Q. Do you f e e l a b l e t o e x p r e s s an o p in io n a s a m a tter o f
   coramonsense about th a t? - A. Y es.
Q. What would your comment be on t h a t b a s i s ? - A. I ta k e the
   view t h a t a l l th e C e r t i f i c a t e c o n d i t i o n s a r e e q u a l l y
   im p o rta n t, as f a r as I can t e l l .
Q. Does i t a f f e c t your mind t h a t th e c a l c u l a t i o n o f t h i s
   c a p a c i t y has g o t a c h a p te r t o i t s e l f i n th e 1986 Green
   Guide and i s a complex-, formula?                         Does th a t a f f e c t your
   mind a s t o th e im portance o f t h i s p a r t i c u l a r m atter? - A.
   W ell, s i r , I draw your a t t e n t i o n t o a l l the o th e r v a r io u s
   c h a p te r s i n th e Green Gi*ide, which c o v e r a l l s o r t s o f
   i s s u e s l i k e e g r e s s , s t a ir w a y s and ramps and what have
   you.           I d o n ' t f e e l competent t o i n d i c a t e to you which
   c o n d i t i o n s o f th e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e are more im portant
   than o t h e r s .
Q. Very w e l l , t h a t ' s your answ er, thank you. Are you a b l e
   t o e x p r e s s an o p i n io n on t h i s p o i n t t h a t when t h e s e
   c a p a c i t i e s have been worked out on the b a s i s o f th e
   g u i d e l i n e s such a s we have looked a t , i n order t o make
   su r e t h e s e c a p a c i t i e s a re n ot exceeded th e r e has to be
   some means o f c o u n tin g th e p e o p le to make su r e t h a t no
   more than th o s e numbers go in? - A. Yes, the S a f e t y
   C e r t i f i c a t e imposes a duty on th e Holder to e n su re th a t
   th o s e c a p a c i t i e s are n ot e x c e e d e d .




                Q. Y es.       So t h e r e o b v i o u s l y
                                                                                     29

                                                                    D. M. BOWNES

           MR. PAYNE:      That would have made a d i f f e r e n c e
    th en , w ouldn't i t , a t th e time o f th e d i s a s t e r ? Gate C
    cou ld not have been opened.

Q. What I want to ask you i s t h i s , and t h i s i s c e r t a i n l y
   not a l i k e m atter.    I f the S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e had, in
   f a c t , been amended, i f i t had been amended to take
   account o f the s u b - d i v i s i o n s by the r a d i a l f e n c e s , then
   the consequence o f th a t would have been th a t the p e o p le
   i n s i d e the ground would have known what the c a p a c i t y o f
   each pen was, w ouldn'V they? Do you want me to put i t
   again? I f the S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e had been amended to
   take account o f the c a p a c i t y o f each pen, i f th a t had
   been done, then t h i s would have g iv e n n o t i c e to the
   peop le running the ground o f what the s a f e number
   c a p a c it y was? - A. Yes.

Q. I t would have done, so th a t a t any time by the co u n tin g
   on the t u r n s t i l e s they would have known how many were
   in each pen and how c l o s e th a t pen was to the c e r t i f i e d
   s a f e ca p a city ? - A. I am s o r r y , I d o n 't f o l l o w t h a t .
   Would you mind r e p e a t in g i t ?

Q. Never mind. This i s the r e le v a n c e and importance o f
   the S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e : once the S a fe t y C e r t i f i c a t e
   f i x e s a number then i t i s a number th a t has got to be
   paid a t t e n t i o n to by the p eo p le who are running the
   ground, i s n ' t i t ? - A. Yes.
Q. So th a t i f the C e r t i f i c a t e had f i x e d numbers fo r the
   p en s, then th a t i s som ething which would have been
   under the n oses o f th o s e who were in charge o f the
   ground?- A. Yes, as i t i s fo r a l l the o th e r c a p a c i t i e s
   s e t in the C e r t i f i c a t e .
Q. And th at was not done, was i t ? - A. In d iv id u a l
   c a p a c i t i e s were not s e t fo r the pens, th a t i s r i g h t .
Q. There i s one l a s t t o p i c th a t I want to ask you about,
   Mr. Bownes, p l e a s e , and th a t r e l a t e s to t h i s idea o f
   v i s u a l im p ressio n , as Mr. B u tle r put i t , up to the
   P o l i c e or Stewards on th e day to s e e by lo o k in g a t i t
   th a t the t e r r a c e was not overcrowded, seemed to be h i s
   id e a , and I want to j u s t ask you a q u e s t io n or two
   about t h a t . Can you go back in the black bundle to
   C274? - A. Yes, I have i t , s i r .
Q. The ground l a y o u t . - A. Yes.
Q. And I am sorry to have to ask you to j u s t s p l i t the
   bundle a g a in , but have open a t the same time the S a fe t y
   C e r t i f i c a t e a t the t a b l e , page 10? - A. Yes, I have
   th at, s ir .
                                                                                         65




                                                                           R.   W.   CREASER
         ✓

         are a n t i c i p a t e d t o a r r i v e , from where, a t what s o r t of
         match, I w i l l be s p e c i f i c , but i f . w e are t a l k in g in the
B        g e n e r a l i t y o f le a g u e m atches, le a g u e matches range at
         H ills b o r o u g h from, as at the moment, the average g a te
         must be 2 3 ,0 0 0 p e o p l e .          There a r e some lea g u e matches
         th a t w i l l a t t r a c t c l o s e to the c a p a c i t y . There have
         been some crowds o f perhaps 1 5 , 0 0 0 .
     Q. How are th e pens used for the s e g r e g a t i o n , th a t i s a l l I
        want t o know? - A. They would be used e x c l u s i v e l y for
        v is it in g fan s. I f the number o f fa n s could be
        accommodated in one pen they would be d i r e c t e d to th a t
        pen.
     0. One l a s t s e p a r a t e t o p i c . The e x p r e s s io n " f u l l " , when a
        pen i s f u l l , has come i n t o your e v id e n c e and I would l i k e
        to ask you a q u e s t io n about t h a t .          You sa id a t one p oin t
        you would go t o a s i d e stand and lo o k a t the pens to
        judge i f they were f u l l ? - A. I might have s a id t h a t .                    I
        would c e r t a i n l y go t o the Uest Stand and look down on the
1}      fa n s .
     0. That i s what you s a i d , I beg your pardon.                      Now wnat I
        want t o know i s t h i s : what was your means of ju d g in g how
        i t was f u l l ? - A. There are no co u n tin g mechanisms, as
        you w i l l a p p r e c i a t e , i n t o each pen.       I t i s d i f f i c u l t to
        d e s c r i b e , i t i s an i n t a n g i b l e . I t i s e x p e r ie n c e o f when
        the ground i s a t a c a p a c it y o f 5 0 , 0 0 0 / 5 2 , 0 0 0 , then th at
        i s the number o f fans th a t occupy t h a t pen.
     Q. Some w i t n e s s e s have g iv e n e v i d e n c e , experien ced f o o t b a l l
        s u p p o r t e r s , t h a t they were in th e c e n t r a l pens a t about
        th ree o ' c l o c k , th a t i s , b e fo r e th e d i s a s t e r o cc u r r e d , or
        w h ile i t was in f a c t o c c u r r in g , and they thought the
        s i t u a t i o n was normal? - A. At t h a t time I could not
        ob serve the pens.               I was o u t s i d e the ground.           So i t may
        or may not have been normal, s i r .
     0 . Are you s a y in g th a t t h i s judgment of when a pen i s f u l l
         depends j u s t e n t i r e l y on the v i s u a l im pression o f the
         person who i s a c t u a l l y look in g a t the pen, the im pression
         i t makes on him? - A. Yes.              There are n o m e c h a n ic a l
         c o u n tin g d e v i c e s so i t has got to be on v i s u a l e v id e n c e ,
         by lo o k in g a t i t .
     0. That w i l l depend to a c e r t a i n e x t e n t on who i t i s that i s
        lo o k in g a t i t a t any p a r t i c u l a r tim e , I suppose?           Uhat
        might look f u l l to one person would not look f u l l to
        another? - A. I c a n ' t say I have known t h i s s i t u a t i o n ,
        but i f - p a r t i c u l a r l y i f I was an I n s p e c to r r e s p o n s ib l e
        fo r the Leppings Lane t e r r a c e s - i f I had radioed a                         ^
        message to the c o n t r o l room and s a i d , "This pen i s f u l l ,
        th en .
                                                                                  11
f




                                                          R. MARSHALL


        Q.   You do not know? - A. No s i r .
        Q.   Is i t r i g h t - and again from your experience I want to
             know t h i s - that fa n s, or a proportion o f fa n s , l i k e
             to stand behind the goal, for whatever reason? - A.
    B        Yes.
        Q.   My question to you i s how           did you ensure, or was i t
             unnecessary in 1988, that            the fans were spread evenly,
             i f I can say t h i s , across       the whole o f the width o f
             the terracing? - A. There            were no p o s i t i v e s t e p s taken
             on my part to ensure that            that happened.
        Q.   As far as you were concerned in 1988, how did you
             a n tic ip a t e that the fans would spread out across the
    C        terracin g, or did that problem not present i t s e l f to
             you? - A. I t was l a r g e ly l e f t to the d i s c r e t i o n o f
             individual fans as to e x a c tly where they wanted to
             stand. There was no means o f a c t u a l ly counting people
             in to the pens that I was aware o f , and the expression
             has been used that fans found th e ir own l e v e l and that
             i s p r e c i s e l y the arrangement that e x i s t e d .
        Q.   It sounds to me as i f , although you have had obviously
    D        quite a b i t o f experience o f f o o t b a l l matches, you
             have had r e l a t i v e l y l i t t l e experience o f s e m i - f i n a l s
             at H illsborough, i s that right? - A. That i s a f a i r
             comment.
        Q.   So i t i s d i f f i c u l t for you to say whether that system
             had worked in the past, would that be tru e, the
             finding o f t h e i r own l e v e ls ? - A. Yes, that was the
             generally accepted means o f d i s t r i b u t i o n o f the fans
    E        on the Leppings Lane terra ce. I was aware o f no
             s p e c i f i c arrangements or requirements that the fans
             should be counted in to pens, or there should be s t r i c t
             monitoring o f overcrowding in any o f the pens.
        Q.   I f you had n o tic e d , and you have already to ld me that
             you had n o t, severe overcrowding in any pen - i t does
             not matter which one - what s t e p s , i f any, were open
             to you to remedy i t in 1988? - A. Well, I think, s i r ,
             with resp ect we are in an area of sp e c u la tio n . I had
             the g r e a t e s t o f d i f f i c u l t y in t e l l i n g when a pen i s
             overcrowded j u s t by looking at i t and I do not think I
             am on my own in that p articu lar area. I f , however,
             there i s some perceived problem which r e a l l y does want
             some s o l u t i o n , then the only way to deal with that
             would be to put a s e r i a l o f p o lic e o f f i c e r s in to a pen
             and get people to move and p h y s ic a lly do th a t , but i t
             i s not an easy task.
        Q.   I said I was coming to the concourse a l i t t l e while
             ago. Did you at any time in 1988 give any orders to -




    H
                                                                      46



                                                  L TUDOR

Q.    Do you remember the teams being announced? - A. Yes.
Q.   You do remember. Was t h i s a t a p o in t i n time that we
     are t a lk in g about now, when you were i n t h i s s o r t o f
     s i t u a t i o n , or was i t afterwards? - A. No, i t was l a t e r
     on. Before the teams were announced I had moved
     fu rth er forward down the te r r a c e to maybe i n between
     the f i r s t and second row o f b a r r i e r s because there was
     that much movement fu rth er back, g e t t i n g thrown about
     q u ite a b i t , th a t I moved fu r th e r forward out o f the
     way o f t h a t , and by the time the teams came out then
     the te r r a c e had f i l l e d up a l o t more.
Q.   But you by t h i s time had s o r t o f moved f a i r l y far to
     the front? - A. Yes.
Q.   At that point i t was crowded you have t o l d me t h i s ,
     that i t was f i l l i n g up a l l the tim e, but were you or
     were not not worried? - A. I was not p a r t i c u l a r l y
     worried in th a t b efore a b ig game there i s o f t e n q u ite
     a b i t o f movement and i t g e t s t i g h t l y packed but
     th in g s tend to s e t t l e down maybe when the crowd fin d s
     i t s l e v e l i n the few minutes a f t e r the k i c k - o f f or
     whatever, and th a t i s what I was e x p e c tin g t o happen.
Q.   Did you remember the p la y ers coming onto the f i e l d ? -
     A. Vaguely.
Q.   Before k i c k - o f f I meant? - A. I c a n ' t r e c a l l taking
     much n o t i c e o f whether the p la y e r s had a warm-up
     e a r l i e r on or n o t .
Q.   Did you see the k i c k - o f f ? — A. I did not take much
     n o t i c e o f the k i c k - o f f . I was more concerned by that
     time with keeping my f e e t .
Q.   What I am tr y in g to do i s I am not asking you whether
     you were so busy watching the match th a t you were not
     looking at anybody e l s e . I am tr y in g t o pin times
     down, do you understand? - A. Yes.
Q.   Did you remember the big surge a t a l l ? - A. No, I
     don't remember any p a r t i c u la r b ig su rg e, no.
Q.   Do you remember any surge which made t h i n g s worse,
     other than th ese l i t t l e ones? I c a l l them l i t t l e ones
     and they may have been q u ite b i g , but a t th a t point
     non-worrying as fa r as you were concerned? - A. Around
     the time that the p la y ers were being announced, and I
     r e c a l l that was q u i t e c l o s e t o the p la y e r s coming out
     onto the p i t c h , i t was g e t t i n g q u i t e crowded down at
     the f r o n t . I t was g e t t i n g very packed and, as I say,
     from that time on I was not r e a l l y taking th a t much
     n o tic e o f what was going on on the p i t c h .
                                                                                   52
                                                     StrfC C jE T ^
 Q. We w i l l show you t h i s p l a n , and can you put a c r o s s
    e x a c t l y where you w ere, as near as you can .       ( The
    Witness marked h i s p o s i t i o n on E x h ib it C397)
                       Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
 Q. Do you r e g u l a r l y go t o watch L iv erp o o l matches? - A.
    Yes.

 Q. And you u s u a l l y stand in tne same p l a c e behind the
    goal? - A. Yes.

 0 . You t o l d tne Court t h a t a t about 10 m inutes b efo r e
     k i c k - o f f , j u s t b e f o r e the p la y e r s came o u t , t a l k i n g
     about the crowding a t th a t tim e, i t was j u s t th e normal
     th in g so you were n o t too concerned at t h a t time? - A.
     No.

 0 . Can you j u s t e x p l a in in your own words what you mean by
     the normal thing? - A. As i n , j u s t as p e o p le coming i n ,
     j u s t swaying forward and back. L ik e , th e r e was
     p ressu re on but then i t would s o r t o f r e l i e v e a f t e r a
     b i t , you know, and you cou ld stand normally a g a in .
 Q. U sually th e r e i s a c r u s h j u s t b e f o r e , or a big crowd
    j u s t b e f o r e , a l o t o f crowding j u s t b e fo r e k i c k - o f f and
    then j u s t a f t e r k i c k - o f f the crowd f i n d s i t s own l e v e l ?
    - A. Yes.
‘ 0 . Tnat i s r i g h t , i s n ' t i t ? - A. Yes.
                     Cross-Exanined by MR. HUMPHREYS
 0 . Were you s u r p r is e d by being put back i n t o the pen a f t e r
     you nad been forced out o f i t ? - A. I was, y e s .
  0 . Why was that? - A. Because people were s h o u t in g for
      them to open the g a t e so I thought once i t had been
      opened th a t they would d i r e c t p eo p le away.
  0. While you were under t h i s co n sta n t p r e s s u r e , about
     k i c k - o f f tim e, did you c a l l out to the P o l i c e O f f i c e r
     a t a l l ? - A. No.

            MR. RUSSELL:           I am s o r r y , I did not hear the
       answer.

             THE C0R0HER:          "No" was the answer.
  Q*        MR. HUMPHREYS:              The second time you came out you
       were e s c o r t e d around to the r i g h t . Was th a t by the
       same P o l i c e O f f i c e r who had put you back in? - A. Yes.
  Q. And th a t was a very b r i e f time a fte rw a rd s? - A. Yes.
                                                                             6

                                                                 M. HORROCKS

Q. T e l l me t h i s , when you f i r s t g o t on to the t e r r a c e and
   you were doing your w r i g g l i n g - n o t when you g o t s t u c k -
   how d id t h a t compare w ith o th e r b i g o c c a s io n s ? - A. W ell,
   i t w a s...       I have been a t A n f i e l d w ith 6 0 ,000 so i t was
   n o th in g un u su al.




               Q. So a t t h a t p o i n t
                                                                    M.   HORROCKS


At th a t p o i n t i t was p r e t t y t i g h t , but you w e ren 't that
s u r p r i s e d , w ith i t being a b ig o c c a s i o n ? - A. No, i t
u s u a l l y s e t t l e s down a f t e r . . . .

Did you   f e e l any surges? Do you know what I meanby a
surge - pushes? - A. Yes, I f e l t a c o u p l e .
A c o u p le d id you say?         - A. Yes.

Where d id t h o s e come, as f a r as you can remember?
A fter th e p l a y e r s were a lr e a d y p l a y in g the game or
before? - A. No, i t was a f t e r th e . . . .
A fter the p l a y e r s .     How d id you y o u r s e l f g e t out in the
end? - A. I dragged a lad out to the r a i l s and there
was a young la d o f 17 or 18 s t a n d in g on top o f the
r a i l i n g s , and he s a i d , "Get him up".       I g o t him up and
he s a i d , "Now you come up", and I s a i d , "No, I'm a l l
rigrtt", b eca u se I was s t i l l l o o k in g f o r the o t h e r , you
know . . . .

Yes. - A. And I j u s t put my arms out and he dragged me
o v e r , or clim bed - I'm too o ld to c lim b , so . . . .
Would I be r i g h t in th in k in g then th a t alth o u g h you
were squashed t i g h t , you co u ld not g e t any f u r t h e r , you
y o u r s e l f were n o t b r e a t h l e s s , or were you b r e a t h l e s s ? -
A. I t was p r e t t y t i g h t , I was . . . .
We know t h a t .           I am j u s t t r y i n g to fin d out how you
•••• “ .A* I was b r e a t h l e s s but I have been in that
s i t u a t i o n b e f o r e so I w asn 't p a n ic k in g about i t .
I u n d erstan d . What I would l i k e you t o do f o r me i s to
put a c r o s s on a p la n , and show me where you managed to
wri g g l s to b e f o r e you could not g e t any f u r t h e r .
( The W itness marked E xhibit C422) In f a c t , you almost
made i t , d i d n ' t you? - A. Almost.

J u s t one p o i n t . In f a c t , you saw Arthur being brought
o u t, d i d n ' t you? - A. Yes.

W ell, as I nave a lrea d y s a i d , I am v e r y , very s o r r y .
I t must have been a t e r r i b l e s i t u a t i o n .

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
J u s t h e l p from your e x p e r i e n c e , p l e a s e .      You s t a r t e d a
s e n t e n c e by s a y i n g , " It u s u a l l y s e t t l e s down a f t e r
            -          j u s t f i n i s h the s e n t e n c e , would you? - A. A fter
the k i c k - o f f .
                                                                                34
                                                                  G. I. SEDDON

Q.    Many o f us may have thought th a t th a t was a t r i c k o f
      the l i g h t in the tak in g o f the photograph? - A. No,
      th a t seemed p r e t t y r i g h t .
Q.   That i s your e x p e r i e n c e , i s i t not? - A. Yes.           If I
     could make a r e fe r e n c e to a newspaper p i c t u r e ,         i f you
     have got them t h e r e .

Q.    Let us j u s t go on to the one Mr. R u s s e ll was ask in g
     you to look a t , which i s 328, because t h i s one i s
     nearer the tim e , as Mr. R u s s e l l c o r r e c t l y s a y s , when
     you p la c e your a r r i v a l i n t o th e p la c e th a t you thought
     was q u i t e co m fo rta b le, about halfway up the t e r r a c e ,
     i s th a t r i g h t ? - A. Yes.
Q.   We can see in our mind's eye whereabouts you are
     t a l k i n g about and i t i s about j u s t i n s i d e the l i n e o f
     the shadow? - A. That i s r i g h t .
Q.    That i s where you were? - A. I t w asn't                th a t
     co m fo r ta b le . I t was s l i g h t l y j u s t behind. You know
     where the main void i s , i t w a sn 't q u ite th a t comfy but
     j u s t s l i g h t l y behind t h e r e . I t w asn't pushy or n o t .
Q.   So from your own ex p e r ie n c e does the p i c t u r e then g iv e
     a true idea o f what i t was l i k e ? - A. Y es, i t d o e s.
Q.   i . e . l e s s crowded at the back but more crowded at the
     fr o n t? - A. That i s r i g h t , y e s .
Q.   I t i s almost as i f there i s a l i n e a c r o ss the          crowd
     which goes where the shadow i s ? - A. Yes.
Q.   Never mind about what i t seems from the photograph,
     but th in k in g about what i t was l i k e when you were
     a c t u a l l y t h e r e , i s that your memory o f what i t was
     l i k e ? - A. That i s r i g h t , y e s .

Q.   A q u e s t io n a r i s i n g from t h a t .  I asked you e a r l i e r on
     about crushing s h o r t l y b e fo r e a k i c k - o f f and then the
     crowd f i n d i n g i t s own l e v e l a f t e r the k i c k - o f f , and I
     did ask you about other grounds, not j u s t H illsb orou gh
     or A n f i e l d , and you sa id t h a t th a t does happen at
     other grounds? - A. That i s r i g h t , y e s .
Q.   I t i s q u i t e a common e x p e r ie n c e a t d i f f e r e n t matches -
     r i g h t ? - A. I am only going as a L iverpool su p p o r te r .
     With L iverpool s u p p o r te r s, y e s .
Q.   So t h i s i s a s i t u a t i o n which we are lo o k in g a t in that
     photograph, that i f the crowd had been a b le to f in d
     i t s l e v e l i t would have done so by moving back i n t o
     the l e s s crowded part where you were? - A. You go
     forward and move back, but crash b a r r i e r s and th in g s
                                                                                      52


                                                                                   D. PERRY


Q. So t h i s photograph i s timed a t j u s t a f t e r q u a r te r t o
   three? - A. Yes.
Q. J u s t t o make sure i t i s pen 4 , i f you look i n the top
   l e f t hand c o rn er o f t h e crowd you can s e e th e e n tr a n c e to
   the tunnel? - A. Y es.
Q. With one chap s ta n d in g on the d i v i d i n g w a ll t h e r e j u s t
   crou ch in g down underneath th e overhang? - A. Yes.
Q. Then j u s t to h i s r i g h t t h e r e are two boys perched up on
   t h e l i t t l e stu d w a l l t h a t s t i c k s down i n t o th e t e r r a c e
   t h e r e ? - A. Yes.
Q. I am ask in g you to look a t t h i s photograph t o h e l p you
   about your tim in g o f e v e n t s , b e c a u se you have s a i d t h e r e
   was a time came when you were as t i g h t as s a r d in e s ? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Look a t t h i s photograph and look down where we can s e e
   through th e mesh o f t h e p e r im e te r f e n c e . - A. Yes.
Q.   Can you s e e       the c h a r a c t e r s s ta n d in g th ere? - A. Yes.
Q. You can s e e            t h e i r c h e s t s , some o f them a r e f a c i n g i n
   d ifferen t d ir e c tio n s.                They    are not crowded
   p a r t i c u l a r l y , are they? - A. No.
Q.   I f you look back up i n t o the t e r r a c e , does i t lo o k to you
     a t t h a t s t a g e a s i f th ey a r e a s crowded a s s a r d i n e s ? - A.
     No, not from t h a t a n g l e , but when you are in t h e r e the
     shapes o f b o d i e s a r e d i f f e r e n t . There are s p a c e s
     between the heads.
Q. So what you are sa y in g i s i f you a re lo o k in g a t i t from
   o u t s i d e , a s you a re i n t h i s photograph i t may n o t look so
   crowded but i f you are a c t u a l l y in i t , i t i s ? - A. Yes.
Q. Does t h i s h e l p you w ith your t i m i n g , t h a t th e s e v e r e
   cru sh in g came sometime a f t e r t h i s photograph was taken? -
   A. I t might have.        I c o u l d n ' t a c t u a l l y swear on i t .
Q. There i s j u s t one o th e r t o p i c .           The jury has been t o l d
   by another w i t n e s s t h a t a t a           b i g game, and b e f o r e th e
   k i c k - o f f , i t g e t s t i g h t l y packed in a pen andthen a few
   minutes a f t e r k i c k - o f f th e crowd f i n d s i t s own l e v e l ? -A.
   Yes.
Q. You agree w ith th a t s t r a i g h t away? ** A. That i s the
   normal s i t u a t i o n , y e s .
Q. That i s what you e x p e c te d was going t o happen here? - A.
   Yes.
                                                                                   13
                                                                     N. M. SAVAGE

                       Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q. Can you j u s t work o u t from th e s t a r t o f th e journey how
   much you had t o d r in k on the way to th e match? - A. I
   would say one p i n t and two cans o f l a g e r , I had m y s e l f .
   About one p in t and two c a n s .
Q. That i s a p i n t b e f o r e you s e t o f f and two cans in the
   car? - A. Y es, t h a t ' s about a p i n t and a h a l f .   Two cans
   i s about p i n t and a h a l f , so about two and a h a l f p i n t s .
Q. What about the r e s t o f the party? - A. One had about
   th r e e or four cans and a p i n t .         The d r i v e r had one p i n t
   in our l o c a l b e f o r e we s e t o f f .  He d i d n ' t have any more
   t o d r in k .  The r e s t o f us had more or l e s s th e same,
   j u s t two or t h r e e , but one lad had th r e e or f o u r .
Q. Can you h e lp t h e c o u r t t o understand why i t i s t h a t you
   a r r i v e d so much l a t e r than you d id in 1988? - A. Yes,
   t h e r e were l a r g e road works goin g on i n the Stockport
   a r e a , th e M.63.      Because I knew my way t o the ground, we
   didn t s e t o f f e a r l y enough to c o v e r t h e s e roadworks and
   we were h eld up f o r about an hour w ith th e roadworks
   around S to c k p o r t .     Then t h e r e was q u i t e a t a i l back a l l
   the way t o the Snake Pass then from Hyde.
                     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:
Q. When you were g i v i n g us th e d e s c r i p t i o n o f th e 1989
   match, j u s t i n one s e n t e n c e you went back t o 1988, b e fo r e
   th e learn ed Coroner asked you a t t h a t tim e to c o n c e n tr a t e
   on 1989.      This i s what I have n oted you s a i d , "In 1988 I
   had been squashed f o r about ten minutes and I then moved
   t o an area o f more space and i t e a sed o f f . " - A. Yes.
Q. I s i t your e x p e r i e n c e , Mr. Savage, as a person who stan d s
   on th e Kop t h a t v ery o f t e n th ere i s a t i g h t squash
   towards th e k i c k - o f f time? - A. Y es, towards the main
   e n t r a n c e , i t i s more c o n g e s t e d than o t h e r a r e a s .
Q. Most o f t e n i t b e g i n s t o e a s e o f f a s th e crowd f i n d s
   i t s . . . - A. They spread around a b i t .
Q. That i s normally a f t e r k i c k - o f f , alth o u g h th e r e i s o f t e n
   then a p r e s s u r e i f t h e r e i s an e x c i t i n g i n c i d e n t o r a
   g o a l or something l i k e th at? - A. That s r i g h t .
Q. Had th e s i t u a t i o n been d i f f e r e n t in 1989, as you l a s t
   s a i d t o the lea rn ed Coroner, you would have been
   p e r f e c t l y prepared to have stood t h e r e and you would have
   ex p ected th a t i t would, as i t had done i n the year
   b e f o r e , eased o f f sometime j u s t a f t e r k i c k - o f f ? - A.
   That’ s c o r r e c t .



                                                                                 $3
                                                                                          12
                                                                  J. E. SHREWSBURY


    anyway but i t j u s t f o r c e o f h a b i t r e a l l y t h a t you a r e
    lo o k in g round t h e ground f o r v a r i o u s s h o t s t h a t may
    be o f i n t e r e s t .
Q. Have we understood from your e v i d e n c e , Mr.
   Shrewsbury, t h a t t h e f i r s t tim e t h a t you a p p r e c i a t e d
   t h a t t h e r e was a crowd problem was some tim e a f t e r
   k i c k - o f f ? - A. That i s r i g h t , y e s , t h a t t h e r e was a
   problem.
Q. During a p e r io d a t 2 . 4 9 , i t s t a r t s partway through
   2 . 4 9 , which goes on t o 2 . 5 1 , f o r a p e r io d o f about
   two m in u te s, th e camera i s r e c o r d i n g t h e Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Yes.
Q. Does t h a t mean t h a t i t g o e s o f f and f o r t h e n e x t t e n
   minutes o r so b e f o r e k i c k - o f f i t i s l o o k in g a t a l l
   s o r t s o f d i f f e r e n t t h i n g s and th en i t s t a r t s
   f o l lo w in g t h e match? - A. Yes.
Q. During t h a t p erio d o f two m i n u t e s , c l e a r l y i n f r o n t
   o f you t h e r e was on one o f your s c r e e n s , t h a t p i c t u r e
   which we can now s e e i n t h e m a ster record in g? - A.
   Yes, t h a t i s r i g h t .
Q. Does t h a t mean t h a t t h e r e was a camera p o i n t i n g a t
   th e Leppings Lane end a l l t h e time? - A. Most o f th e
   tim e , y e s . The cameras would have been doing
   d i f f e r e n t t h i n g s . They a r e a l s o f i n i s h i n g o f f t h e i r
   own l i n e u p s , t h e i r own t e c h n i c a l t h i n g s , and so i t
   would n o t be a l l th e tim e but a l o t o f t h e tim e t h e
   camera p o s i t i o n e d a t t h a t end o f t h e ground would be
   lo o k in g a t t h a t end, y e s .
Q. During t h e p e r io d which we have s e e n , which s t a r t s a t
   twenty m inutes t o t h r e e and g o e s on u n t i l t h e game
   s t o p s - I do not know whether I am r i g h t about t h a t .
   Let us go up t o k i c k - o f f anyway. From tw en ty m inutes
   t o t h r e e u n t i l k i c k - o f f one o f t h e cameras would
   mainly be lo o k in g a t t h e Leppings Lane end, would i t ?
   - A. Yes, i t would but i t would n o t be recorded
   sep a ra tely .
Q. No, q u i t e . I t would o n l y be recorded i f you changed
   i t t o be recorded? - A. Yes, t h a t i s r i g h t .
Q. In f a c t , we can s e e i n t h a t two m inutes o f r e c o r d in g
   th e camera does a c l o s e up and we can s e e th e crowd
   surging about? - A. That i s r i g h t .
Q. Does t h a t mean f o r a good p a r t o f t h a t tw en ty m inutes
   you would have been a b l e t o s e e t h a t on a t e l e v i s i o n
   screen i n f r o n t o f you? - A. Yes.
                                                                                        13

                                                               J. E. SHREWSBURY


Q. But you d id n o t t h i n k i t was a n y th in g p a r t i c u l a r l y
   s p e c i a l t o be recorded? - A. No, I d i d n ' t t h i n k i t
   was a n y th in g t h a t I h a d n 't s e e n a t l o t s o f o t h e r
   f o o t b a l l grounds a t t h a t ti m e .
Q. That i s what I wanted you t o h e l p us a b o u t. You d id
   n o t t h i n k i t was a n y th in g o u t o f t h e o rd in a ry ? - A.
   No.
                       Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:
Q. Mr. Shrewsbury, had you thou gh t t h a t what you were
   s e e i n g from th e Leppings Lane end was n o t som ething
   you had seen a t a n o th e r b i g game, b e in g I e x p e c t
   i n t e r e s t e d i n t h e new s, you would have reco rd ed i t
   and probably shown i t ? - A. Y es.
Q. The cameramen, do t h e y have any l i n k w it h you? - A.
   They d o, y e s . They have a t a lk b a c k c i r c u i t t o me.
Q. I f t h e y had seen something o f i n t e r e s t t o them t h e y
   c o u ld t e l l you? - A. That i s r i g h t .
Q. But you r e c e i v e d n o th in g about Leppings Lane a t t h a t
   time? - A. No.
                        Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:
Q. Mr. Shrewsbury, i t i s an o b viou s q u e s t i o n but you on
   b e h a l f o f th e BBC d i d n o t regard y o u r s e l f a s having
   th e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r m o n ito rin g t h e t e r r a c e s f o r
   s i g n s o f c r u sh in g o r overcrow ding. That was n o t p a r t
   o f your job , was i t ? - A. No, i t w a s n ' t .
Q. You a r e m erely g i v i n g your i m p r e s s io n on t h e g l a n c e s
   you had i n t o t h e crowd a t w hatever tim e you might
   have looked i n t o i t ? - A. Yes.                                          i
Q. Furthermore from l o o k in g a t t h e camera s h o t s you were
   n o t c o n c e n t r a t i n g , f o r example, on t h e v e r y f r o n t o f
   t h e t e r r a c e r i g h t down by t h e f e n c i n g . I suppose you
   co u ld n o t , co u ld you? - A. We had t h e f a c i l i t y t o do
   t h a t but i t d i d n ' t seem n e c e s s a r y a t t h e ti m e .
Q. Again o b v i o u s l y you were o n l y i n t h e p o s i t i o n o f
   somebody lo o k in g a t t h o s e p a r t i c u l a r s c r e e n s and your
   v ie w was as good o r a s bad a s th e s h o t s on th e
   s c r e e n s ? - A. A b s o l u t e l y , y e s .
Q. You would a g r e e w it h me, s i n c e you have been asked
   your v ie w o f what you d id s e e , t h a t , s h a l l we s a y , a t
   14.49 t o 14.51 when one cou ld s e e t h e pens i n th e
                                                                                  24
                                                                    J . W. MOTSON

   I t c e r t a i n l y s t r u c k me as b e in g odd. I t was something I
   w ouldn't have remarked on to Mr. Shrewsbury on the l a z y
   microphone u n l e s s i t had caused me some i n t e r e s t .
Q. How common i s i t f o r k i c k - o f f to be d ela y e d - I d o n ' t
   want to go i n t o t h i s in g r e a t d e t a i l - b ecau se th e crowd
   i s n ' t in? - A. W e l l, i t i s d i f f i c u l t to answer t h a t
   q u e s t io n b ecau se i t has probably happened more s i n c e t h i s
   i n c i d e n t than i t d id b e f o r e .  I have been a t b i g matches
   where the P o l i c e have asked th e r e f e r e e to d e la y the
   match because e i t h e r they c o u l d n ' t g e t everybody i n t o the
   ground or away s u p p o r t e r s were s t i l l a r r i v e l a t e . I
   d o n 't know, w hatever reason i t may be o u t s i d e th e a c t u a l
   stadium.          I would n o t say i t i s a common o c c u r r e n c e but
   i t i s c e r t a i n l y one I have e x p e r ie n c e d on a number o f
   occasions.
Q. Obviously t h i n g s have changed a b i t s in c e ? - A.
   Consequently we g e t i t more, y e s .
Q. When you were l o o k in g - I want t o come back to t h e match
   i t s e l f - when you were lo o k in g a t t h e s e c e n t r e pens a t
   14.46 what was your im p r e ssio n o f th e crowd? - A. W e ll, I
   have to be h o n e s t and say i t was j u s t as I would normally
   have ex p ected i t t o b e .            I t appeared t h a t p eo p le were
   c l o s e l y packed but you would g e t t h a t on a t e r r a c e
   anyway.          They appeared to be i n q u i t e an exuberant mood,
   hence Mr. Shrewsbury r e f e r e n c e to the b a l lo o n and the
   l a d y ' s q u e s t io n about t h a t .    I t s t r u c k me as b e in g a
   good natured atm osphere, as one would have e x p e c t e d .
   The weather was p a r t i c u l a r l y kind t h a t day so i t appeared
   th a t everybody was e n jo y in g th e m s e lv e s .          Nothing
   untoward a t t h a t tim e s t r u c k me about the c e n t r a l p e n s.
Q. You, o f c o u r s e , had th e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y to comment on the
   whole o f th e stadium? - A. Yes.
Q. We are lo o k in g a t one t i n y b i t .           Would I be r i g h t in
   saying th a t once th e teams were announced and came o u t ,
   your c o n c e n t r a t i o n was fo cu sed on th a t a s p e c t o f the
   matter? - A. Y es.              My main r e s p o n s i b i l i t y when I went to
   the ground th a t day, o b v i o u s l y , beforehand, was to
   commentate on th e match. At t h a t time when the p l a y e r s
   began to come out o f the t u n n e l , my c o n c e n t r a t io n was
   t o t a l l y taken up w ith r e c o r d in g th e proper i n t r o d u c t i o n
   th a t we had r e h e a r s e d p r e v i o u s l y and preparing m y s e lf for
   the k i c k - o f f and ready to do a normal match commentary.
Q. I presume you l e f t out the comment about the c a p a c i t y
   crowd? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you by chance g l a n c e a c r o s s a t t h a t p oin t?           Can you
   remember? - A. I can remember, f u n n i l y enough, t h i n k in g
   there was s t i l l a l o t o f s p a c e , p a r t i c u l a r l y a t th e very
                                                                                          91

                                                                         M. ROBERTON


Q. You were s t i l l t h i s s i d e o f th e tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. When I say t h i s s i d e o f the t u n n e l , the concourse area? -
   A. Yes
0. Did you then go down the tunnel? - A. Yes, s t r a i g h t away.
0 . What was th e tu n n e l l i k e ? - A. How do you mean?                   In
    terms o f s i z e ?
Q. I meant as fa r as crowds are concerned? - A. The crowd?
Q. Yes. - A. Like I s a i d , we were amongst the f i r s t th a t
   went through th a t g a t e and so when we were going through
   i t w a sn 't p a r t i c u l a r l y crowded a t a l l .
0. Did anybody attem pt to look a t your t i c k e t when you went
   through t h a t g a te? - A. No.
Q. Did you s e e any stew ard s or P o l i c e O f f i c e r s as you came
   through th e g ate? - A. I th in k t h e r e might have been one
   or two stew a r d s. I c a n ' t remember anybody e l s e .
Q. But they w e r e n 't l o o k in g a t your t i c k e t s a t th a t point? -
   A. They w e r e n ' t , no.
Q. So the tunnel was r e a so n a b ly c l e a r ? - A. F a i r l y c l e a r .
   There were a few p e o p le g o in g in but i t w asn't what you
   could c a l l crowded.
Q.   You were a b le to walk q u i t e normally? - A.                Yes.
Q.    Were you s t i l l t o g e t h e r , th e t h r e e o f you,   or had y o u . . .
     - A. Yes.
Q. So the th r e e o f you went down the tu n n el together? - A.
   T h a t's r i g h t .
Q. Then you g o t to th e bottom o f the tu n n el I presume.
   Which way d id you g o , r i g h t or l e f t ? - A. I went to the
   righ t.        P e te and m y s e lf had been to the same match the
   p r e v io u s year and we pushed to the r i g h t to sto p g e t t i n g
   pushed around and a l s o to g e t a good view .            I s t a r t e d to
   move t o th e r i g h t , c a l l e d over to P e te r and Jon, who were
   to my l e f t , to f o l l o w me, and th a t was the l a s t time I
   saw them.

Q.    When you f i r s t e x i t e d on to the t u n n e l , in te n d in g to go
     r i g h t , what was i t l i k e i n th a t t e r r a c e as fa r as you
     could see?         What was the s i t u a t i o n l i k e ? - A. I t was
     crowded, as one would e x p e c t f o r such a big match, and at
     th a t time as w e l l , th r e e o ' c l o c k .
                                                                              73
                                                                   J . L. CASE

Q. Did you a c t u a l l y hear t h a t w ith your own ears? - A. Not
   w ith my own e a r s , but my dad s a i d t h a t .
Q. You dad has t o l d you th a t? - A. Yes.
Q. He was s ta n d in g n ext to you? - A. Yes.
Q. He w a sn 't on th e p latform ? - A. No, he was s t a n d in g by
   Robert.
Q. Dad h a s n ' t brought you to d a y , has he? - A. No.
                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;
Q. I know th a t tim ing i s d i f f i c u l t f o r you, so i f you are
   n o t c l e a r and don t know, then j u s t say s o .         I j u s t want
   to s e e i f you can be c l e a r e r .     I f you c a n ' t then d o n ' t
   worry. - A. OK.
0. The f i r s t time you were asked about th e tim ing you s a i d
   th a t the p r e s s u r e was g e t t i n g too much a t about th r e e
   o ' c l o c k ? - A. Yes.
Q. How do you a r r i v e a t t h r e e o ' c l o c k ? - A. W ell, I presume
   i t was th r e e o ' c l o c k .
Q. Because? - A. The p l a y e r s had j u s t warmed up. The names
   had been addressed o v er the speaker system , the PA
   system , s o . . .
Q. The p l a y e r s had warmed up? - A. Yes.
Q. The n e x t th in g was g o in g t o be th a t the game was goin g to
   s t a r t ? - A. Yes.
Q. I t was a t t h a t tim e, was i t ? - A. Yes.
Q. That i s when the cru sh g o t too bad? - A. Yes.
Q. Up to th a t time i t had b e e n . . . - A. Reasonably
   c o m f o r ta b le . There had been a b i t o f a c r u s h , but
   nothing u nexpected.




          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
                                                                                43
                                                                       A. DUNCAN


Q. You were j u s t t a l k i n g and w a itin g fo r the match to s t a r t?
   - A. Yes.
Q. At t h a t s t a g e I take i t nothing concerned you, apart from
   the f a c t that L iv erp o o l s h o u ld n 't lo s e ? - A. Yes.
Q. I t happened th a t you a c t u a l l y saw two o f your f r i e n d s ,
   S tu a r t Thompson and Tony G rier, i s t h a t r ig h t? - A. Yes.
Q. I know what time you s a i d i n your s t a t e m e n t , but do you
   remember about what time you saw them? -A. Well, i t was
   p r e t t y f u l l then so we d i d n ' t speak t o them, we j u s t saw
   them.         They were fu r th e r up.
Q. They were behind you, were they? - A. Yes.
Q. When you saw them can you remember Tony clim bing up on to
   a b a rrier? - A. No.
Q.   You d o n ' t remember that? - A. No.
Q.   I t d o e s n ' t m atter, you may n o t have been watching him a t
     th a t p a r t i c u l a r moment. Do you remember a beach b a l l
     being knocked about? - A. Yes.
Q. Was th a t a t about the same time as you saw Tony or was i t
   e a r l i e r or l a t e r ? - A. I c a n ' t remember.
Q. Can you remember the p la y e r s coming on to the p i t c h ,
   pre k i c k - o f f ? - A. Yes.
Q.   Were you s t i l l in the same p o s itio n ? - A. Yes.
Q.   At t h a t p o i n t , what was i t lik e ? - A. J u s t l i k e a normal
     game, r e a l l y .    A b i t o f pushing and th a t but not bad.
Q. Nothing th a t concerned you a t th a t s t a g e ? - A. No.
Q. You o f cou rse were e x c i t e d , the match was going to begin
   soon, you hoped. Did you se e the k i c k - o f f ? - A. They
   were about to k i c k - o f f - I d i d n ' t a c t u a l l y see i t because
   o f p eop le pushing about.         You were s o r t o f moving round
   everywhere.
Q. So when the p l a y e r s came out pre k i c k - o f f , i t was s t i l l
   l i k e a normal match as f a r as you were concerned? - A.
   Yes.
Q. J u s t b e fo r e k i c k - o f f something had happened.          T e l l me
   what had happened in that period between the p la y e r s
   coming out and k i c k - o f f ? - A. Well, t h e r e was a b i t of
   pushing and moving round and t h a t , then I d o n 't know.                   I
   j u s t d o n 't remember a c t u a l l y s e e in g any o f the game, so I
   o b v io u s ly c a n ' t remember s e e in g the k i c k - o f f .
                                                                                   . 56
                                                                            C. JONES


Q. So i t i s j u s t th a t team you saw? - A. Yes.
Q. So you are t h e r e sometime a f t e r 1 4 . 5 4 , th a t i s s i x
   m inutes t o three? -A. Yes.
Q. Comfortable? - A. P r e t t y Comfortable anyway.
0.   Nothing out o f the o r d in a r y fo r ab i g match? -A. I t was
     j u s t l i k e a normal Derby match a t A n f i e l d .
Q. The n e x t t h i n g wed e f i n i t e l y   know from your e v id e n c e i s
   th a t you saw some time l a t e r            th a t th e g a te was in f a c t
   open? - A. T h a t's c o r r e c t .
Q. In between t h a t tim e, " L iv erp o o l team on to the p itc h "
   and g a t e 4 opened, you had been pushed down from p o s i t i o n
   1 to p o s i t i o n 2? - A. T h a t ' s c o r r e c t .
Q.   You can s e e where g a t e 4 i s . Look down " In te r n a l
     Column" u n t i l you g e t t o 1 4 : 5 9 : 0 4 . - A. Yes.
Q.   That i s one minute to t h r e e . So i t look s as though you
     were pushed down then a t some time between s i x minutes to
     and one minute to three? - A. T h a t ' s c o r r e c t .
                       Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:
Q. C h r is t o p h e r , you have t o l d us when you went in through
   the b i g g a t e , th a t i s Gate C as we have been t o l d , you
   went i n w ith the r e s t o f th e crowd and got c a r r i e d in? -
   A. That i s c o r r e c t .
Q. But you were a b le to g e t ou t o f t h a t crowd in order to go
   to the t o i l e t and your f r i e n d s to go to the t o i l e t and
   g e t a programme? - A. Yes.
                        Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q.    What was i t about pen 3 , as you looked to pen 3 when you
     e n te r e d th e t e r r a c e , t h a t you s a i d you d i d n ' t want to go
     i n t o th a t pen? - A. You c o u ld se e i t was a b i t more
     crowded towards the back as w e l l .
Q. You say when you got on to pen 4 and p o s i t i o n 1 i t was
   p r e t t y c o m f o r ta b le , " l i k e a Derby match a t A n fie ld " .
   T e l l u s , what i s i t l i k e a t a Derby match at A n f ie l d in
   terms o f t h e amount o f sp ace you have between you and the
   person next to you? - A. We always stand towards the
   middle o f th e Kop and i #t can be e x p e c te d that you are
   go in g to be pushed and t h a t i s how i t was.
Q.    In o th e r words, i n p o s i t i o n 1, I j u s t want to know
     f a c t u a l l y because you are a f o o t b a l l supporter and you
     know what i t i s l i k e .        What i s i t l i k e , even though you
                                                                                              3
                                                                        M. A. DICKENSON

Q. What did you s e e in th e t e r r a c e s ?                 T his was j u s t b e fo r e
   k i c k - o f f , i s th a t r i g h t ? - A. Y es.
Q. What did you see? - A. I t j u s t looked l i k e s i n g in g and
   sh ou tin g and i t looked p e r f e c t l y a l l r i g h t , l i k e i t
   u su ally i s .
Q. You d i d n ' t n o t i c e an y th in g unusual? -A. No.
Q. Which pen were you lo o k in g i n t o can you remember? - A. We
   were lo o k in g a c r o s s to 3 and 4 and s t r a i g h t behind us -
   5.
Q. Was anybody in 5 , as f a r you remember?           I am t a l k i n g
   about th e narrow o n e s , so t h a t we g e t i t r i g h t . - A. No,
   th ere was no-one i n .
0 . Was anybody i n 6 , . which i s the o th e r s id e ? - A. Yes,
    q u i t e a few, but i t w a s n 't f u l l .
Q. At th a t p o i n t , j u s t b e f o r e k i c k - o f f , did you hear any
   c a l l s from t h a t pen which alarmed you in any way? - A.
   No.
0.    Did you se e - again j u s t b e f o r e k i c k - o f f - did you see
     any of the g a t e s open? - A. No, they were a l l c l o s e d .
Q. I am t a l k i n g about the l i t t l e         t i n y g a t e s in t h e . . . - A.
   No, they were a l l c l o s e d .
Q. The match k i c k e d - o f f ? - A. Yes.
Q. Was your a t t e n t i o n fo cu sed on th e match or were you s t i l l
   lo o k in g around? - A. S t i l l l o o k in g around because t h a t i s
   when some p e o p le s t a r t e d c lim b in g over and they were
   stood in f r o n t o f us and we c o u l d n ' t s e e .
0. I c o u l d n ' t hear you. - A. They were stood in fr o n t o f us
   and around us so we w e r e n 't tak in g any n o t i c e o f th e
   game. We were lo o k in g to s e e what was going on.
Q.    Can you d e s c r i b e to me what you saw?                   B efore k i c k - o f f
     you h a d n 't n o t i c e d a n y th in g , i s t h a t    r ig h t? - A. Yes.
0 . Match k i c k - o f f , you are s u r e you saw that? - A. Yes.
Q. Then w ith in what s o r t o f p e r io d did you begin to n o t i c e
   peop le around you? - A. I t was one or two minutes.
Q. D escrib e to be where they appeared from and what
   happened? - A. Over the f e n c e s and from behind us because
   we had to stand up, stand on the tr a c k , and we c o u l d n ' t
   see the game so we were lo o k in g round behind us and there
   were s t i l l peop le corning o v e r .
                                                                        21

                                                          A. M. GRIER




   p a st-2 I wouldn't have any idea how many were drinking
   o u t s id e , no.
                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
Q. Where you have put that cross on the diagram, does that
   show the p lace where you stood up onto the r a i li n g ? -
   A. Where we f e l l o f f , y es.
Q. Did you say that you did that a f t e r the      teams cameout
   onto the f i e l d ? - A. As they came out onto the f i e l d .
   We were sin g in g as they came on the p itc h .
Q. Did you climb up onto the r a i l i n g as they came out? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Did you do that once or more than once? - A. We did i t
   a few times before the teams came out, when i t was
   empty, when i t was f a i r l y empty anyway,  but that was
   the l a s t time we did i t , as the teams came out.
Q. The   la st     time wasas the teams came out? - A.           Yes.
Q. Was that        when youf e l l forward onto the crowd in front?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Onto t h e i r heads in front? - A. Yes.
Q. Did that have any e f f e c t on the crowd in front of you
   when you did that? - A. Not p a r t i c u l a r l y . Obviously
   they are breaking your f a l l but I don't think anybody
   was s e r i o u s l y injured by th a t, no.
Q. You d o n 't think anybody was s e r i o u s l y injured? - A. No,
   not a t a l l .
Q. How t a l l     are you?- A. 6 . 3 , 6 .3 and a b i t .
Q. Do you know what you weigh? - A. 15 stone.
Q. From the p oin t of view of anybody watching from the
   o u t s id e , anybody who was not in the pen and looking in ,
   when they saw you doing th a t, i s that the normal kind
   of thing that they would expect to see at a fo o t b a ll
   match? - A. Well, I would.
Q. You would not? - A. I would. I have seen that many a
   time. You are not a c t u a lly d iv in g on the people in
   front o f you. You don't dive on them. Obviously you
   f a l l i n , and your f e e t go in f i r s t , you don't dive o f f
   head f i r s t . You f a l l in to a space, you are not jumping
   on p e o p le 's heads.




                                                                             6   *
                                                                                       56

                                                                     R. E. SEPHTON


Q. In l i n e w it h t h e g a t e , i n o t h e r w ords, were you? - A.
   Y es.
Q. Or were you t o one s i d e ? - A. No, I was on l i n e w ith
   the g a t e .
Q. Was t h e r e anybody between you and t h e two l a d s , James
   and Jonathan? - A. No, I was l e a n i n g on them.
Q. Jonathan has t o l d me t h a t t h e r e were s e v e r a l p e o p le
   on t h i s f i r s t row. Were t h e r e p e o p l e n e x t t o you? -
   A. I can o n l y remember Mr. Case on my l e f t .
Q. He was r i g h t a t t h e f r o n t a s w e l l ? - A. Y es.
Q. I t a k e i t you were q u i t e happy t o be t h e r e b ecau se
   you were g o in g t o have a good view? - A. Y es.
Q.    Canyou remember t h e p l a y e r s coming o u t j u s t b e fo r e
     t h e match s t a r t e d ? - A. J u s t b e f o r e o r e a r l i e r on f o r
     a warm up?
Q.     I am so rry ? - A. Sorry, I do n o t know when you mean.
Q.     I was t a k i n g you   t o r i g h t up t o j u s t b e f o r e t h e match
     began? - A. Y es, j u s t b e f o r e t h e match began.
Q.   Youcan remember           them coming out? -          A.    Yes^
Q. That was j u s t s i x m inutes or s o b e f o r e k i c k - o f f i n
   f a c t ? - A. Yes.
Q. What was i t l i k e f o r you a t t h a t tim e? - A. I was
   q u i t e c o m fo r ta b le up u n t i l a few m in u tes b e f o r e th e
   game.
Q. U n t i l ? - A. A few m inutes b e f o r e t h e game, t h e r e was
   no problem.
        THE CORONER:             There i s a m essage I have t o p a s s t o
t h e Jury which i s a p e r s o n a l and p r i v a t e m a t t e r .  I do not
th in k i t would be r i g h t f o r me t o d e l a y i t .        So I am goin g
t o i n t e r r u p t t h i s exam ination o f you a t t h e moment. I t has
g o t n o t h in g t o do w ith t h e In q u est l e t me s a y s t r a i g h t
away. I t i s a m a tte r e n t i r e l y p e r s o n a l t o one o f th e
Jurors.         I w i l l g i v e t h e message t o my O f f i c e r and he w i l l
p a ss i t t o you i n your Jury room. I f you would l i k e t o go
t o your Jury room he w i l l j o i n you.
                        fThe Jury r e t i r e d from C o u r t )
         THE CORONER:          I t has t o do w it h t h e i l l n e s s o f
somebody and I do n o t t h in k i t i s r i g h t t o d e l a y .         I
s u g g e s t we r i s e . I t i s j u s t one o f t h o s e t h i n g s . Let us


                                                                                 if
                                                                  A.   BOOTH


about s i x y e a r s now.     I have been g o in g to L iverpool
f o r about ten y e a r s .
R ig h t, and where do you stand? - A. I s i t down now in
the main s ta n d .

For t h a t s i x y ea r s? - A. W ell, for fou r y e a r s I stood
on the Kop, y e s .

Whereabouts on the Kop? - A. In the m id d le .
Behind the g o a l? - A. Yes.
From t h a t e x p e r i e n c e can you j u s t h e l p , p l e a s e ? You
have d e s c r i b e d y o u r s e l f goin g onto the t e r r a c e , you
have shown us where you went and you have t o l d the
Court about the p l a y e r s coming onto the p i t c h , with
everyone a p p la u d in g , swaying and s i n g i n g , th a t i s what
you s a id ? - A. Yes.
That i s r i g h t , i s i t ? - A. Yes.
Nothing w orried you a t th a t point? - A. No.
So now d id t h a t compare then w ith the kind o f crowding
th a t th e r e i s a t a normal big match, behind the goal? -
A. I t was j u s t probably a normal game.
A normal game? - A. Yes.
That i s when the p l a y e r s came out. Now th e n , tne next
landmark th a t we have g o t in our tim ing i s th a t the
match kicked o f f ? - A. Yes.
You were s t i l l a t about the same p l a c e , r i g h t ? - A.
Y es.

At t h a t time you have n o t t o ld us what p eo p le d id .
Were they s h o u t in g and c h e e r in g at t h a t time? - A. At
k ick -o ff, yes.

At the k i c k - o f f . So how did things seem to you at tnat
time a t the k i c k - o f f , compared with a normal big matcn?
- A. I t was j u s t busy l i k e .
Busy? - A. Yes.
Nothing out o f the ordinary from your p o i n t o f view? -
A. Not r e a l l y , no.
                                                                           bU




                                                   R. A. KNOWLES


Q. ' When you got onto the t e r r a c e i t s e l f , you were not
     p a r t i c u l a r l y o v e r l y concerned about what you saw on
     the te rra ce? - A. No, not when we f i r s t got t h e r e .
Q.   There were a number o f people sta n d in g where th ey had
     got in? - A. Yes.
Q.   But t h a t , you sa y , i s f a i r l y common p r a c t i c e ? - A.
     Yes, they normally stan d and g e t t h e i r b e a r i n g s ,
     d ecid e which way t o go f i r s t . Having had the boys
     w ith me, I had d ec id e d th a t I w ouldn't stand t h e r e ,            I
     would g e t to the f r o n t and move to one s i d e .
Q. Although you had t o f o r c e your way through a l i t t l e
   b i t , you were a b le t o g e t down the s t e p s and t o the
    p o s i t i o n th a t you have i n d ic a t e d ? - A. Yes.
Q.   So a t th a t s t a g e , which was moments b e fo r e the k i c k -
     o f f , I th in k , again as f a r as you were concerned then
     the t e r r a c e was not abnormal? - A. No.
                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING
Q.   Mr. Knowles, j u s t p i c k in g up what Mr. Manning has been
     t a l k in g about, i s t h i s the normal scene when you go
     onto a t e r r a c e , t h a t a l o t o f p eo p le are imm ediately
     standing where they have j u s t e n t e r e d , as you say to
     get t h e i r b e a r i n g s , and then th ey w i l l t r y and move
     fu r th e r onto the t e r r a c i n g and spread out? - A. That
     is righ t.
Q.    So th a t when you a r r i v e a t the back and s e e a l o t o f
      people immediately i n f r o n t o f you, you probably say
      to y o u r s e l f , "Well, I am not too w orried about th a t
      because I can g et f u r t h e r in and spread out"? - A.
      That i s c o r r e c t .
Q.    I f we look at the t e r r a c e s , we can see on the model,
      we se e th a t the a c t u a l width o f the t e r r a c e s runs the
      whole width o f the West Stand?
           THE CORONER: He cannot s e e .              Is i t e a s i e r on the
      plan o f the ground?
            MR. KING:       I t may b e, s i r .
            THE CORONER: I t i s 274. I am not t r y i n g to s to p
      you u sin g the model, but I th in k i t might be e a s i e r .
                MR. KING: S i r , th a t i s q u i t e r i g h t .       It is
      convenient fo r me but th a t means, o f c o u r se , th a t i t
      i s t o t a l l y in c o n v e n ie n t fo r the w i t n e s s , and the
      w itn ess i s far more im portant.                I wonder i f the
      o f f i c e r , with h i s p o i n t e r , could p o in t out the West




                                                                                     &
I                                                                                39




                                                                  D. A.     LACKEY



        Q. Anyone e l s e added t o t h a t as w ell? - A. Yes.
    _   Q. when you g o t down t o the end o f th e tu n n el and went
    B        in to the pen you have d escribed what you saw. Did
             you think i t was s a f e a t th a t time f o r you t o go i n t o
             the pen? - A. Yes.
        Q. Quite s a fe ? - A. Yes.
        Q. No worries a t a l l ? - A. No.
        Q. The teams were then kick in g about on th e ground? - A.
           Yes.
        Q. I wonder i f you would look a t what i s c a l l e d the
           a c e ta t e t o mark th e p la c e where you went t o in the
           ground? You w i l l be shown the p i c t u r e .
        Q.          THE CORONER:       I f you walk round, Hr. Lackey.
             Can you j u s t p o in t out where the tunnel i s , which i s
             Enclosure 3, and where the gate i s so t h a t he can
             f in d h i s way around t h i s ? - A. Yes.
    D
        Q.        MR. PAYNE: What i t might be h e l p f u l t o do i s t o
             mark the f i r s t p l a c e t h a t he went t o .
        Q.        THE CORONER:   That i s the f i r s t p o s i t i o n ,    is it
             not, the one you have marked with a c r o s s , Mr.
             Lackey? - A. Yes.
        Q. Can you put a f i g u r e 1 next t o i t because t h a t i s
           quite important? - A. Yes.
        Q.       MR. PAYNE: A fter you had been pushed, Mr.
             Lackey, whereabouts did you f i n i s h up?
        Q.        THE CORONER:            Mark i t with a c i r c l e and not
             with a c r o s s and put a fig u r e 2 next t o t h a t so th a t
             we w i l l know e x a c t l y what i t i s ? - A. Yes.
        Q.        MR. PAYNE:          Come back t o the w itn e s s box and
             could th e a c e t a t e be l e f t on the screen p le a s e ?
                   MR. JONES:     C.320.
        Q.        MR. PAYNE: To push you from p o in t 1 down t o p o in t
             2, as you f e l t i t , from which d i r e c t i o n d id th e push
             come a g a in st you? - A. From the back.
                                                                                       101



                                                                 D. A. RICHARDS



Q. I am j u s t drawing your a t t e n t i o n to t h a t p l a c e which
   you have t o l d us about, when you cou ld have stopped
   your forward movement why d id you not do so? - A. I
   j u s t wanted to go in and watch the match and j u s t
   c a r r i e d on going forward. I cou ld have made my way
   back out i f I wanted t o , but I d i d n ' t want t o , I wanted
   to go in and watch the match.
Q. You cou ld have stopped a t t h a t time? - A. Yes.
Q. Can you j u s t r o l l up how much drink you had had by that
   s t a g e a t the v a r io u s p l a c e s you had stopped? - A. We
   only stopped a t the one p u b l i c house and t h a t was j u s t
   o u t s i d e B a rn sley, and I g o t four d r i n k s , t h a t ' s a l l .
Q. Four what, i s that? - A. Four d r i n k s , pernod and
   lemonade.
Q. I d o n ' t q u i t e know whether we have g o t t h i s or n o t -
   are you an ex p erien ced f o o t b a l l supporter? - A. W ell, I
   have been going to f o o t b a l l matches now f o r y e a rs.
Q. For years? - A. Yes.
Q. So you have been in o th er f o o t b a l l crushes? - A. Yes.
Q. You t o l d the Coroner th a t you were n o t worried about
   your own s i t u a t i o n a t the time o f k i c k - o f f ? - A. No, I
   w a sn 't worried.
Q. You were not worried? - A. No.
Q. Is t h a t because the crush a t th a t time was s i m i la r to
   o th e r crushes t h a t you had been in? - A. Yes.
Q. Whereabouts were you then? I s th a t where you have
   marked i t or somewhere e l s e ? - A. No, as you come in
   through th e tu n n e l, we came down and stopped about four
   f e e t away from where we ended up, and then j u s t c a r r ie d
   on.
Q. Could you p o in t to whereabouts you were a t the time of
   k ick -off?
             MR. PAYNE:        For the shorthand n o t e , he has
     p o in te d to a p l a c e a s h o r t d i s t a n c e i n s i d e the pen, a t
     the entran ce to the tunnel and s l i g h t l y to the r i g h t ,
     about l e v e l w ith the f i r s t r a i l i n g .
           THE CORONER:           B a r r ie r , I think we had b e t t e r say,
     i f you d o n 't mind.
Q.             MR. PAYNE:        The o th er p o in t which has a t t r a c t e d
     i n t e r e s t i s th a t from the p la c e where you have marked
                                                                        R. JOLLY

Then I th in k you n o t i c e d a t some p o i n t a b i g b lu e metal
g a te had opened? - A. Yes.
Where were you when you n o t i c e d th at? - A. There were
j u s t t h r e e , the r i g h t hand s i d e o f th e p e r im eter g a t e s
there.
So you were s t i l l o u t s id e ? - A. Yes.
How d id you g e t from t h e r e to t h e s e two b i g b lu e open
g a te s ? - A. W ell, we j u s t walked through.
You went in through t h e s e g a te s ? - A. Yes.
They were wide open? - A. Yes.
Having g o t through them - had you been t o th e ground
b efore? - A. Y es.      I was th ere the y ear b e fo r e but I was
i n th e s e a t i n g .
You e n t e r e d , I take i t ,   through the tu n n el? - A. Yes.
You went i n t o pen 3? - A. As I went through the tunnel I
turned r i g h t , to the r i g h t hand s i d e o f the g o a l , looking
down a t the g o a l .
Passage through the t u n n e l , what was t h a t l i k e ? -A. I t
was p r e t t y r e a s o n a b le .
As you s e t o f f you can se e the p i t c h from the end o f the
tu n n e l. Do you remember whether you saw i t ? - A. No, I
don' t remember.
When you g o t to the end o f the t u n n e l , J u s t b e fo r e you
h i t th e t e r r a c i n g , were you a b l e to e x i t from i t w ithout
any d i f f i c u l t y ? - A. Y es, i t was OK.
You d i d n ' t have t o push your way through ab ig crowd     or
anything l i k e th a t? - A. I t was q u i t e packed but you
cou ld move. There was room to manoeuvre.
Having to on to the t e r r a c e did you g la n c e a t the pitch?
- A. I th in k I d i d .      I v a gu ely r e c o l l e c t you c o u ld se e
the p l a y e r s ' h ea d s.
On the pitch? - A. Yes.

Did you look a t        your watch? - A. No.
But you are p r e t t y s u r e th e p l a y e r s were on the p i t c h
when you g o t on to i t ? - A. Yes.
                                                                                     96




                                                                                  R. JOLLY


Q. What d id you do then?      You had Jon w ith you, o f c o u r s e .
   - A. I had him in f r o n t o f me. We took up a p o s i t i o n
   maybe h a l f way down th e t e r r a c i n g .
Q. Did you f i n d i t p a r t i c u l a r l y d i f f i c u l t g e t t i n g th e r e ? -
   A. W e ll, i t was packed, but you c o u l d manoeuvre.
Q. At t h a t p o i n t would i t be f a i r to say you were n o t too
   concerned? - A. I t was q u i t e c o m f o r ta b le - w e l l , f o r me
   anyway.
Q. I d o n ' t th in k you were near a b a r r i e r or a fe n c e a t t h a t
   p o in t? - A. No.
Q.    P la y e r s were on the p i t c h , you had taken up your
     p o s i t i o n , you have t o l d me how you f e l t i t was, what
     happened then? - A. There was a kind o f a s u r g e .                        It
     s t a r t e d g e t t i n g t i g h t e r and t i g h t e r . There was no room
     to manoeuvre.               I had Jon Paul in f r o n t o f me and I was
     ch e c k in g he was OK, o b v i o u s l y .            There was a s u r g e and I
     ended up a t Gate C, i s i t ?
Q.    W e ll, i t i s not Gate C.             Gate C i s th e one you came
     through.        There i s a g a t e . - A. W ell, I ended up about
     t h r e e or four f e e t o p p o s i t e a g a t e .
Q. Which le a d s on t o the p i t c h ? - A. Which le a d s on t o the
   p itch .
Q. T h a t’ s g a t e 3 . - A. Gate 3 .      I was s t a r t i n g to be
   concerned because i t was r e a l l y t i g h t .              There was no
   room to manoeuvre.             There was a Policeman on the g a t e
   and I shouted t o the Policem an, "I have g o t a c h i l d
   h e r e " , and could I g e t him o u t , but t h e r e was no
   r e s p o n s e . As I s a y , i t was g e t t i n g t i g h t e r and t i g h t e r
   and I kept checking on Jon Paul and I passed o u t ,
   apparently.           When I came t o on th e t e r r a c i n g I heard a
   Policeman sa y , "This o n e ’ s s t i l l a l i v e , " and the
   Policeman dragged me out and put me on th e p i t c h .




                   Q. You have g iv e n a very g ra p h ic
                                                                            44

                                                           J . FITZPATRICK

Q.   He s t a y e d w ith you once he was w ith you? - A. Yes.
Q.   What did he lo o k l i k e to you up to the p o in t in time
     when he was moved away? - A. J u s t happy.
Q.   We w i l l g e t you to mark your p la n . Can you j u s t put a
     l i t t l e c r o s s on th a t plan? ( Witness marks plan

          THE CORONER: Sergeant G r i f f i t h s , the young man
     can do the marking and s i g n i n g , and so on, l a t e r on.
            MRS PERKINS:       That i s C396.
                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q.   Are you a r e g u l a r f o o t b a l l supporter? - A. Yes.
Q.   At A n fie ld ? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you u s u a l l y sta n d behind the goal? - A. Yes.
Q.   Roughly how lon g have you been doing th at? - A. I have
     been go in g r e g u l a r l y f o r round 5 y e a r s .
Q.   Do you agree t h a t j u s t b e fo r e the k i c k - o f f behind the
     g o a l q u i t e o f t e n th ere i s a crush o f p e o p l e , and then
     during the f i r s t few m inutes o f the match i t e a s e s o f f
     as the crowd f i n d s i t s own l e v e l ? - A. I t depends on
     what match i t i s .
Q.   Okay, a t a b ig match? - A. Yes.

Q.   The way I have put i t i s r i g h t , i s i t ? - A. Yes.
Q.   At t h i s p a r t i c u l a r match d id you th in k th a t was what
     was go in g to happen a f t e r the k i c k - o f f ? - A. There was
     a l o t o f p u sh in g , you know, u s u a l , everybody s i n g in g
     and swaying and t h a t .

Q.   But did i t seem to you th a t the s i t u a t i o n up to k i c k -
     o f f was the kind o f th in g you have been in b e fo r e ? -
     A. Yes, j u s t the normal happy, s i n g i n g , swaying.
                 Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPHREYS:
Q.   Can I ask you about the a r r i v a l o f Paul C lark. Did
     you a c t u a l l y see him coming down the t e r r a c e towards
     you? - A. I had j u s t seen him a r r i v e behind me.
Q.   You saw him when he a r r iv e d ? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you do not know how he got to you, as i t were? - A.
     He walked a few p aces down.
                                                         G. I. SEDDON


I t had d e f i n i t e l y kicked o f f ? - A. Yes.
You are su re about th a t? - A. Yes, because I remember
L iverpool h i t t i n g the b a r . When L iverp ool h i t the bar
th ere was a b i g push. When you th in k i t i s g o in g in
the g o a l , you jump.
I am t r y i n g t o f in d out whether the game had kicked
o f f . Was i t a lr e a d y i n p la y when you got onto the
t e r r a c e i n the f i r s t i n s t a n c e ? - A. Yes, i t was in
play.
I t was i n play? - A. Yes.
Not j u s t t h a t they were k i c k in g the b a l l about? - A.
No. I t h in k i t was i n p l a y , y e s .
Carry on. What was your f i r s t im p ression o f the
te r r a c e once you g o t through the crowd a t th e back
there? - A. Where we ended up i t w a sn 't v ery ch o c k a .,
you know, i t was q u i t e calm.
We w i l l g e t you t o show us i n a minute where t h a t waSj
but j u s t d e s c r i b e i t . - A. Right i n the c e n t r e o f Pen
3.

In the c e n tr e ? - A. Yes, maybe a b i t fu r t h e r towards
the back than the c e n t r e .
So a t th a t p o in t you were q u i t e c o n te n t w ith the
te r r a c e f o r y o u r s e l f ? - A. We were happy at our place,
yes.
And the match was i n play? - A. Yes, th a t i s r i g h t .
You were w atching i t ? - A. Yes.
You were a b le to watch i t ? - A. Not then because
people were s t a r t i n g to g e t over the fe n c e th e n .
That i s r i g h t , so when you got to the p o s i t i o n where
you were and which was a c c e p t a b l e , were peop le already
b eginning to climb over the fen ce a t th a t p o i n t , or
was i t a l i t t l e b i t l a t e r or before? - A. Within a
couple o f m in u te s, y e s .
Before they s t a r t e d clim b in g over the f e n c e , were
p eople c h e e r in g and b ein g happy i n the area where you
were? - A. Yes, i t seemed p r e t t y normal. I t i s a
shallow t e r r a c e , you c a n ' t see what i s i n f r o n t o f
you.
Could you hear any c r i e s from the fr o n t a t a l l at that
point? - A. At that p o in t no, not r e a l l y .
                                                          R. M. WRIGHT


You drew t h e c o n c l u s io n t h a t i t would a lr e a d y be
f u l l ? - A. That i s r i g h t .
And t h a t i s why p e o p le were n o t g o in g round? - A.
That i s c o r r e c t .
In f a c t when you g o t t h e r e you had no problems a t
a l l ? - A. No problems.
How p o p u la te d was i t would you say? - A. How could
you say? You c o u ld g e t t o where you wanted t o
co m fo rta b le but t h e r e was enough p e o p le t h e r e . You
had enough room on t h e t e r r a c e s t o s t a n d where you
wanted t o stand.
By t h e tim e you took up your van tage p o s i t i o n , as you
term i t , t h e match had a lr e a d y k ick ed o f f ? - . A . That
i s correct.
Do you know about what tim e i t was when you took up
your v a n tage p o i n t ? - A. I th in k i t was something
l i k e t h r e e minutes p a s t t h r e e .
Three m inutes you say? - A. Yes.
Having done t h a t you looked around? - A. That i s
correct.
What d i d you se e ? - A. L iv e r p o o l fa n s were in Pens 4
and 3 behind th e g o a l .
4 and 3? - A. I t h in k i t i s       4 and 3, y e s .
Those a re t h e numbers, y e s . - A. In t h o s e pens th e r e
were a l o t o f numbers in t h e pens e i t h e r s i d e on t h e
c o r n e r s . There were su p p o rters but t h e r e was p l e n t y
o f room.
In t h e pens on e i t h e r s i d e ? - A. Yes, by th e corner
p o s t . There was a l o t o f s i n g i n g and c h a n tin g i n t h e
pens b ehind th e g o a l and we were t h i n k i n g t o
o u r s e l v e s , "Cor, we wish we were i n th e r e " because we
always sta n d behind th e g o a l s o r t o f t h i n g .




                             /S o you were a c t u a l l y .
                                                                                    24
                                                               S. P. T. SWEENEY

Q. Do you remember what was happening on the p i t c h when
   you looked down? - A. No.
Q. Having g o t to the end o f th e t u n n e l , e x i t s i d e , how d id
   you, g e t out onto the t e r r a c i n g ? - A. Walked out o f the
   t u n n e l, walked to my l e f t .

Q. Did you have to go through a w a l l o f p e o p le or did you
   have r e l a t i v e l y c l e a r e n t r y o n to the t e r r a c i n g ? - A. I t
   was c o n g e s t e d w ith i t b e in g a cup game, because i t was
   g e t t i n g c l o s e to k i c k - o f f , and you e x p e c t th a t a t most
   b ig games, but i t w a s n 't ---- I could move, but i t was a
   b it of a stru ggle.
Q. You went l e f t ? -       A. I d i d .
Q. I think you made your way down towards th e c e n t r e o f
   the pen? - A. About h a lfw a y .
Q. At th a t p o i n t were th e p l a y e r s a lrea d y on the p i t c h ,
   can you remember? - A. No.
Q. You had a programme, I t h i n k , which you had bought
   p r e v i o u s ly ? - A. Yes.

Q.    Were you a b l e to read i t a t t h a t sta g e ?       - A. Not read
     i t , I was g la n c in g through i t .

Q. I t would be f a i r to say t h a t a t th a t s t a g e you were n o t
   apprehensive? - A. You mean com fortable?
Q. Uncomfortable, y e s . - A. I would sa y , w ith bein g on th e
   t e r r a c e o f a match, e s p e c i a l l y a b ig game l i k e a sem i­
   f i n a l , you expect to be t i g h t , but I was j u s t as t i g h t
   as normal games.

Q. In o th e r words, i t was u n com fortab le but i t was
   something you would have e x p e c te d a t th a t s o r t of
   match? - A. Yes.
Q.   At th a t time? - A. Y es.

Q.   Do you remember the p l a y e r s coming            onto th e p itc h ?    - A.
     No.

Q. Did you s e e the k i c k - o f f ? - A. D id n 't s e e a b a l l
   kicked.

Q. What happened then as f a r as you were concerned? - A.
   Some s o r t o f . . . .

Q. What time was t h i s , would you sa y , th a t you were in
   t h i s p o s i t i o n when you were g l a n c i n g a t the programme?
   - A. About 2 . 5 3 , 2 . 5 4 .
                                                             30




                                     K.   P.   RAWLINSON



            THE CORONER: That looks like pen 2 actually,     to
      me.

           THii WITNESS: They were using these pen dividers
      to stand on to help themselves get up on the railings.

Q*    ^   -1R. PAYNE: So if you could see them climbing up
     there into the stand, could you also see the crowd
     that was on the terrace in front of the stand? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   You have told the Court that you did not realise that
     anything had gone wrong until you saw somebody on the
     pitch, is that right? - A.  I think so, yes.

Q.   Being resuscitated? - A.      Yes.

Q.   So the view that you had then looking across into the
     crowd in the pens behind the g o a l , it did not appear
     to you that there was anything wrong in the crowd? -
     A. Well, I have seen crushes before and people
     getting out of crushes and that is what it looked
     like.  Obviously it was a crush but it didn't seem
     anything more serious than that at the time.

Q.   It did not seem anything more serious than what you
     have seen before? - A. No.

Q.   ThanK you.  Do you agree with the description which
     other witnesses have given about the sort of crush
     which you have seen on other occasions at football
     matches, that the crowd when it is in a crush like
     that on other occasions is shoulder to shoulder and
     front to back? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is a fair description,    is it? - A.       Yes.

Q.   That is what it looks like? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is not uncommon at football matches, is it, on
      terraces? - A. Without actually being in the Lappings
      Lane end, it looked like a crush I had been in before.

Q.   I am asking you about your experience about other
      football matches. - A. Yes — -
Q.    I am sorry to interrupt you, my fault, but tell the
      Jury what your experience of other football matches
      is? - A.  especially at wembley on occasions I have
      experienced crushes and your feet actually are lifted
      off the floor, it is that tight.

Q.   So you have been to Wembley? - A.         Yes.
                               K. P. RAWLINSON


'When you exited into the North Stand, can you remember
 whether the match was still in progress or whether it
 had ceased? - A. Yes, it was still in progress.

When you looked across to where the terrace was which
you had tried to enter the second time? - A. Yes,
that is right.

What did you notice about that? - A.  There were
people climbing up into the stands and being lifted
up, and there were people coming over the perimeter
fence onto the pitch.  At first it just looked like an
overspill.

Did you look at the terrace further along, which was
the second one you wanted to get in? - A. Yes, the
terrace that I originally went for, the one on the
right, at the front it was fairly empty.

But there were people at the back? - A.     There was
better vantage point at the back.

Can you remember how long you were there before the
match finished? - A. A couple of minutes.

A couple of minutes? - A.     Yes.

Had you realised by then that something other than an
overspill had happened? - A. No, not at that point.

When did you first begin to realise that something was
wrong? - A. It was when they carried a fellow onto the
pitch.  He was sort of on the edge of the penalty
area, on the left of it, in front of us, and they laid
him down and started giving him the kiss of life.
That was when it started to look serious.

              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Can you show whereabouts you went into the stand when
you took up your position?  Can you go and show it on
the picture? - A. Yes.           '

        THE CORONER: Actually we will get him to mark the
plan.     Thank you for reminding me, Hr. Payne.

     THE WITNESS:  I do not remember going through the
wall, but there ara railings here.  I want through the
railings, round the back and up this walkway and cane
out onto the stands there.

     MR. PAYNE:  Whereabouts was your position when
you took it up? - A. I didn't actually get to a seat.
                                                                                     83
                                                                    D. R. LYCETT

Q. So i t was j u s t on k i c k - o f f ? - A. J u s t on tim e, y e s .
                      Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;
         MR. PAYNE:   I wonder i f you would be kind enough to
    put up the photograph 268:
Q. I f you open th e f o l d e r in f r o n t o f you you w i l l f in d 268.
   Over to the l e f t o f th e photograph can you s e e the narrow
   pen w ith the g a te a t th e end o f i t , g a t e 5? - A. Y es.
Q. So t h a t ' s where you a r r iv e d j u s t a t k i c k - o f f ? - A. Yes,
   th a t's r ig h t.
Q. Can we se e h ere th e w a ll you s a t on? - A. I f you go up
   the s t e p s you can s e e t h e r e .
Q. The s t e p s from th e narrow pen up to the gate? - A. Y es,
   th a t's r ig h t.     I t i s j u s t th e top s t e p . That i s
   a c t u a l l y where we used to s i t , j u s t a b i t fu r t h e r down.
Q. You a r r iv e d a t k i c k - o f f and s a t th e r e fa c in g th e p itc h ? «
   A. Yes, t h a t ' s r i g h t .
Q. From your e v id e n c e i s t h i s f a i r to say th a t i t c e r t a i n l y
   w asn 't ob viou s to you a t th a t tim e th a t th ere was any
   r i s k o f in ju r y t o p e o p le in pen 4 behind you t o your
   r ig h t? - A. I t j u s t looked a b i t t i g h t , t h a t ' s a l l .    I
   d i d n ' t think anyth in g was goin g to happen.              I looked a
   b i t t ig h t , th at s a l l .
Q. I t c e r t a i n l y w a sn 't ob viou s to you t h a t people were a t
   r i s k o f t h e i r l i v e s ? - A. No.
Q. I h a v e n 't q u i t e g o t your movements. A fte r a w h ile you
   moved away somewhere e l s e ? - A. Y es, I moved under th e
   North Stand, about h a l f way down the North Stand.
Q. T h a t's to th e l e f t o f f t h i s photograph? - A. Y es, to the
   l e f t , th a t's r ig h t.
Q. I s th at along by th e b lu e w a ll? - A. T h a t's r i g h t , y e s .
   I stood about where th a t w h ite t h in g i s i n th e m iddle of
   th e blue w a l l .
Q. The l i t t l e w h ite sq u a re, about h a l f way along th e le n g th
   as we look a t i t ? - A. Y es, t a l k i n g to some L iv e r p o o l
   fans.
Q. At th a t time d id you r e a l i s e th a t p eop le had been
   s e r i o u s l y in ju r e d and were b ein g s e r i o u s l y in ju r e d in
   th o s e pens? - A. I knew th ere was something goin g on by
   th a t time but n ot a c t u a l l y i n j u r i e s .
                                                           81




                                              A. J. BENNETT
 Q. At least not the way you see it? - A. Yes, not so it
    hurt.

 Q. What? - A. It didn’t hurt.

 Q. It worried your friend Julie? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not know whether we are going to hear her
   but....

       THE CORONER:   No, we are not.

Q.      MR. PAYNE:   Is she an experienced football
     supporter? - A. No.

Q. So she has not had this sort of experience of an
   event? - A. No.

Q. But you had and so far as you were concerned it was
   pretty normal? - a . Yes.

Q. So that where it went wrong was after about quarter
   or ten to three? - A. Yes.

Q. Just help please; from the point of view of somebody
   looking at the crowd from outside, using your
   expression of normal judging by other matches,
   anybody looking at the crowd up to that time would
   have seen it in a normal condition? - A. Yes.
Q. As you know it? - A. Yes.

Q. After that you just got more and more squashed
   together? - A. Yes.

Q. That is how you felt it? - A. Yes.

Q. However, you have mentioned the Police who were on
   the perimeter track? - A. Yes.

Q. By which time, when you were giving your evidence,
   you knew that it had gone beyond normal and was now a
   crush? - A. Yes.

Q. Did it seem to you that the Police did not realise
   that? - A. No, they didn't.

Q. You are agreeing with me? - A. They didn't know what
   they were doing.

Q. They obviously did not realise it was dangerous? - A.
   No.
                      APPENDIX III



Diagram of whereabouts of witnesses

on LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE              78



Diagram of whereabouts of witnesses

within the GROUND                     79
Flan      Coroners     Ma«e
KeTTHo.   H E S F                         Location of Witnesses within thy Ground            Sheffield Wednesday
 \        C2<»0      R.M.Wright
 2        C3t0       T.K.Hilton                                                              Football Club.
 y.
 u
          C352
          C359
                     T.Hicka
                     Dr.C.K.Flenley
                                                                                             Hillsborough Ground
5         C370       L.M.Steele
A         C371       D.Steele
7         C373       S.Hamilton
a         C377       E.B.Giliatt
Q         CA08                                                         V   *   t s j x ; ,
                     S,Clark
10        C409       K.Lawson
11        C421       B.W.Devonside
12        C428       M.A.Dickinson
t3        C431       S.H.Mullin
U         C437       T.E.Cully
15        C448       8.J.Doyle
16        CA56       R.Lathaa
17        C458       Inspector D.Bullas
18        C<*69      A.Atkin
19        C471       S.Ellis                             Gymnasium
20        C476       S.R.Curry
2t        C480       P.A.J.Eason
22        C481       P.Wells
23        C520       ft.Thomui

           \v
                                                           Room

                                                     NORTH STAND




                                                             STAND




                                                                                                     s5r^ L jsd A
1                         A.J .Murray    ?*               A.M.Dodd
                                                                                                           47\    C394   R.McMahon       71   C*?9   P.J.3mh
              rr*o;>      L.Hinton       “'S      C342    J.Grant                                          48                            72   C430   S.W.Mull in
                                                                                                                  C305   A.Booth
>                         P.J.Thompson   2h       C3'i3   A.W.Langley
                                                                                                           49     C396   J.Fitzpatrick   73   C432   P.Duggan
>4            r?rn,       D.P.Low*       21       C345    M.T.Hollinnhurat                                 50            J.Singleton     74   C433   G.J.Gains
                                                                                                                  C397
r>            r.?n7       A.J.Bennett    ?8       €346    L.F.Canpbel1
                                                                                                           51     C398   R.E.Sephton     75   C434   A.J.Hollinrake
*>            C?OR        A.P.Jones      ?9       C347    D.A.Richards                                     52     C399   C.A.Sterntt     76   C435   D.P.Twidale
1             cm?         r,.Jones       30       C356    P.Hand
                                                                                                           53     C400   I.Southgate     77   C436   N.M.Savage
a             C303        K.Carroll      31       C357    S.Fortune                                                                      78   C439   H.F.Abbott
                                                                                                           54     C401   R.B.Kin*
<>            C304        R.Knowles      32       C358    O.R.Rex                                                                        79   C441   R.J.Greaves
                                                                                                           55     C402   J.C.Glover
10            C306        M.C.Gould      33       C3M     L.Tudor                                                                        80   C442   L.D.Uoyd
                                                                                                           56     C403   H.J,Clarke
?t            C307        3.A.Berry      34       C362    P.Taylor                                                C410                   81   C4*3   D.J.Macarthur
                                                                                                           57             D.R.Lycett
!2            C30R        S.K.Boardman   35       C363    P.V.Goodnan                                                                    82   C444   T.W.Uoyd
                                                                                                           58     C412   J.L.Case
13            C309        0.Hurst        36       C364    G.O’Yiteh                                                                      83   C445   G.I.Seddoo
                                                                                                           59     C413   A.M.Brown
u             C311        G.Richardson   37       C365    A.D.Leigh                                               CM 4   M. Robertson    84   C446   T.S.Pitt
                                                                                                           60
*5            C312        R.G.Hewstone   38       C368    E.Spearntt                                                                     85   C447   B.J.Doyle
                                                                                         tunnel            61     C415   R.C.Ball
16            C320        D.Lackey       39       €369    A.J.R.Watson                                                   S.M.D.Grady     86   C455   G.W.Hutt
                                                                                                           62     C416
1?            C3?5        P.J.Garrett    40       C372    D. Perry                                                                       87   C457   A.Dune an
1fi           C335        A.M.Gner       *1       C374    G.M.Baron                '15                     63     C417   C.E.Griffiths
                                                                                                                                         88   C460   B.L.Scarratt
                                                                                                           64     C4I8   C.Jones
10            €33*        S.M.Hughes     42       C375    W.M.Duckworth                                                  A.F.Owen        89   C461   S. P.T. Sweeney
                                                                                                           65     C4I9
              €337        T.D.Crawford   43       €376    E.B.Gillatt                                                    J.L.Kenworthy   90   C466   P.Edwards
                                                                                                           66     C420
?}            C338        B.J.Anderson   44       C378    S.Cain
                                                                                                           67     C422   M.Horrocks      91   C467   I.J.Feamn
22            C339        K.M.Mull*e     45       C379    A«Canpbell
                                                                                                           68     C423   U.K.Stewart     92   €468   T.A.Cooper
23            C3W         G.P.Bndson ^   46       C3B0    fl.Jolly                                                €424   J.Thooas        93   C470   S.A.Tracy
                                                                                                           69
                                                                                                           70     C425   T.M.Moore       94   C518   D.L.Caae




                                                                                                                                                                               r \
                                                          30E   i§ 8 5                                                          m


                                               GATE 3                                             GATE 4                                                           GATE 5


      STANLEY TOOLS                      F*NN                                oia                       FLY THAI                                TENNANTS LA


      SCALE
      0                   2.5
                                                             Location of Witnesses on the Leppings Lane Terraces                                                            e^F w    t3
      O               5         10
                                                                                                                                                             (ptwe^JU-A
                      APPENDIX IV



R.L. GREENWOOD      Supt. SYP       80

A.M. TAYLOR         SYP             81

J. BICHARD          Control Box     82-83

M. GODDARD          Control Box     84-87

C.W. HUTT           Spectator       88-89

W.M. DUCKWORTH      Spectator       90

L.J. HINTON         Spectator       91

M.T. HOLLINGHURST   Spectator       92

J. GRANT            Spectator       93

P.J. McGUINNESS     SYP             94

S . CLARK           Spectator       95
                                                                                           59
                                                                        R- L. GREENWOOD



Q.             MR. PAYNE: Did you, Mr. Greenwood, e x p e c t t h e r e
     would be any overcrow ding or c r u s h in g problem which
     would a r i s e on th e t e r r a c e ? - A. No, in f a i r n e s s , not
     t o t h e e x t e n t t h a t we w i t n e s s e d .       I mean you alw ays g e t
     l o c a l i s e d d e n s i t i e s t h a t are d i f f e r e n t . You alw ays
     w i l l do a t e v e r y f o o t b a l l match, e v e r y f o o t b a l l ground,
     rugby ground i n t h e c o u n tr y . You w i l l alw ays g e t t h a t
     b u t n o t t o t h i s s c a l e , no.
Q. Did you b e l i e v e t h a t t h e ' f i n d your own l e v e l ' system
   which had been used a t t h e 1987 and 1988 matches was a
   s a f e system ? - A. Y es, I have e x p e r ie n c e d i t i n another
   ground as w e l l .     I b e l i e v e i t t o be s a f e .
Q. Did you a l s o b e l i e v e t h a t i f an emergency o f any s o r t
   d id a r i s e on th e t e r r a c e then t h e t e r r a c e c o u ld be
   s a f e l y evacu ated w it h in t h e tim e s t h a t had been worked
   o u t by t h e O f f i c e r Working Party? - A. R e ly in g on
   ad vice, y e s.
Q. I now come t o th e e v e n t s o f th e day p l e a s e and come t o
   th e moment when you walked from your p o s t by t h e
   p l a y e r s ' tu n n e l down t o t h e Leppings Lane end and went
   towards g a te 3 and answer t h i s q u e s t io n ; a t any tim e
   up t o t h a t p o i n t when you made t h a t jou rn ey, had i t
   ev e r been ob vious t o you t h a t t h e r e was a r i s k o f
   in j u r y t o p e o p le on th e t e r r a c e ? - A. No.
Q. I f b e f o r e t h a t tim e you had seen or been t o l d about
   overcrowding on t h a t t e r r a c e would you have r e a c t e d t o
   i t ? - A. C e r t a in l y .
Q. What would you have done? - A. I f you have g o t an
   overcrowded area t h e r e a r e s e v e r a l o p tio n s t h a t are
   a v a i l a b l e t o you. One o p tio n i s , and I s t r e s s
   dependent on t h e ty p e o f crowd, t o open t h e g a t e s and
   l e t p e o p le ou t through t h e f r o n t o f th e p e n . Another
   o p tio n i s t o send O f f i c e r s i n t o t h e crowd whether i t i s
   from t h e s i d e or w hether i t i s from th e r e a r i n order
   t o move p e o p le .
Q.    Did you regard i t a s t h e r o l e o f t h e P o l i c e t h a t i f
     th e y became aware o f a s a f e t y problem , in c lu d in g
     overcrow ding, then i t was t h e duty o f th e P o l i c e and
     y o u r s e l f t o r e a c t and d e a l w ith t h e problem? - A. Yes,
     you have heard i t i s our b a s i c and our prime t e n e t as
     such and t h a t would be t h e c a s e . We would r e a c t t o
     t h a t and always w i l l do.
Q.    I f i n a l l y ask you t h i s q u e s t io n and i t i s t h i s ; a t any
     tim e , Mr. Greenwood, were you i n d i f f e r e n t t o a r i s k o f
     in ju r y ...
                                                                  A. M. TAYLOR

                     Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN
Q. O f f i c e r , when fa n s came o u t o f Gate 3 you s a i d you
   caught one fa n and put him back and o t h e r O f f i c e r s
   put o t h e r fa n s back. D id n 't you n o t i c e any s i g n s o f
   f e a r o r p a n ic o r a n y th in g w h a tso ev er on t h o s e p e o p le
   who you were p u t t i n g back? - A. None t h a t I r e c a l l .
Q. There w ere no i n d i c a t i o n s o f any s o r t t h a t t h e y had
   panicked i n s i d e and t h a t i s why t h e y had come o u t o f
   th e pen? - A. No.
Q. When you put them back i n t o t h e pen, d i d n ' t t h e y
   scream a s you were p u t t i n g them back in ? - A. As I
   have a l r e a d y s a i d t h e crowd was e x tr e m e ly lo u d .   It
   was a l l g a r b le d what p e o p le were s a y i n g . Some was
   a b u s iv e , some was j u s t s h o u t in g , I d o n ' t know i n
   p a r t i c u l a r what.
Q. But you had one t o o n e. Whatever t h e r e s t o f t h e
   crowd w ere d oin g you were v e r y c l o s e t o t h e p erson
   who you were t a k in g back t o t h e pen and s o was t h e r e
   no c o n v e r s a t io n between you a t a l l ? - A. Not t h a t I
   can r e c a l l , no.
Q. So t h i s fa n d i d n ' t o b j e c t a t a l l ? - A. He may have
   done but I c a n ' t r e c a l l .
Q. When you, g M t-tH tf/fts I        a   o       t
   where you p u t t i n g him back, t h e p l a c e where he was
   g o in g , was g r o s s l y overcrowded? D id n 't i t seem t h a t
   way t o you? - A. I f I had s e e n t h a t he w o u ld n 't have
   gone b ack . I r e a l i s e t h e e r r o r now and I w ish I
   could change i t but I c a n ' t .
Q. Can you r e l a t e t h a t i n c i d e n t w ith th e i n c i d e n t where
   you saw t h e two g i r l s crushed a g a i n s t th e fe n c e ?
   What i s t h e r e i n tim e? - A. The e v e n t s e s c a l a t e d . I
   l o s t t r a c k o f t im e . E verything seemed t o go v e r y
   s lo w ly .     I t c o u ld have been m in u te s.    I t c o u ld have
   been l o n g e r . I d o n ' t know.
                   Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN:
Q. C on stab le T a y lo r , you have been asked about w hether
   you saw a t an e a r l y s t a g e p e o p le squashed a g a i n s t t h e
   fe n c e a t t h e f r o n t . I would l i k e t o ask you
   something about th e n a tu r a l e y e v ie w you had o f t h e
   t e r r a c e s , when you a r e a c t u a l l y s ta n d in g on t h e
   p erim eter t r a c k . I t may be o f some a s s i s t a n c e t o you
   t o look i n th e b la ck f o l d e r i n f r o n t o f you a t C.268?
   - A. Y es.
Q. We can s e e t h e r e lo o k in g a t t h e p e n s, p a r t i c u l a r l y
   Pen 3, where you were in v o lv e d t h a t t h e r e c l e a r l y i s
   a w e l l , a s i t w ere, beneath t h e p e r im e te r tr a c k ? - A.
                                                                    T. BICH A R D


Once you spot som ething you then e n la r g e th at p i c t u r e to
g e t more in fo r m a tio n , i s th a t c o r r e c t ? - A. Yes, i f th a t
i s what i s needed.
So you are a b le to sp o t t h a t .              Now i f somebody - t h i s i s
on any normal match day - broke t h e i r ankle or something
l i k e th a t , would you be a b le to d e t e c t th at s o r t o f th in g
on th e terrace? - A. No. Perhaps I d id not make th a t
p a r t ic u la r i n c i d e n t very c l e a r .   The c o l l a p s e had
occurred and i t was i n d i c a t e d where i t was and we were
able to oversee th e s i t u a t i o n when d i r e c t i n g f i r s t a id e r s
to i t .        I t w a sn 't th e a c t u a l man c o l l a p s i n g that I saw,
but oversaw what took p l a c e when i t occurred.
Yes, i f you saw someone who appeared to need a t t e n t i o n
you would draw t h a t to th e a t t e n t i o n o f the Commander? -
A. Yes.
So you are lo o k in g out f o r danger or tro u b le in th e pens
then?       I s th at r i g h t ? - A. Y es, a c r o s s the board,
r e a lly , yes.
On the 15th A p r il , 1989, d id you n o t sp ot any tr o u b le or
danger of any s o r t ? - A. None w h a tso e v e r .




               THE CORONER:          You had b e t t e r say
                                                                                10

                                                                     T. BICHARD


          THE CORONER:  You had b e t t e r say a t what tim e,
     Mrs. McBrien. You had b e t t e r ask a t what tim e, r a th e r .
Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:         Were you lo o k in g a t th e sc reen s
     from 2 . 5 4 , from about th a t tim e , when the p la y e r s came
     onto the f i e l d ?   That would be an im portant p o in t to go
     from; d id you s e e th e s c r e e n s from th a t time? - A. I
     would be w atch in g a s c r e e n but I b e l i e v e a t that time
     i t would b e, i n f a c t , the s c r e e n th a t was a p p erta in in g
     to Leppings Lane.        I b e l i e v e th a t t h in g s were s t i l l
     occurring o u t s i d e on Leppings Lane.
Q. What time did you look a t the Leppings Lane Terrace? -
   A. I t probably would be a f t e r 3 o c l o c k , once the
   s i t u a t i o n in L eppings Lane had a l l e v i a t e d i t s e l f .
Q. I know you w e r e n 't lo o k in g out fo r d i s p a r i t y and th a t
   may not mean v ery much to you, but would you be look in g
   a t the d i r e c t i o n in which th e fan s were fa cin g ? When
   the p la y e r s a r e on th e f i e l d p e o p le normally watch them
   p la y in g , d o n 't they? - A. As a s p e c t a t o r , y e s , but
   ob v io u sly we a r e t h e r e as a jo b in co n n e c tio n w ith . . . .
                         ■\              . '■
Q. Yes, s p e c t a t o r s are th e r e to watch the match so once
   they appear on th e f i e l d you would ex p e c t t h e i r heads
   to be fa c in g in th a t d i r e c t i o n .    Did you look at Pen 2
   a t 3 o ' c l o c k and s e e which d i r e c t i o n th o s e heads were
   turned in? - A. I c a n ' t r e a l l y answer th a t q u e stio n but
   perhaps ----- I d i d n ' t s e e a n y th in g on Leppings Lane
   Terrace th a t was untoward u n t i l th e time when people
   appeared to be t a k in g p art in what I thought in my own
   mind was a p i t c h i n v a s i o n .
Q. You d i d n ' t se e th e d i f f e r e n c e in Pen 2, not in numbers
   but the f a c t t h a t in Pen 2 p e o p le would be looking
   towards the p i t c h ; in Pen 3 a l o t o f them were lo o k in g
   behind them wondering what was happening behind them,
   and some o f them were a c t u a l l y fa c in g the wrong way
   round?
            THE CORONER:       I th in k he has answered the
     q u estio n but I w i l l ask i t again f o r you:
Q. Did you n o t i c e any d i f f e r e n c e in the way p eop le were
   looking in Pen 2 and Pen 3 a t around 3 o 'c lo c k ? - A.
   No, s i r .
Q.          MRS. McBRIEN:         Did you u se the zoom f a c i l i t y a t
     th at time to g e t a b e t t e r c l o s e up, a b e t t e r p ic tu r e ? -
     A. Again, I have g o t to be c a r e f u l what I say about
     which camera I was lo o k in g a t .          O bviously, i t i s one
     p a ir of e y e s , and g e n e r a l l y speaking I can only manage
     to look a t one s c r e e n .      I f my a t t e n t i o n was in to what
                                                                              97

                                                                  M. G G B D A R D


   t h a t . The a rea s around H ills b o r o u g h I would c e r t a i n l y
   do t h a t , as I o u t l i n e d to you, becau se I knew th e area
   b etter.
Q. C e r ta in ly i f th e r e was som ething w it h i n your area o f
   r e s p o n s i b i l i t y and you f e l t i t needed d o in g , you would
   n ot even need to r e f e r to him? - A. I would n o t need to
   r e f e r to him, but I th in k I would r e f e r to him. Bear
   in mind t h a t he i s s a t d i r e c t l y a t th e s i d e o f me.
Q. But by th e same to k en , i f you f e l t t h a t som ething did
   need d o in g , whether i t was in your d i r e c t sphere of
   r e s p o n s i b i l i t y or n o t , th e f a c t t h a t he had not
   mentioned i t to you, or th e f a c t t h a t he perhaps had
   not thought o f i t , would n o t s t o p you from m entioning
   i t i f you thought i t was n e c e s s a r y ? - A. That i s
   correct, s ir .
Q. Your r e l a t i o n s h i p was as good as th a t? - A. I t was,
   yes.
Q. To be f a i r , having regard to th e team approach, as fa r
   as you can s a y , and i f you th in k you can t p l e a s e t e l l
   u s , but would the same apply to Mr. Ryan and Mr.
   Bichard? - A. E x a c t ly , y e s , s i r .
Q. They had th e c o n fid e n c e both o f Mr. Murray and they had
   th e c o n f id e n c e in th e m se lv e s to be a b l e to mention
   t h in g s i f they f e l t i t was worth m entioning? - A. Most
   d e f in it e ly , yes.
Q. Thank you very much. 1988, you had e f f e c t i v e l y the
   same view o f th e Leppings Lane T errace as you had in
   1989? - A. C o r r e c t, s i r .
Q. There was n o th in g in what you saw t h a t day i n 1988 th a t
   gave you any c a u se fo r concern in r e l a t i o n to any
   p o s s i b i l i t y o f overcrowding in th e c e n t r a l pens? - A.
   Nothing a t a l l , s i r , no.
Q. Do you keep an eye on th o s e pens? - A. Y es, s i r , as
   w e l l as th e r e s t o f the Ground.
Q. I assume t h a t as you are lo o k in g round th e Ground i f
   you s e e s i g n s , e i t h e r v i s u a l l y or through a m onitor,
   th a t appear to s u g g e s t t h a t an area i s overcrowded, you
   would do som ething about i t ? - A. Yes, s i r .               I would
   c e r t a i n l y make mention o f i t to Mr. Murray, or I would
   c e r t a i n l y do something about i t , y e s .
Q. In 1989 we have n o t heard you t e l l us t h a t you thought
   th e r e was any s ig n o f overcrow ding on th e Leppings Lane
   T errace, p r i o r to you s e e i n g somebody come over a
   f e n c e . I s the p o s i t i o n t h a t you d i d n ’ t th in k th a t
                                                                                                98

                                                                                    M. G O D D A R D


     th ere was any such overcrowding? - A. That i s the
     p o sitio n , y es, s i r .
Q. I am very g r a t e f u l .      Indeed, nobody, whether i t be an
   In s p e c to r or a S erg ea n t who was in th e West Stand, or a
   P o l i c e O f f i c e r on th e p erim eter t r a c k , had s u g g e s te d to
   C ontrol t h a t th ey f e l t th e r e was any overcrowding? - A.
   That i s c o r r e c t , s i r .

Q. Could I tak e you to th e p erio d between q u a r t e r - p a s t - 2
   and j u s t a f t e r k i c k - o f f on 15th A p r i l , 1989, Sergeant?
   There are th e th r e e p e o p le who are on th e th r e e s e a t s
   a t th e f r o n t o f th e C ontrol Box, you, Mr. Murray, Mr.
   Ryan. Mr. Bichard i s a t th e back, Mr. D u ck en field
   somewhere behind you.                I e x p e c t i f you a re lo o k in g
   forward you cannot s e e where he i s ? - A. I knew he was
   somewhere over my r i g h t s h o u ld e r , y e s .
Q. C e r ta in ly you have a r e c o l l e c t i o n o f him b ein g on the
   s t e p n ex t to Mr. Bichard? - A. C e r t a i n l y , y e s .
Q. There was a l s o , we understan d , Mr. McRobbie th ere? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Would i t be f a i r to say th a t even b e f o r e any c r i s i s
   th in g s were p r e t t y t i g h t ? - A. We had a f u l l h o u se,
   s i r , y e s . You can put Mr. Jackson in t h e r e as w e l l so
   i t was f u l l , y e s .

Q. I th in k Mr. Jackson was th e r e and then he wasn’ t t h e r e ,
   so we need n o t r e a l l y tr o u b le w ith him, I th in k , fo r
   the p erio d th a t we are t a l k in g a b o u t. Your
   r e c o l l e c t i o n i s t h a t i t was about h a l f - p a s t - 2 th a t Mr.
   Marshall ra d io ed in fo r Leppings Lane to be c l o s e d ? -
   A. That i s c o r r e c t , y e s .
Q.   Your view o f t h i s i s t h a t was an i n s t r u c t i o n on the
     p art o f Mr. M arshall because t h a t was w it h i n h i s
     o p e r a t i o n a l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y ? - A. T o t a l l y , y e s , s i r .
Q. At th a t s t a g e , to you, was th e r e any c a u se f o r concern
   about any a s p e c t o f th e s a f e t y o f th e crowd?- A. Not a t
   a ll.   I was q u i t e c o n f i d e n t t h a t okay, th e r e i s a b ig
   crowd t h e r e , but th ey would g e t i n .
Q. I s t h i s r i g h t , t h a t from your p o i n t o f v ie w , th in k in g
   perhaps to y o u r s e l f about i t , you thought th e crowd
   would g e t in th a t you cou ld see? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. Did you e x p r e s s t h a t view to anybody e l s e ? - A. No, not
   a t a l l , i t was my own th o u g h ts.     I had h ea rd , maybe
   b e fo r e or a f t e r t h a t , where Mr. D u c k e n fie ld had a
   c o n v e r s a t io n w ith Mr. Murray on th o s e l i n e s  and Mr.
   Murray . . . .
                                                          101

                                                if.   GODDARD


 iould it be fair to say that the atmosphere at that
 time in the Control Room was electric? - A. It would
 oe, yes sir.

 From your point of view - I am not speakin^ abou*
 anybody else - having regard to Mr. Marshall's demand
 ais tone of voice, the urgency of his tone of voice,
 aiu you feel that there was any time for d=>lay*> - A
 No, none at a l l .

Up to that time, insofar as anybody had nad a view of
tie terraces at Leppings Lane, and insofar as anybody
nad^    a view of what was happening at the turnstiles
at mappings Lane, you were in as good a position 3 3
anybody else, would that be fair? - A. That would be
fair, yes sir.

    vTO'v, .Ir. Goddard, tnat no order was given by
3n) n:iy, -ihr. Duc’cenfield, Mr. Murray and you have said
yn.irsalf, to send a serial of men to divert fans away
i.roi the central tunnel.     Had you thought that was
necessary, would you (a) have suggested it to
somebody? - A. Yes, most definitely.

•lad you tnought - and I am not suggesting for a moment
yoj n 3 d the duty to do this but I want to investigate
Viat you as an experienced and competent Control ’loom
Officer thought at the time, do you follow me? - A.
Ye s .

da-! you thought there was any risk to anybody in Pens
3 a 1J   as a result of people being allowed in through
tia gate, would you have done something about it? - A.
'as sir.   :Iad I believed there would have been risk,
ov/in.isiy 1 would have done something about it.

Is tie position this, that everybody's concentration
v-is focused on the need, voiced oy Mr. Marshall, to
save the lives of those outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles? - A. Yes, concentration was total on that
aspect, yes sir.

As I understand your evidence, after the order was
given to open the gates, people could be seen to come
into the concourse area and the situation outside Gate
C seemed to be relieved? - A. From the camera there is
only part of the area outside the ground that you can
see.  Up to the turnstiles, an area between the
turnstiles and the gates at the start of the ground,
you cannot see that because of the turnstiles coming
in.^ Beyond that obviously you can sea.  So when you
talk aoout relieving injuries you cannot really see
ti3t at all because it is totally obscured fro.^ you-
vision.
                                                            ?!.   GODDARD


 Yo u c ould sea them coming into the c o n c o u r s e area? -
      Yes, you c ould see them c o m i n g into the concourse
 w he n Gate C was opened, yes.

Of course, your v i e w on the m o n i t o r - and it is only a
m o n i t o r v iew that you have got - does not show any
more of the c o n c o u r s e than just that area just behind
the t urnstiles and next to Gate C? - A. Yas, that is
correct.

Y ou have told us that you, of all those in the Control
Room, had the g r e atest e x p e r i e n c e of
                                              the ground since
1936? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

You k n e w what the state of the terra c e s was. Do I
take it that you did not tie in in you r mind the link
betw e e n Gate G and the tunnel? - A. That is correct, I
didn't.

After people had star t e d to come in, it could he said,
’"Jell, they had to go som e w h e r e those p e o p l e ” . Did
you feel they wer e going to make their w a y onto the
te r r a c e s where there was space? - A. :. Then they came
onto the concourse, o b v i o u s l y they had the option of
wnere they wa n t e d to go and they c ould have taken any
op t i o n that they wished, yes.      So they would go into
the a r e a s where there was space, yes sir.

With you r kno w l e d g e of the ground, w i t h your
ex p e r ience, had yo u c o n s i d e r e d that they would, or the
m a j o r i t y of them would, go dow n the c e n t r a l tunnel and
had y o u c o n s i d e r e d that the area in the terraces in
the c e n t r a l pens was too full, if those things had
gone thro u g h y o u r mind w o u l d you have done something
about it, told s o m e b o d y or don e s o m e t h i n g ? - A. If
those things had gone through my mind, there is no way
would an y o n e have gone down the central tunnel.

But I am putt i n g these things        to you     in hindsight,     of
coarse? - A. Exactly, yes.

At the time your attention, and so far as you could
tell the a t t e n t i o n of those in the Control Box, was
f o c u s e d on the saving of lives outside? - A. Yes.

Then, of course, e v e r y b o d y ' s a t t e n t i o n was diverted to
Gate A and the o p e n i n g there? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Is it also right to say that whilst this was going on
you had some c o n c e r n for what m a y be h a p p e n i n g on the
Spion ICop where there had been some d i f f i c u l t y in the
p r e vious year? - A. Yas, that is quite correct, but
tne i\Op was totally secondary.         The Xop was totallv


                                                                     « r >
                                                               9.


                                       C.W. HUTT



Q. Can you remember the teams coaling opt preniRttCh? **A. Ye»
   I can because I can remember fcla|#i:rig when 'the teams came
   on.
Q. And were you still in this position which you have described
   to me, you know where you had taken up? - A. Roughly in the
   same vicinity, yes.
Q. At that point you said you were clapping. Does it follow
   at that point you would still have found it acceptable,
   I am not saying at the height of comfort, but acceptable?
   - A. It did not seem any different at that stage to any
   normal big game that I have been to when I have stood up.

Q. When did it change? - A. When I really became aware of it
   do you mean?
q   # Yes? — A. Probably about five minutes or so before kick-off,
      five or ten minutes before kick-off, I can’t remember
      exactly.




                         Q. Try not to give
                                                                                   10

                                                                       C. W. HUTT

Q. Try n ot to g i v e me tim e s . I w i l l t e l l you why in a
   minute. What I want you to tr y and do i s r e l a t e i t to
   ev en ts on th e f i e l d , as fa r as you are a b l e . - A. I
   would say when I f i r s t r e a l l y became aware o f i t , th e
   teams were about to kidl: o f f .
Q. The reason why I s a id t h i s , so t h a t you might
   understand, we know what time th e teams came onto the
   p i t c h , pre-warm up. That was about 5 - m in u t e s - t o - 3 , and
   k i c k - o f f was a t j u s t b e fo r e 3 o ' c l o c k a c t u a l l y , so i f
   you g i v e me a tim e, u n le s s you a c t u a l l y looked a t your
   watch or looked a t the c lo c k s - i f you d id t h a t , th a t
   i s a d i f f e r e n t m atter, o f c o u r s e . What you are saying
   i s th a t i t was sometime between th e p la y e r s coming out
   p r e - k i c k - o f f and k i c k - o f f . . . . - And k i c k - o f f , y e s .
Q. When you r e a l l y became aware t h a t th in g s were . . . . - A.
   Yes, b ecau se I had alread y been ---- I was being pushed
   forward by th a t tim e. There was su rges coming as i t
   got near to k i c k - o f f , as more p e o p le rushed in I
   s t a r te d to move.
Q. In f a c t , I th in k you were pushed forward to another
   p o s i t i o n , i s th a t r ig h t? - A. Y es, I was.
Q. That was what I would c a l l your r e s t i n g p o s i t i o n where
   you remained u n t i l th in g s got s o r t e d o u t, as fa r as you
   were concerned? - A. That i s r i g h t .
Q. Was th a t th e p o s i t i o n th a t you a r r iv e d a t , a t k i c k - o f f
   time or j u s t a f t e r , can you remember? - A. Yes, i t was.
Q. You have t o l d us th a t you were w ith q u i t e a l o t of
   young men, some o f whom we know u n fo r t u n a te ly l o s t
   t h e i r l i v e s , and th a t included C h risto p h er, o f cou rse,
   and Simon and . . . . - A. Gary Church.
Q. Yes, Gary Church, th a t i s r i g h t . When was the l a s t
   time th a t you were w ith th o se yo u n g sters? - A. When we
   had f i r s t en tered i n t o the ground. We were a l l
   to g e th e r i n i t i a l l y fo r about th e f i r s t few, I d o n 't
   know, f i r s t minute or whatever, when we g o t in there

Q. Few m in u tes, or moments, l e t ' s s a y . - A. And then when
   the su rg es happened I moved to th e second p o s i t i o n .
Q.    Doesi t f o l l o w th a t you were      s t i l l to g e th e r wheifyou*
     were c la p p in g when the teams         came out? - A. Yes, I
     should th in k we were.
Q.    You m entioned, you have used the word surge now and
     that le a d s me onto the next p o i n t , which i s how come
     that you moved from p o s i t i o n 1 to p o s i t i o n 2, i f we can
                                                                                   35


                                                       W.M. DUCKWORTH



Q. So i t i s j u s t about i n t h i s tim e b r a c k e t between 5 - t o - 3
   and l - m i n u t e - t o - 3 t h a t you f i r s t saw a Policeman p ushing
   people back or making them go back o f f th e fen ce?                   A. Yes.
Q. Now you d o n 't know what th e y were t h in k in g so I am n o t
   asking you t h a t , b ut from your p o i n t o f v iew , th in k in g
   about i t now as t o what you remember happening, d id i t
   seem t h a t th ey d id n o t r e a l i s e th en how s e r i o u s th e crush
   was? - A. I take i t by "they" you mean the P o l i c e O f f i c e r s ;
Q. The P o l i c e I mean? - A. Well y e s th ey c e r t a i n l y d i d n o t
   r e a l i s e what would happen. I mean th ey cou ld n o t r e a l i s e .
Q. But a l s o in t h i s tim e b r a c k e t h ere t h a t we are lo o k in g a t ,
   about 5 - t o and about l - m i n u t e - t o - 3 , th e P o l i c e d id then
   r e a l i s e how s e r i o u s i t was? - A. No, I cou ld n o t sa y t h a t .
   What I would say i s t h a t th e P o l i c e r e a l i s e d t h a t th ey
   could no lon ger knock p e o p le back i n t o th e crowd. Now
   whether t h a t was b ec a u se t h e r e was to o many p eo p le t r y i n g
   to g e t o ver the r a i l i n g s ; w hether i t was because th ey
   r e a l i s e d t h a t t h e r e would be t r o u b l e I d o n ' t know, b ut you
   j u s t t o l d me to sa y n o t what t h e y th ou gh t, so I am s a y in g
   what I th in k and I th in k th e y co u ld have l e t them o ver
   fo r one o f two r e a s o n s .
Q. I s e e , q u i t e . But anyway th e y d id s t a r t l e t t i n g them over
   or sta n d back and s t o p p r e v e n t i n g them from coming over?
   - A. Yes.
Q. And it is also at about that time that the gate was opened?
    - a . Between 5 - t o and 1 - m i n u t e - t o , y e s , t h a t i s r i g h t ,
    th a t i s c o r r e c t .
            MR. PAYNE:        Thank you v e r y much.

                       Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. In talking about the beach ball you I think made it clear
   that you would have taken a part in the batting let us
   call it or the pinging of the beach ball around the
   people, but that your concern wasn't that you could not
   have done that but in doing so there is a natural tendency
   to over balance as one stretches or leans for it? - A.
   Well it was not so much a fact about over balancing.

Q. But you had a couple of young people in front of you and
   you were concerned that if you reached forward ....
   A. Oh yes but they would lose their balance in the toing
   and froing of the crowd.

Q. But you would agree, and I think you said, it is something
   which is perfectly natural and often happens in that
   sort of a situation, it is that sort of a crowd, the beach
   ball? - A. Yes, balls quite often appear at the match, yes.
                                                            105


                                           L.J. HINTON


     when people were trying to climb over they were telling them -
     to &et back in, and the men around me were shouting to try and
     tell them what was going on inside, but I mean, they could not
     hear.

Q. And did you hear them make any comment for people to move back
   at all? - A. They were telling people to get back in and move
   back, yes, they were, but you just could not do that.

Q. So two things were happening as far as they were concerned.
   "Move back" was similar to what the crowd was saying right up
   at the top.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. But what you are saying is by the time you had reached that
   position it was physically impossible for you to move back? -
   A . Yes.

Q. It would have had to be people further behind?      Is that right?
   - A. That is right, yes.

Q. And then things, if anything, got even tighter for a moment or
   two? - A . Yes.

Q. And I think you then saw something was happening to the
   fencing? What did you see there? - A. Once the Police
   realised what was happening they began to tear it down at the
   front, and they were just pulling it down as quickly as they
   could.

Q. Can you recollect whether this was done before or after the
   match had stopped playing? - A. That was after.

Q. What I am asking you is what you saw or what you remember.
   Are you saying you saw Police Officers attempting to pull the
   fencing down, or fans, or both? - A. Police Officers.

Q. Did you see any fans who were trying to pull at the fencing? -
   A. I can't remember.

Q.   You can't remember.   Definitely in your mind it is clear it
     was Police Officers who were doing it? - A. Yes.

Q.   In the enclosure in which you were? - A.   Yes.

Q.   Opposite you or away from you? - A. They were more or less
     opposite where I was.

Q. And did they in fact succeed in the end as far as you
   remember? - A. I d o n ’t really know, because....

Q. If you don’t know let us forget it. If you don't know, you
   don’t know. Did you walk out by yourself or were you lifted
   out, or what happened to you? - A. No. Somehow the next thing
   I knew there was just nobody around me, and then I was helping
   get some men off the floor, and then I was wandering rouna
   wondering where I was.
                                                                                 66


                                                             M, T. HOLLIHGHPRST

Q. Did he p o i n t you i n any d i r e c t i o n o r d i d he j u s t s a y ,
   "May your way through"? - A. J u s t g e n e r a l l y .         He j u s t
   s a i d , "Hake your way i n . "
Q. He d id n *t p o in t i n any way.       He j u s t s a i d , "In la d s " , or
   words t o t h a t e f f e c t , "T here's p l e n t y o f room"? - A. Y es.
Q. Uas i t s a i d to you p e r s o n a lly o r j u s t g e n e r a lly ? - A. No.
   I mean, w it h i n a c o u p le o f f e e t o f me a s I was making my
   way.
Q.    Down you went down t h i s tu n n el and you g o t to the o th e r
     end o f i t , o f co u rse? - A. Y es.
Q.   You went l e f t or r i g h t ? - A. L e f t .
Q. When you g o t on t o t h a t t e r r a c e - we c a l l i t | | | j | f c i te ll
   mp vhat haoDened and how i t was? - A. Well* on th e way
   through th e tu n n e l th e th r e e o f u s were s t i l l t o g e t n e r .
   Having been th e r e the previou s y e a r , a s I have s a i d , when
   i t was q u i t e f u l l th e p rev io u s s e a s o n s we had n o tic e d
   th a t the t e r r a c i n g to the l e f t corn er had been
   p a r t i c u l a r l y empty y e t where we were was cru sh ed v th e
   season b e f o r e .        Even going through th e tu n n e l, and as
   f a r as I can remember even on th e way t o t h e n a tch t h a t
   day, we s a i d we would make our way to th a t l e f t t e r r a c e .
Q.    That     is   th e banked o n e , th e h ig h one? - A.        The l e f t hand
     corner behind the goal*           Of c o u r s e , n o t knowing th a t
     t h a t end was penned o f f i n s e p a r a t e p e n s . We thought i t
     was a l l one com plete t e r r a c i n g .
Q. So th a t was your o b j e c t i v e t o g e t . . . - A. Out o f Where i t
   was cru sh ed .
Q. You e n tered pen 4 , however, becau se you were e x p e c tin g to
   walk a lo n g th e te r r a c e ? - A. Y es.
Q.    J u st d e s c r i b e to me what th a t pen was l i k e wnen you
     en tered i t ? - A. t i n * * q t i t * f u l l *• w e l l , ■wtatf: f u l l , but
     nothing t h a t 1 had n o t seen on a f o o t b a l l te r r a c e b e f o r e .
     I t was f a i r l y f l u i d because we co u ld make our way
     through, a l b e i t i t was a s t r u g g l e a t f i r s t fo r a few
     m inutes.            Then i t suddenly became more and more t i g h t l y
     packed by th e minute r e a l l y .
Q. Do you r e c o l l e c t when you f i r s t e n t e r e d , pben you s a i d i t
   was q u i t e f l u i d , had t h t        k i c k e d - o f f ? - A* No.

Q. I t had not? - A. No.
Q. Then you say i t became t i g h t e r , th a t was th e word you
   u sed . Do you r e c o l l e c t what tim e t h a t was i n r e l a t i o n
   to the match?    I am not a sk in g you to t e l l me what time
                                                                            9

                                                                     J. GRANT




Q. You to ld me you were t r y in g to move over to the l e f t ? -
   A. To th e l e f t , y e s .
Q. We w i l l g e t you to show us in a minute where you
   f in is h e d up, but were you a c t u a l l y a b le to make your
   way at a l l ? - A. We d id a c t u a l l y go a b i t but we j u s t
   came to a s t o p .
Q. You c o u ld n 't go any fu r th e r ? - A. No.
Q. At that p o in t were you f r ig h t e n e d by th e s i t u a t i o n ? -
   A. Not r e a l l y . Wm-fm*ttMWglfe ** would eaa« i t s e l f
   o u t, w ith                                                     Just
   s e t t l e s i t s e l f out once th e game s t a r t s .
Q. What happened then? - A. When we came to a s t a n d s t i l l I
   noticed in fr o n t o f me th e r e was a man doubled over, so
   we picked him up and when I looked a t him you could
   t e l l he w a sn 't t h e r e , he was p a l e , and lo o k in g a t h is
   e y e s , so we picked him up and then as I p ick ed him up
   he was s i c k a l l over           me. ll* « a -ijp '
   there was a b i t o f a              push and we werejd is tfe #
   then I l o s t t h i s man           and t h e ® ' M f t p u s h oaammmd
   lu c k ily enough fo r u s, fo r me p e r s o n a l ly , because we
   were heading l e f t we were going down a t an a n g le , and I
   went down and away to the l e f t .
Q. How did you g e t o u t, j u s t t e l l me th at? I am jumping
   ahead a l i t t l e b i t ? - A. A fte r the game?
Q. Yes - d id you clim b o v e r , d id you come out o f the
   tunnel? - A. No, where I was I j u s t sto o d my ground and
   then i t was 20 m inutes, h a l f an hour afterw ard s th a t I
   le ft.
Q. The chap whom you have mentioned who appeared to you to
   be doubled up and who looked o b v io u sly very s i c k , was
   he an o l d e r or a younger man, can you remember? - A. He
   was o ld er than me, about 35, something l i k e th a t - I
   wouldn't know.
Q. You apart from th a t glim pse o f him you l o s t s i g h t of
   him and you d o n 't know what happened to t h i s chap? - A.
   No
Q. You have mentioned th a t you were coming to a s t o p , you
   could s e e t h i s chap ahead o f you, and then I th in k you
   sa id th a t th ere was a push and then th ere was a r e a l
   b ig push. Try and d e s c r ib e th a t to me in a l i t t l e b i t
   more d e t a i l . - A. We picked t h i s man o f f th e f l o o r , he
   was doubled o v e r , and we were t a lk in g to him, asking
   him i f he was okay and we were g e t t i n g no resp on se from
   him, and then th ere was a l i t t l e b i t o f a su r g e , l i k e
   j o s t l e , maybe i t was people th a t were j u s t around me, I
                                                                             11
                                                             P. J . McGUINNESS



                   C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR.   PAYNE

Mr. McGuinness, on the q u e s t i o n o f the speed o f your
own r e a l i s a t i o n t h a t a d i s a s t e r was ta k in g p l a c e , you
have t o l d the Jury th a t as you made your way towards
the t e r r a c e , the Leppings Lane t e r r a c e , you saw people
coming over the f e n c e - I am read in g from my n o te - and
you thought i t was a p u b l i c order s i t u a t i o n , based on
your p r e v io u s e x p e r ie n c e ? - A. Yes.
I want you in your own words to e x p la in what you mean
by th a t and what was g o in g through your mind? - A. I f I
can e x p l a in t h a t , I o n ly based th a t d e c i s i o n on not
what I saw, but on what I had ex p erien ced p r e v i o u s ly .
Yes, e x p l a in about th a t p l e a s e , why i t was th a t th at
was what was in your mind? - A. B a s i c a l l y because I
have been a P o l i c e O f f i c e r f o r e i g h t y e a r s , worked a t
most i f not a l l H ills b o r o u g h m atches, and the only
e x p e r ie n c e s I have had o f s i t u a t i o n s s i m i l a r to tn a t
have been ones which have been p u b lic order o r i e n t a t e d .
O bviously I have never been th e r e and had to d e a l w ith
any d i s a s t e r of th a t manner on any s i t u a t i o n regarding
safety.
What d oes p u b lic order o r i e n t a t e d mean? VJhat a c t u a l l y
has happened in your e x p e r i e n c e on o th er o c c a s io n s to
make you th in k th a t? - A. P u b li c order in the sen se o f
crowd d i s r u p t i o n , f i g h t i n g , o v e r s p i l l i n g onto the
p i t c h , p i t c h i n v a s io n .   I d o n ' t r e a l l y know how to put
i t more s p e c i f i c a l l y .
No, very w e l l , t h a t ' s b e t t e r , and i s th a t the kind o f
th in g tn a t in your e x p e r ie n c e you have nad to loox out
for? - A, Host d e f i n i t e l y , y e s .
                    Cross-Examined by MR» KING
On tn a t l a s t a s p e c t , O f f i c e r , do I understand from
t h a t , and I can understand i t i f i t i s r i g n t , tnat tne
wnole b a s i s of t r a i n i n g and e x p e r ie n c e i s sucn tnat
whan you se e someone coming over the top o f a fe n c e ,
your r e a c t i o n i s , t n e r e ' s t r o u b le here? - A. ?;y
p e r s o n a l, y e s .
I t f o l l o w s from th a t tn e r e has been n otning in your
t r a i n i n g , your i n s t r u c t i o n s , p r io r to th a t wnich
occurred in your own e y e s a t t h i s d i s a s t e r , which would
have le d you to s t o p and t h i n k , w e l l , t h e r e ' s another
a l t e r n a t i v e , they might be in t r o u b le , they might be in
p erso n a l d i f f i c u l t i e s ? - A. I r e a c t to s i t u a t i o n s in a
number o f ways. O b v io u sly , i f I am a tt e n d in g a road
a c c id e n t or a d i f f e r e n t s i t u a t i o n my p e r c e p t io n , my
o b j e c t i v e s , are d i f f e r e n t than on t h i s o c c a s i o n , y e s .
A                                                                                            72
                                                                                      S. CLARK

               HISS ADDLEMAN: S i r , I am v e r y s o r r y , b u t i t i s v e r y
     d i f f i c u l t t o h ear t h e w i t n e s s .
g            THE CORONER:        I know. I am f i n d in g i t d i f f i c u l t as
     w e ll.   I t h in k he s a i d t h a t th e p eo p le went back i n t o th e
     crowd.
     Q. Was t h i s a f t e r t h e match had kicked o f f o r b e fo r e ? -
        A. During t h e game.
     Q. Pardon? - A. During t h e game i t was.
     Q. You do n o t know i n r e l a t i o n t o e v e n ts when i t was?
        Was i t b e f o r e B e a r d s le y h i t t h e c r o s s b a r o r a f t e r ? -
        A. I c a n ' t remember o ffh a n d .
     Q. I t h i n k you l o s t your b r o th e r and your f r i e n d , d id
        you not? - A. Y es.
     Q. I am v e r y , v e r y s o r r y t h a t t h a t has happened. When
        you saw t h i s a c t i v i t y on t h e fe n c e you have a l r e a d y
J)      t o l d me t h a t you had n o t r e a l i s e d t h a t a n y th in g was
        p a r t i c u l a r l y wrong down t h e r e . You d id n o t r e a l i s e
        i t u n til a b it la te r .       That i s c o r r e c t , i s i t n ot? -
        A. Y es.
     Q. So what d id you a c t u a l l y th in k was happening i n
        r e l a t i o n t o t h e s e p e o p le who were g o in g up? - A. I
        j u s t th ou gh t i t was a p i t c h in v a s io n when t h a t was
        hap p en in g, l i k e . That i s what I th o u g h t i t was.
     Q. That i s what i t lo o k e d l i k e t o you? - A. That i s what
        i t lo o k ed l i k e a t f i r s t .
                            Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:
     Q. Mr. C lark , can you h e l p us w ith th e ti m e s j u s t so
        t h a t we know what you a r e t e l l i n g us? You went t o
        t h e West Stand l e a v i n g your broth er and your f r i e n d s
        b e h in d . About what tim e was t h a t a f t e r you g o t
        through t h e t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. That i s a b ou t tw e n ty -
        f i v e t o t h r e e o r so m eth in g .
     Q. About t w e n t y - f i v e t o th r e e ? - A. Yes.
     Q. You s e t t l e d y o u r s e l f i n th e sta n d . How f a r away were
        you from th e l i n e which s e p a r a t e s t h e sta n d from t h e
        t e r r a c i n g ? - A. Near enough th e back.
     Q. Towards th e back? - A. Y es.
     Q. So you had a v ie w o f i t a l l , going a l l t h e way
        down? - A. Y es.
                              APPENDIX V



A. HOCKENHALL           Sheffield Resident         96

E.M. LEE                Sheffield Resident         97

J. ECKFORD              Sheffield Resident         98

M.J. TISSINGTON         SYP                        99

L. STEVENSON            Sheffield Resident         100

A. LINDLEY              Sheffield Resident         101

J .R .T . BARTHOLOMEW   Sheffield Resident         102,119

P. WILSON               SYP                        103

P .C . LOMAS            SYP                        104

W. WRIGHT               Spectator                  105

T.K. HILTON             Spectator                  106,126

G. RICHARDSON           Spectator                  107-108

R.W. CREASER            Insp. SYP                  109

G. SYKES                Insp. SYP                  110-111

E.J. WILSON             SYP                        112

P. HAND-DAVIS           Mounted Section SYP        113-114

B. RIDGE                SWFC Steward               115

J. MORGAN               SYP                        116

A. ATKIN                Spectator                  117

A. LINDLEY              Sheffield Resident         118

L.J. HINTON             Spectator                  120

R.J. THOMPSON           Spectator                  121

R.A. KNOWLES            Spectator                  122

M.C. GOULD              Spectator                  123

S.K. BEARDMAN           Spectator                  124-5

F.N. GRUNHILL           Liverpool Mounted Police   127,137

P. KERRY                SYP                        128

A. BEST                 SYP                        129



                                 -1-
                         APPENDIX V (Page 2)



C.G. WATSON               SYP                        130

A.M.   DODD               Spectator                  131,175

G.I. SEDDON               Spectator                  132

S. FRY                    Liverpool Police           136

J.L. TAYLOR               Spectator                  140

R. MARSHALL               SYP                        141

G.I. SEDDON               Spectator                  14 2

R.W.   COBB               SWFC Gateman               143,145

                  14 4                    NOT USED

M.A. HURST                SWFC Programme Seller      146

                  147,148                 NOT USED

P.S.   SMITH              Liverpool Police           149,150

S. FRY                    SYP Mounted Section        151

R. PURDY                  SYP                        153

G. SYKES                  SYP                        15 4

                  155-160                 NOT USED

L.F.   CAMPBELL           Spectator                  16 0,174

K.E. HORSEFIELD           SYP                        161

G. WRIGHT                 SYP                        16 2

D.M. SCHOLEY              SYP                        163-4

L.PROCTOR                 SYP                        165

S.A. BERRY                Spectator                  166-7

L.F. CAMPBELL             Spectator                  168-9

B. RIDGE                  SWFC Gateman               170

G.I. SEDDON               Spectator                  171

S.M.D. GRAY               Spectator                  172-3

D. BUTLER                 SYP                        176

J. MORGAN                 SYP                        177



                                  - 2 -
                 APPENDIX V (Page 3)



G. MILTON         SWFC Turnstile Operator   178

A.R. MARSH        SWFC Steward              179

                                            181

R.W. BEARDSLEY    SWFC Gateman              182

S.R. THORPE       SWFC Senior Steward       183

I. MARSH          SWFC Steward              184

R.W. COBB         SWFC Steward              185

R.G. HEWSTONE     Spectator                 186

B.L. MOLE         SYP                       187

B.D. MURRAY       SYP                       189

R.L. GREENWOOD    SYP                       190
                                                                                          10

A


                                                                    A.   hockenhall
         /




                              Cross-examined bv MR. PA.¥H1:

B   Q. During t h e f i v e y e a r s t h a t you have l i v e d
       you e v e r seen such l a r g e nuatoers c °ming down t o t h e
       ground a t about q u a rter t o th r e e ? - A. Not as l a t e
       t h a t , no.
    Q. This was th e w orst ca se? - A. This was t h e w orst t h a t
       I have s e e n .
                             r r n s s - ^vainined bv MR. MANNINQ:
    o.        J u st f o l lo w in g t h a t through, y o u do nQt r^aember
             s e e in g anybody more drunk than t h i s ? - A. Not than                   at
             t h i s tim e , no.
    o . The s c e n a r io i s a la r g e r number than ev er b e f o r e
        coming u r in a tin g i n your garden? - A. As f a r as
        have e v e r n o t i c e d , y e s .

D   n.       A la r g e r number o f cans and b o t t l e s        b eing d e p o s i t e d
             in your garden? — A. That i s r i g h t .
    Q That f i n i s h e d when t h e P o l i c e O f f i c e r to o k up
      p o s i t i o n ? - A. That i s r i g h t .
     q       We have n ot a c t u a l l y e s t a b l i s h e d a t what tim e t h a t
             was? - A. I t was g e t t i n g t o round about tw enty t o
             t h r e e . I cannot say e x a c t l y b u t round about t h a t
             tim e.
     n       The ones who were coming t h a t you d e s c r ib e d a t
             q u arter t o th r e e and indeed even up to 3 . 0 5 you
             d e s c r ib e p eop le s t i l l going down towards th e
             ground? - A. That i s r i g h t .
     Q. Which i s them making t h e i r way down to t h e ground
        f i v e minutes a f t e r what would have been an o rd in a ry
        kick o f f time? - A. I do n o t r e a l l y f o l lo w th e
        f o o t b a l l but I b e l i e v e i t t o have been t h r e e o c l o c k ,
        yes.
     O.        Those p eo p le from twenty t o th r e e onwards up t o 3. 05
              they would n ot have been th e ones r e s p o n s ib le f o r th e
              d e p o s i t because th e P o l i c e O f f i c e r would have
              p reven ted th a t? - A. The d e p o s i t ?
      q       Of th e cans? - A.         Oh no, s o r r y . The cans d id not
              n ecessa rily stop .       He was t h e r e t o stop p e o p le coming
              on t o th e garden.
                                             E. H. LEE


0. This is what I want to try and find out.    Did    / ^ ar
   the match start?    Did you hear tne roar of the match
   starting? - A. Yes.
0.    Howmany minutes a f t e r th a t did t h i s man or      lad coma and
      say they were being squashed at tne front.               A.
      two and four minutes he came.

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. P A Y N E :

0. In the time you have lived, or lived at                         R o a d ’ in
   all that time did you ever see sucn a large crowd
   t r r i S i n g in ?he l a s t qu arter of an hour b e fo r e the matcn
   was due to start? - A. No, never.

Q. Anything like this before at all? - A. No.

                      Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

0. Can I just deal with the time? At about quarter to
   three I think it was when you saw t h e r e was an awful lot
   of people in the area by the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

0.     I wasn't quite clear where you where exactly when you
       were watching this.   Was it the top of Vere Road. - A.
       There is a tyre shop and we were stood outside tier .

0      At that stage you-could see there were police officers
       first of all at the end of the roads which would stop
       people going down the side roads? - A. Yes.

 0.     You also said there were a lot of police at the top
       the road just stood looking at the crowd, just standin,.
       That wasthe note I had.     Is that n g n t . - . » es.

 0.    So the people who were coming along Leppings Lane to join
       the turnstiles, they weren't being stopped c o m m a on
       Leppings Lane, there was nothing to stop them continuing.
       - A. No.
 0. If we look at the model, one can see the are whece tne
  ' turnstiles are for those w h o a r e g o i n g to go and stand at
    the match.   You see there, it is a relatively narrow
    area? - A. Yes.
            THE CORONER:   For the shorthand note, can we say
       you are pointing at the turnstiles A to G.

             MR. KING:     Yes:

 0. The turnstile A to G area. - A. Yes.

     0. That leads   to the turnstiles?      - A. Yes.
                                                                            90
                                                               J. EC.Cr (Hi)




0. Aad ;»e are talking about 2.45? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.
X
   Did vou do tnis journey, by chanca, in 1933? - A. Ye»,
   sir. Well, I don't know.   I can t remember, oacaus- I
   work alternate weekends.

0. So you might not have been there? - A. I mignt not
   done, but it doesn't stick in my memory m L o v , let ;»
   put it that way.

0. Did anythi   else strike you? - A. No.  Tha tning tnat
   struck me most was tne volume of people at tnat ti-e,
   si .
0. Yes, and the distance from the ...? - A. And tne
   distance from trie ground, yes.

                 C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by -'1R. PAY NE
0. Mr. Eckford, you drove to .'leepsend Lane, wnere your
   first impression was that ttia traffic was bad compared
   with normal? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Do you mean nocraal whan there is a football caatca? - A.
   Yas.
Q. And what was it that was holding up the traffic? - A.
   Like I explained to the Coroner, my impression was t.i-
   amount, the volume of people going along Jeepsend
   and tne same amount coning along Fenistone, tne t r a g i c
   just c o u l d n ’t — I go directly across Penis tone ^oaa
   and I think tnat was wnat was holding ae up.       it *.oo*
   aa longer to get across.

 0. You had sat off on your journey from tna Sportsman at
    about 2.25 to 2.30? - A. Approximately, sir, yas.

 0. Wnich makes you arrive at this traffic hold up at wnat?
    - A. Normally it is about a 15 minute drive fron tnere,
    so I would say again between 20-to and quartirr-to-j.

 Q. A map has been circulating, and t.rara it is in front ot
    you.    If you look in the oottcm rignt-nana corner ot
    the map can you sea ileepsand Lana just coming on. -   •
    I c.-.n, yes.

 C . where-it joiis Penistone .Jvoad? - A. Yes.

 0.   Tnat is tne junction you have been talking a?out,                is
      it? - A. Yes, sir.

 C. And it is tnare that the volume of      football supporters
      ■.;as holding up tne traffic? - A. .ell I can spea<
      of .iaajsand Lar.2 t:\an I can on Penistona,
                                                                                   i>4


                                                  M..T. TISSINGTON


Q. So the people who came in the mini-buses, o f cou^ ®
   don't know what happened to them,          clock when
   at Wardsend Road up to say half-pa;st1/      cans- they
   you thought "That is it" they did not carry cans. Joblem
   were well behaved; they were no trouble ..A.
   whatsoever.
o     And in fact were good fun? - A. Good humour, good fun.
      in fact we commented that it was a typical you know
      good Liverpudlian humour.


      -      A Ho, I kept goin g on to H a lifa x Road and there was
      quite a build-up of traffic there.
Q. v e h i c le s ? - A. V eh icu la r t r a f f i c and q u i t e a few p eople
      still going dov/n to the ground for that time.

Q. And th a t was about what time? - A. That i s about h a l f - p a s t - 2
   and we were l e a v in g th e r e at q u a r t e r - t o , 1 0 - t o - 3 .
Q. so between t h a t time t h a t i s when you saw people                                 "
       a      That is when, you know.           It is not in hindsight tnat
          i" a m   saying   th is.   I t s tr u c k me a t the^tim e th a t I c o u ld
       not understand people going to a semifinal so late
       these cans of beer.
 0        How long does it take to walk from where you were, the
          Wardsend Road and Halifax Road area down to the ground.
          - A. Normally it would take ten minutes.
    Q. It may take a bit longer? - A. May be if you are dodging
       in between people.
    Q. j u s t to g e t t h i s rights were you a b le to d i s t i n g u i s h
       which c lu b t h e s e people were supporting? - .A. H ell no
          you could tell by the accents and the ma;joiiuy of                     .
          Liverpool people were coming in that way. x could not
           s p l c m l a n y say th ey were a l l Liverpool fans           t h a t would
          be wrong but the majority, because they had been directed
          in this way which was a natural way in -rom the M6-.

    0. So you are not saying that every single one of them was
       but your impression was that the majority were.
       Yes, the majority I know were Liverpool.
    Q. Just again to make this absolutely clear, although theSe
       lads and lassies for all I know, were carrying these
       c a n s * and stuff down the road, as f.ar ■   as you
       c o n c e r n e d you h a d no problems with them? - A. We didn
                                                                                     ^
       have any problems with them at all.
     Q. But you were a bit surprised that (a) they leit iu a
        bit late and (b) that they were drinking v/nen they
        w e r e going to a match? - A. Well I had not seen this tne




                                                                                   V i
                                                                        83


                                           L. STEVENSON


      impression were first of all that the £ ° P l®
      whoever they were, were an hour on averag.5 in ro
      figures later arriving than tney had been tne y«
      - A. Yes, yes.
B   Q . And second this impression that lots of people had cans
        of beer? - A. Yes.
    Q. An impression which was different from the impression that
       you had had the previous year? - A. Yes.

             MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much.




                              C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR- KING



H
                                                                                 52




                                                                 A. LINDLEY


q   .    From t h e roar? - A. From t h e roar o f th e crowd we
        knew t h e p la y e r s were coming ou t o f t h e tu n n el on t o
        t h e f i e l d . That i s my e x p e r ie n c e .
q   .   when you hear th e loud roar you know t h a t th e p l a y e r s
        a r e coming o u t and t h a t t h e match has e i t h e r s t a r t e d
        o r i s about t o s t a r t i n a few m in u te s ' time? - A.
        That i s r i g h t .
Q. You cannot s e e i t ? - A. Ho.
Q. Did you hear t h i s roar on th e 15th A p r il 1990? - A.
   Yes, we heard th e r o a r .
Q.       what         happened a f t e r th a t ? - A. My w i f e and I s a i d ,
        " I t sounds as though t h a t i s i t " and i t d id go q u i e t
        i n t h e l a n e . There was n o t much t r a f f i c , n ot many
        su p p o r te r s coming a lo n g , and we n o t i c e d t h a t t h e
        Policemen a t th e o th er s i d e o f th e road, bottom o f
        E sk d ale, began t o move h i s b a r r ie r s a b i t . Then a l l
        o f a sudden a f t e r a few more minutes t h e r e was a
        t e r r i f i c surge o f b o d ie s along Leppings Lame. There
        seemed t o be hundreds o f p e o p le running along
        Leppings Lame i n t e n t on g e t t i n g t o th e ground. We
        s t o o d amd watched them. We were amazed. We s t o o d
        amd watched them and t o d e s c r ib e i t , i t was j u s t l i k e
        p u t t i n g a l i d on a b o i l i n g k e t t l e when th e y g o t t o
        t h e ground. I do n ot th in k any Policem en, no m a tter
        how mamy th e r e were, th e y c o u ld not have stopped
        them.
Q. I want t o g e t t h i s q u i t e r i g h t . You are saying you
   heard th e roar o f th e crowd which you took t o be t h e
   s t a r t o f th e match or th e p la y e r s coming out? - A.
   That i s r i g h t .
Q. At t h a t p o in t i t was f a i r l y q u i e t , are you s a y in g , or
   not? - A. Yes, i t was f a i r l y q u i e t .
Q. Leppings Lame was r e l a t i v e l y empty a t t h a t p o in t? -
   A. Yes, th e r e were not mamy p eop le t h e r e .
Q.       A f t e r t h a t t h e r e was a laurge  crowd o f p eo p le t h e r e
        running down Leppings Lane towards th e ground w it h a
        view t o g e t t i n g i n . Is t h a t what you are sayin g? -
        A. Yes.
Q.       You say            these; p e o p le were i n hundreds. We axen o t
        t a l k i n g about f i v e or ten ? - A. Ho, th e y were
        l i t e r a l l y hundreds.
                                                                             62


                                                    J. R. T. BARTHOLOMEW*




Q. So fo r some reason you d i d n ' t walk up Farndale you
   decided to walk up Leak, i s th at r ig n t? - A. There i s a
   l i t t l e gen n el o p p o s i t e ray house, th a t c u t s in -between
   the gardens.
Q. I s e e . So you walked up Leak Road and you g o t onto
   Leppings Lane, r ig h t ? - A. Yes.
Q. And I take i t you then turned l e f t ? - A. That i s r i g h t ,
   yes.
Q. what stru ck you as soon as you en tered Leppings Lane? -
   A. What s tr u c k us as being very u n u su al, even for a
   s e m i - f i n a l , was the amount o f people s t i l l g e t t i n g to
   the ground. There was hundreds and hundreds o f them.
   You c o u ld n 't walk on the pavement because i t was
   a b s o lu t e ly c n o c - a - b l o c , and there was p eo p le walking in
   the roads. There was probably j u s t enough roo^a f o r a
   bus to go through th e middle o f Leppings Lane, oota
   sid es.
Q. Yes. Anything e l s e a t th a t time? Did an yth in g e l s e
   s t r i k e you? - A. Y es, as soon as we g o t i n t o Leppings
   Lane we cou ld s e e p eo p le stood on the w a l l s o f p e o p l e 's
   gardens, and as soon as we walked in they jumped o f f
   and came ru sh in g down the road to u s , about 20,
   probably 3 0 , a l l a sk in g fo r t i c k e t s , i/e s a i d no, we
   hadn't got any, and they was a l l c a r r y in g cans o f beer
   and d r in k in g . The su p p orters th at were coming up
   Leppings Lane, they thought no aore o f j u s t k ick in g
   cans in to the a i r , throwing them in fr o n t gardens and
   shouting and s i n g in g so n g s , t h e i r own songs what they
   sin g a t f o o t b a l l rcatcnes, co n ta in in g t e r r i b l e swear
   words. I t i s u n rep ea ta b le what they were s i n g i n g , you
   know.
Q. Did you d e c id e you cou ld go on or did you d e c id e you
   would turn back? - A. LIo, we c a r r ie d on.
Q. Although a l l t h i s was going on you d i d n ' t f e e l i t was
   r isk y for you to go on? - A. Hot a t th a t tim e, no.
Q. Were t h e r e , in f a c t , apart from the tim e, tne numbers
   being high in r e l a t i o n to the tim e, was the crowd in
   i t s e l f any d i f f e r e n t to any other la r g e f o o t b a l l crowd?
   - A. I t was c e r t a i n l y n o i s i e r , the crowd.
Q. I t was n o i s i e r ? - A. Yes.
Q. But you d i d n ' t f e e l th reatened by i t ? - A. I d i d n ' t
   f e e l tn rea ten ed , no.
J                                                                                        82


                                                                                P. WILSOri




             have had something s h o r t o f a r i o t i f we naci t r i e d to
             stop them with P o l i c e O f f i c e r s .
    B   Q. The t i n e of t h i s e v e n t t h a t you a re speaking about,   the
             t i n e you gave was about 2 0 -r a in u te s-to -3 ? - A. That i s
             when i t s t a r t e d , y e s , I would s a y .
        Q. For how long then d id t h i s e x t r a a r r i v a l o f people
           running go on? - A. S e v e r a l m in u tes. I c o u ld n 't say
           e x a c t ly but s e v e r a l a i n u t e s .
        Q. So by the t i a e they a r r iv e d a t the back o f the croud,
             about what t i a e are you t a l k i n g about? - A. Probably
             about 1 0 - t o - 3 , I arc not s u r e . I c a n ' t be e x a c t l y s u r e .
             I d o n 't mean 10 minutes to g e t from where I was to th e
             back o f the crowd, I mean frora the f i r s t s i g h t o f them
             costing to the t a i l end g e t t i n g to the crowd was
             probably 10 m inutes.
        Q. So t h i s crowd was a r r i v i n g a t the t u r n s t i l e a r e a , you
           are s a y in g , a t about 1 0 - t o - 3 , are you? - A. About t h a t
    D      1 would sa y .
        Q. You c a n ' t be exact? - A. I c a n ' t be s u r e , no.              I don 't
           r e c a l l looking a t ay watch a t the tim e.
        Q. 1 want you j u s t to look p l e a s e a t the o p e r a tio n a l
           order, j u s t to i d e n t i f y what your ord ers were, in ord er
           j u s t to i l l u s t r a t e the p la n n in g th a t had gone in to tn e
           part o f your job . I t i s C2S5, page 33 . You are S e r i a l
           23? - A. That i s c o r r e c t .
        Q. P o lic e Sergeant 2400 Wilson? - A. That i s a m isp rin t -
           i t i s 2408, but tn at i s c o r r e c t .
        Q. I t should be 2403? - A. Yes.
        Q. Ju st go to the p reviou s page, page 37 . - A. Yes.
        Q. Which s t a r t s o f f the Sub S e c t o r , whicn in c lu d e s you? -
           A. Yes.
        0.    And in charge of t h i s Sub S e c to r a t the top             of page 37,
             we can s e e i s In sp e c to r Selwood? - A. Yes.
        Q. So he was your I n s p e c t o r , was he? - A. He was ay
           In s p e c to r , yes.
        0.. And h i s S e r i a l s , tn en , s t a r t a t the top o f page 37 w itn
            S e r i a l 36, righ t? - A. S e r i a l 2S.
        Q.    Sorry, 26 , and they are responsible for public order at
             Parkside Roaa/Caccabar Lane, than there is Serial 2 7 ,
             Penistone i?oad/Leppings Lane, and then ve ?et you, 2 3 ,




    H
                                                                                103


                                                                  P.   C.   L O ..a S




G. And what happened a t 2.30? - A. At 2 . 3 0 , s i r , i t was
   j u s t as i f a s w it c h had been f l i c k e d and the flow o f
   p e d e str ia n t r a f f i c turned, so fro;3 walking away fron
   tne ground they then s t a r t e d to walk towards the
   ground
Q. They walked q u i t e n orm ally, apart from the odd ones who
   might perhaps have sta g g e r e d a b i t , but by and l a r g e
   they were walking ---- they d i d n ' t run? - A. No, s i r .
   There was no running a t a l l . C e r ta in ly tn ere was a l o t
   the worse fo r drink and s e v e r a l of thesi were
   s t a g g e r in g .
Q. 3ut the walk was a normal walk? - A. A normal walk,
   s i r , yes.
Q.   Did they walk in the road or on the pavenents? - A .
     I n i t i a l l y they f i l l e d the pavement and then tnay
     s p i l l e d out onto th e road, then h a l f th e road was
     blocked o f f up Wadsley Lane and than v i r t u a l l y the
     whole o f the road was blocked o f f then by p e d e s t r ia n
     tr a ffic .
Q. What time would th a t have been, about? - A. That was I
   would say about 2 0 - t o - 3 , s i r .
Q. At about t h i s t i a e I think you a l s o looked down
   Leppings Lane, d id you? - A. Yes, s i r .
Q. What was th a t l i k e , was i t s i a i l a r to . . . ? - A. «<o,
   Leppings Lane a t the j u n c t io n w ith Hiddlewood Road was
   blocked w ith t r a f f i c , s i r - s o r r y , blocked w itn
   p ed estria n t r a f f i c , and I deployed a P o l i c e Constable
   to s t o p a l l t r a f f i c going down Leppings Lane a t a l l .
Q. You heard - you may nave - I d o n 't know whether you did
   hear, but one o f your c o l l e a g u e s s a id he thougnt th a t
   the t r a f f i c nad been stopped going down Leppings Lane
   fron q u a r t e r - t o - 1 2 onwards. Would you a gree w ith tn at
   or not? - A. C e r ta in ly not froa cay s i d e , s i r .          I
   stopped t r a f f i c a t 2 . 3 0 . I a l s o heard t n a t soneoody
   sa id th a t Superin ten d en t Marshall had asked cor the
   t r a f f i c to be stop p ed . Radio tr a n s m is sio n s were poor
   tnat day. I d id n >t hear tne message. I looked a t tae
   s i t u a t i o n a t 2 . 3 0 , saw a l l th ose p e o p le , and I d i d n ' t
   want a car g oin g down t h e r e . Due to the c o n d i t io n o f a
   l o t o f the f a n s , they could have stepped in fr o a t o f
   the car and we cou ld have had somebody n u rt fron i t .
0 . So on your own i n i t i a t i v e , you are s a y i n g , you decided
    .to block th a t road o f f ? - A. Yes.
0. And you put one o f your O f f i c e r s to i t ? - A. Yes, s i r .
                                                             55


                                                           .UG.;I




v. But you nad arrival at tna -grounn earlier tna /sar
   before? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got down to the roundabout and tnen had to
   tura oack, were tnere a lot of yeop ls around at tnat
   tine? - A. Yes.

0. And what sort of tine, trying to wore backwards, mi-nt
   that nave oeen? - A. Around nalf-past-2.

0. So just to be sure about it, z c o a half-past-2 you nad
   to walk back up to the coacn? - A. Inat's rignt, to get
   our ticxets and come back.

0. Couja back down tne hill a^ain and then continue your
   journey to the ground and tnat took, in all, about 20
   minutes? - A. Yas, something li;e tiat.

Q. Uhen you got down to tne ground at 10-to-5 were you
   surprised by the number of people that wsra still
   outside? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said you were one of a number of people
   tnat were making tneir way down to tne ground at tnat
   time? - A. Yes, tnat is correct.

0. Did anybody join the back of tna crowd after you got
   tnere? - A. Yes.

Q. Ouite a lot of people? - A. Yas.

Q. In fact, I tnin?: you described bain.; pusned yourself
   forward? - A. Tnat is correct.

Q. You knew you were .much later than you had wanted to oe?
   - A. Yes.

0. But of course you had a goon reason for bein': so lata.
   You must nave thought to yourself, "<ny on aartn are
   all tnese people so late getting here"? - A. Yas.

0. You were aole to get fro.* tna gates and into the inner
   enclosure and tnen through tne turnstile just before
   kioii-off ti.ee? - A. It must nave been aroun i t lat ti :e,
   yes.

0. You would enow it was k i c ::-off itself _because tier;- is
    usually a roar from tne crowd? - A. f.iat is correct.

■   3ut you felt tnat you wanted in any event' to la/e a
     programme? - A. Oh, yes.  It is one of tie souvenirs,
     yas.
                                                                  T.   K. HILTOH




Q. J u s t d e s c r i b e what you saw, and what d id you s e e the
   people d oin g when they a r r iv e d a t the h o r s e s ? - A. Some
   p eople were running under them.
Q. Running under the h o r se s ? - A. Yes - n ot many, but a
   few.
Q. what e l s e ? What p i c t u r e - you s e e tne Jury w e r e n 't
   th ere and they can o n ly r e l y on what you saw, and o th e r
   w i t n e s s e s , o f c o u r s e . - A. J u s t the P o l i c e were j u s t ,
   w ith the h o r s e s , h o r i z o n t a l and then they would j u s t
   back up a b i t and l e t a few p eople through, and p eople
   were running underneath them and round them.
Q. People were running underneath and round them? - A.
   Yes
Q.    You have not a c t u a l l y - i t i s not your f a u l t , you
     haven*t been asked - what i s your e x p e r ie n c e o f going
     to o th e r f o o t b a l l matches? How long have you been
     doing i t and how many matches? - A. Q uite a few y e a r s .
     I have been to a l o t o f f o o t b a l l matches.
0. At d i f f e r e n t grounds? - A. D i f f e r e n t grou n d s,    yes.
Q. Is i t your e x p e r ie n c e t h a t when a la r g e crowd a r r i v e s
   a l l a t th e same time o u t s i d e a f o o t b a l l match - do you
   understand what I am sa y in g ? - A. Yes.
0. I t i s d i f f i c u l t fo r th e P o l i c e then to c o n t r o l the
     advance o f the crowd? - A. Yes, but normally they d o n 't
     a r r iv e a l l a t the same tim e.
Q. Normally what? - A. Normally they d o n 't a r r i v e a t the
   same tim e.
Q. Wo, q u i t e , I a p p r e c ia te t h a t . Have you e v e r in the
   matches you have been to ever se e n so many p eo p le
   a r r i v in g a t the same time s h o r t l y b e fo r e th e k ick o ff ?
   - A. Never.
 Q. Never anything l i k e t h i s before? - A. No.
 Q. J u s t g i v e a b i t more in fo rm a tio n about your ex p e r ie n c e
    so we know what you a r e d e s c r i b i n g . In o t h e r matches,
    I mean, how o f t e n and where and when and a l l that? - A .
    I t i s not so c o n g e s t e d , you know, tne roads . . . .
 Q. No, I w a n t‘to fin d o u t how o f t e n you have been to
    f o o t b a l l matches. How o ld are you now? - A. 21.
 Q. How long have you been attending football matches? - A.
    12 years, 13 years.
                                            G.   RICHARDSON

      /                                                       |

     years to Everton? - A. I stopped in about...    I didn t
     go to a football match from about 1986 onwards.

Q. Up to 1986? -A. Yes.

Q.   Nothing after 1986? - A. One or two.

Q.    And about the same number of times supporting Liverpool,
     is that what you want to say? - A. I only went and
     watched Liverpool.     I didn't go and watch Everton after
     1986.
0. Who did you go and watch after 1986? - A. Just Liverpool.

Q. About how often? - A. Just once or twice.

0. Is that once or twice a year, or what? - A. Once or twice
   a year.
0. The reason I am asking you that is because I want you to
   try and compare your experience this time with your
   experience at the other matches in one particular way.
   Do you understand? - A. Yes.

Q. You have told the court that when you arrived at the
   ground at this match we are talking about now there was a
   very large crowd outside? - A. Yes.

Q.    Loads of people arriving at the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.    This was a few moments before the kick-off was due? - A.
     Yes.
Q. In all your experience have you ever seen such a large
   crowd arriving at the ground just before the kick-off?
   A. No.    I have always been in before three o clock.

0.    When the coach set off to bring your party oyer, did you
     have a time at which you expected to arrive in Sheffield?
     Did you have any idea? - A. Not a clue.

0. You have mentioned the traffic hold-ups at Mancnester?
   A. Yes.   We went over Buxton and all the way round.

          THE CORONER:     I'm sorry, I missed that again.

          THE WITNESS:    We went over Buxton - the driver.

o. •    MR. PAYNE:       You think he went a long way round? -
   A. Yes.
 0. When your coach parked in Halifax Road, were there other
    coaches arriving at the same time? - A. Yes.
                                               G. RICHARDSON



That i s about h a lf - w a y down L ep p in gs Lane? - A. Y es.
Now j u s t , in your own words as you g o t i n t o Leppings Lane
w h il e you were s t i l l ru n n in g , d e s c r i b e th e crowd t h a t you
were w ith? - A. B u i l t up.
What were th ey doing?          - A.- W a itin g f o r th e   g a t e s t o open
r e a lly .
I d o n ' t want t o g e t down t o th e ground y e t ,        I want t o j u s t
come i n t o L eppings Lane when you were running towards th e
ground. Do you s e e ? Now t h e crowd was, you have s a i d
" load s o f p eop le" ? - A. Q u ite a few .
L ots o f o th e r w i t n e s s e s have g i v e n e v id e n c e about what
happened and I want you t o g i v e your s t o r y w ith o u t me
prompting you. Do you u n d ersta n d ? - A. Oh y e s .
So .what was th e crowd d o in g as th e y came i n t o      Leppings Lane?
- A. Well you eou W n o t do n o t h i n g about i t . The g a t s t t w ere
s h u t s o vm were j u s t s h o u t i n g f o r them open.
Very w e l l .   By now i t was what about? - A.                         ,"®';5 * t d .*'
You have s a i d " load s o f p eo p le" which i s a good d e s c r i p t i o n ,
o t h e r s have saAd "huodreds". You would a g ree w ith t h a t
would you? - A. O h y e s .
Arriving about              t i s m ? - A. Yes.

At th e e n tr a n c e to th e ground t h e r e were some P o l i c e on
h o r s e s ? - A. Yes.
With th e h o r s e s cro ssw a y s to th e advance o f th e crowd t r y i n g
t o slow the crowd down and f i l t e r the crowd through? - A.
Well y e s .
And p eo p le were ducking under th e h o r s e s , r ig h t ? - A. Yes.
Because now i t was n e a r l y k i c k - o f f time and everybody wanted
to g e t i n t o th e ground? - A. Y es.
         MR. PAYNE:      Thank you v e r y much.

                       Cross-Examined by HR. K I N G :

Mr. Richardson, was it your impression that the reason the
crowd were getting so anxious was because it was so close
to kick-off? - A. Yes.

Do I take it from that if it had been not so near kick-off
that your impression was that they would have been calmer?
- A . Oh yes.




                                                                          |0       i
                                                               R. W. CREASER


I understand t h a t . - A. So between, s h a l l we sa y ,
2.30 and 3, i f I can d e s c r i b e t h a t s i t u a t i o n .
Yes? - A. I n o t i c e d t h a t th e b u ild -u p o f fa n s was not
as quick, not as r a p id , as i t had been in th e
previous y e a r s . I o b v io u s ly knew t h a t i t was a s e l l ­
out or t h a t a l l th e t i c k e t s had been s o l d . So we
were e x p e c tin g 24,000 L iv erp o o l f a n s . _O bviously n ot
a l l going in th o s e t u r n s t i l e s . The b u ild -u p was
slo w ly g e t t i n g l a r g e r and th ey then reached th e tim e,
and again I wouldn’t want t o be s o r t o f f i v e minutes
e i t h e r s i d e but I would e s t im a t e i t , something l i k e a
quarter t o t h r e e i t seemed t h a t a l o t o f p e o p le y®r ©
a r r iv in g a t once. At another venue I have d e s c r ib e d
i t as i t was l i k e a "leaving" crowd a r r i v i n g .       I t was
almost as i f everyone had d ela y ed th e tim e th e y were
coming t o t h e ground and a l l d e c id e d t o come l a t e r .
When you say th e b u ild -u p , you mean th e b u ild -u p
o u ts id e th e t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. Yes, in what I have
heard d e s c r ib e d as th e fu n n e l, p a r t i c u l a r l y o u t s i d e
T u r n s tile s A t o G I th in k i t w as.
 So what you are t e l l i n g me i s t h a t your im p ression -
 and I am o b v io u s ly i n t e r e s t e d in your im p ression and
 what you saw - i s t h a t a t l e a s t up t o 2.30 t o 2 .4 5 ,
 a t l e a s t up t o 2 .3 0 , i s t h a t t h e r e was a ste a d y flow
 o f people in but n othing e x tr a o r d in a r y , so t o
 speak? - A. That i s r i g h t .
 Then between 2.30 and q u arter t o t h r e e , i f an y th in g ,
 you thought th e numbers in t h a t area were r a th e r
 sm aller than you would have a n t ic ip a t e d ?         A.
 Smaller, y e s . They w e r e i n c r e a s in g a l l th e tim e but
 th e r a te o f in c r e a s e d id not seem as ra p id as th e
 previous y e a r .
 At quarter t o t h r e e th e term you have used i s a
 "leaving" crowd a r r i v i n g , so t o speak? - A. Yes.
 J u st put i t in your words so t h a t I do not p u t i t in
 mine. How d id t h a t "leaving" crowd p r e s e n t i t s e l f t o
 you? - A. I am sorry?
, How d id t h i s crowd a t q u arter t o th r e e p r e s e n t
  i t s e l f ? - A. I t o b v io u s ly w a s n |t l i k e a tap t h a t one
  minute was turned on and one minute was turned o f r .
  I t was over a much sh o r te r p erio d o f time than
  would have e x p e c te d . The p rop ortion o f p eo p le who
  arriv ed , who had been d rin k in g , was in c r e a s in g and
  s t a r t e d t o i n c r e a s e r a p id ly a t t h i s time but I th in k




                                                                                   I©
                                                              108




                                                     G. SYK l S




Q. And having been unsuccessful with the radio, was your
   cordon still in place or had tnat riisaopeared by that
   time? - A. By that stage it got a bit ragged and
   disappeared.

0. Where did all the oounted Officers go to? - A. They
   were tnere but the crowd was sucn, they nad lost the
   cordon.
                                                                    k
Q. what did you observe about the crowd at about that
   time? - A. It was the sheer volune of it, the amount of
   people approaching and the state of sone of then, in
   that quite obviously they had been drinking.

0. wnat was happening to your nen by the turnstiles at
   this point? - A. At that stage I saw, I think,
   Inspector Bennett on tne top of the turnstiles.

U. So you saw hi«i on tne top? - A. On tne top, pulling
   people up onto the top of the wall, and they were going
   over the wall into the ground.   I had completely lost
   sight of all ray men at the turnstiles.

Q. So you don't know wnat was nappening to them? - A. It
   was very, very difficult due to the restricted view.

Q. Did it look crowded in tnere? - A. Yes, sir, very
   crowded.

0. Could you see froci wnere you were - it sounds, as if you
   were on the outside - could y o u s e e wnat was happening
   at tne front? - A. Not rignt at the front.      Obviously
   from tne nunber of people approacning the turnstiles at
   that particular tine and tne actions of Nr. Bennett and
   tne raounted men wno I could see near the turnstiles,
   then obviously I knew tnere were problems right down at
   the front.

Q. I see. Again, you put two and two togetner and you
   realised there were problems? - A. Yes.

Q. what attempts if any were nade to control the crowd at
   tnat point? Wnat time are ve talking about now, about
   quarter-to? - A. we are talking after half-past-2,
   going up towards quarter-to-3 tine.

0. i.nat attempts if any were being nade during   tiiis period
   at controlling the crowd? - A. Tnat is when    I saw tne
   norses again, so I an presuming that is the    cordon that
   i*r. Greaser put in, wnich was after the one   that I nad
   done.

Q. uiu you see a landrover? - A. Yes, sir, tnere was a
   Police lanarover arrived and parked, as you loo< at tne
                                                                                II




                                                                     G.   SYKES

    /

Q. Round about 2 .3 0 t h e s i t u a t i o n was s t i l l in hand? -
   A. I t was s t i l l c o n t r o l l a b l e a t t h a t s t a g e .
Q. You s a i d in one s p e c i f i c i n s t a n c e I put t o you, th e
   c lim b in g over, t h a t you had never seen anything l i k e
   t h a t b e fo r e . You, o f c o u r s e , In s p e c to r , are in a
   s i t u a t i o n t o make a d i r e c t comparison w ith th e y ea r
   b e f o r e because you had i d e n t i c a l d u t i e s th e year
   b e fo r e ? - A. Yes, I worked down th e r e f o r th e l a s t
   t e n y ea rs and I have never seen anyone in t h a t tim e
   clim b over th e o u te r w a l l .
Q. In more gen eral terms o f t h a t crowd, o f t h a t b u i l d ­
   up, o f th e p eo p le a r r iv in g a t t h a t s o r t o f tim e, o f
   t h e i r demeanour? - A. Yes, s i r . They a l l seemed t o
   come a t once. Normally we g e t a stea d y b u ild -u p o f
   p e o p le coming. I c a n ' t remember what tim e t h e g a t e s
   open but ele v e n o ' c l o c k , tw e lv e o ' c l o c k , even a t t h a t
   s t a g e people are goin g i n t o th e ground t o t r y and g e t
   a good l o c a t i o n . Prom t h a t time you g e t a stea d y
   b u ild -u p and a n i c e stea d y flow o f fa n s i n t o th e
   ground. That d i d n ' t happen on t h i s o c c a s io n .
Q. Would you say s o f a r as th o s e a s p e c ts o f your te n
   y e a r s o f duty down th e r e are concerned t h a t you have
   never seen anything l i k e t h a t b efore? - A. No, n e v e r .
Q. I t i s not something t h a t you cou ld have reason ab ly
   expected? - A. No, I never a n t i c ip a t e d t h a t . I t was
   j u s t u n fo r e se e a b le w ith th e inform ation t h a t I had t o
   hand.
                       Cross-Examined        bv MR. KING;
Q. In s p e c to r , i f you had been g iv en in form ation in
   advance th a t t h e r e was a r i s k a l o t o f p eo p le might
   come a t th e same tim e near t o k i c k - o f f , what
   d i f f e r e n c e would t h a t have made in your e x p e r ie n c e as
   t o how you would have planned f o r th at? - A. At t h e
   t u r n s t i l e s o b v io u s ly I cou ld have asked f o r more
   manpower and more h o rses i f th ey were a v a i l a b l e .          I
   do not know how many h o rses th e r e were, spare or
   whatever. I had no id ea what was happening a t th e
   o th e r s i d e o f t h e ground or o th er p a r ts o f th e
   v i c i n i t y o f t h e ground. I o n ly had th e t u r n s t i l e s t o
   d e a l w ith .
 Q. I was r e a l l y t r y i n g t o d i r e c t your m ind.at th e
    b r i e f i n g , a t t h a t s t a g e , because you have t o l d us a t
    t h e b r i e f i n g i t was not contemplated t h a t a la r g e
    group o f people would a r r iv e a t th e same tim e in th e
                                                                      E. J. WILSON


That means t h a t you w e r e n 't e x p e c tin g th a t many coming
down th a t h i l l ? - A. No.
Had you been g iv e n any gu idance as to where th e p eop le
were l i k e l y to come from - A. With working th e ground
th ere r e g u l a r l y i t ' s a g e n e r a l f a c t th a t you know to turn
your a t t e n t i o n s to a t r a i n a r r i v a l and once t h a t i s
s a t i s f a c t o r y then you would o b v io u s ly look f o r what th ere
i s to do n e x t and perhaps u se your own i n i t i a t i v e as
regards t h a t ) but b eca u se I was d e t a i l e d and I knew my
job was i n the p e r im e te r a r e a , the Middlewood Road/Catch
Bar L ane/the b rid g e a r e a , t h a t i s u s u a lly f o r p e o p le j u s t
making a c c e s s in t h e i r own v e h i c l e s , but I n ever
a n t i c i p a t e d a t a l l t h a t number o f p eople to sudden i n f l u x
w ith in the l a s t t h i r t y m in u tes.
T h a t's my n e x t q u e s t io n : what time would you say the
p eo p le were coming down from the Middlewood 3oad/Catch
Bar Lane area? Do you know?                 -If you don t know,
d o n ' t . . . - A. I t was a s t e a d y flo w , but a f t e r the t r a in
e s c o r t i t was r e a l l y enormously heavy. Within a few
minutes i t was r e a l l y a d r a s t i c change.
So you d e f i n i t e l y n o t i c e d a s u b s t a n t i a l change in the
people coming down? -A . Y es.
So you were caught by s u r p r i s e w ith regard to t h a t .                       You
were w ith your c o l l e a g u e from Nottingham and you
continued a g a i n s t the flo w o f t r a f f i c up towards the
t r a f f i c l i g h t s , i s t h a t r i g h t , or what did you do? - A.
Yes, I moved the f u l l l e n g t h o f the bridge up to the
t r a f f i c l i g h t s and back but as I turned my a t t e n t i o n s up
there I saw th ere was a very sm all number o f f o o t
policeman who were waving t h e i r arms, t h e y s e e m to have
tro u b le a t t h i s t r a f f i c l i g h t a r e a .    I t didn t take me
long to r e a l i s e the f a c t th ere had been some form o f
f i g h t or sk irm ish up th e r e so we then g a llo p e d up th ere
to g i v e a s s i s t a n c e t o them.           When a f i g h t ta k e s p la c e
everybody wants to run and s e e what i s happening.                              If
everybody had run t h e r e i t would have stru ck p an ic and
every th in g e l s e so i t was a c a se of d i s p e l l i n g th a t
s i t u a t i o n as q u ic k ly a s p o s s i b l e .
In f a c t you s u c c e e d e d admirably in doing th at? There
w asn 't any problem w ith regard to that? - A. There was a
l a t e r problem on the b r id g e when something e l s e e i t h e r
had rumbled, had s t a r t e d , or was about to s t a r t .
Was t h i s b e fo r e the match began? - A. Yes, i t would be
not l o n g . . .    I t would perhaps be approximately between
2.30 and 2 . 4 0 .
                                           P. HAND-DAVIS


accord in g to plan I mean? - A. No, had every th in g gone
accord in g to p la n , I had r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s a l l around
the ground. P e n is to n e Road was e q u a l ly as important
to me because o f the numbers going through there b u t,
as i t happens, I n ever r e a l l y g o t to P en iston e Road.
Things at Leppings Lane develop ed and I never l e f t i t .
So what did you p e r c e i v e happen? - A. C e r ta in ly at
2.15 th ere was n o th in g p a r t i c u l a r l y to worry me, but
c e r t a i n l y from 2 .3 0 onwards th ere was a b s o l u t e l y no
chance fo r me to l e a v e Leppings Lane a t a l l .
What happened then at 2 .3 0 as fa r as you could see? -
A. W ell, a phenomenon - an a b s o l u t e i n f l u x o f people
in huge numbers. C e r t a in ly n o th in g l i k e i t at 2.15
was s e e n , but by 2 .3 0 we were r e a l l y in a c r i s i s in
terms o f the sudden appearance o f thousands o f p eo p le .
We know the answer to t h i s , but did you a c t u a l l y se e
them come from both ends o f Leppings Lane, or did you
j u s t n o t i c e them from one end? - A. They were coming
from both e n d s.       I th in k I have s a id th a t perhaps fo r
every two th a t were coming from Leppings Lane end one
was coming down from the b r id g e .
So your p e r c e p tio n was th a t th ere were more coming up
Leppings Lane from the H a lif a x Road area than coming
down Catch Bar Lane? - A. Y es, c e r t a i n l y huge numbers
from both d i r e c t i o n s .
But when the crowds f i r s t o f a l l came down a t , say,
2 .3 0 I th in k your im p ressio n o f the crowd was s t i l l a
good-natured crowd, would th a t be r ig h t? - A.
C e r ta in ly the 2 .1 5 to 2 .3 0 time w asn 't anything to
worry about, and they were a good-natured crowd and no
problems.
At t h i s p o in t where were you a c t u a l l y p o sitio n e d ?
Were you w ith in the t u r n s t i l e a r e a , or were you in the
roadway, or where were you? - A. I was moving about
on the concourse a r e a , t a l k i n g £o p eople and
s u p e r v is in g g e n e r a l l y , but I did not at that time
e n te r the t u r n s t i l e a r e a , no.
When you say the concourse area, so that we can get
this right, are you meaning the paved area outside the
perimeter gates? - A. I think the PW referred to it as
the Reception Area, and we might well best keep to
that.  It is the Reception Area because we receive
coaches there usually.

 I used the word "concourse" for the inside.  So that
 was where you were? - A. In that general area, yes.
                                                                                           66




                                                                         P. HAND-DAVIS


         Yes, our o n ly r e a l concern was t h e South Stand c a r
         park, which we f e l t h a d n 't been c a t e r e d f o r . A l o t o f
g        c ru sh in g problems can occur down t h e r e sometimes w ith
         queuing and we b u i l t in a sm all c o n tin g e n c y f o r t h a t
         in 1989 as opposed t o 1988.
     Q. That was as a r e s u l t o f an e x p e r i e n c e in one o f t h e
        p r e v io u s y e a r s , was i t ? - A. Yes, n o t a c o m p la in t,
        j u s t an awareness t h a t we had n o t c a t e r e d f o r i t and
        i t needed t o be b u i l t i n t o 1 9 8 9 ' s o p e r a t i o n s .
     Q. Had anything happened p r e v i o u s l y t o prepare you f o r
        what was t o come in 1989? - A. No, a l l o f my mounted
        e x p e r ie n c e in some way h elp ed b u t I c o u l d n ' t p u l l t h e
        answer o u t o f t h e h a t . There w a s n 't an answer so f a r
        as I was concerned t o p u l l o u t o f t h e h a t .
     Q. Prom your e x p e r ie n c e p l e a s e - a l o t o f o th e r
        w i t n e s s e s have done t h i s b u t I t h in k t h e Jury would
        l i k e t o hear from you as b e in g i n ch arge o f - th e
JJ      mounted s e c t i o n - can you compare t h e e v e n t s o f 1989
        w ith your p r e v io u s e x p e r ie n c e , p a r t i c u l a r l y o f t h o s e
        two p r e v io u s f i n a l s ? I th in k t h r e e t h i n g s are
        p a r t i c u l a r l y i n t e r e s t i n g , one i s t h e numbers o f t h e
        p e o p le , two i s t h e tim e a t which th e y a r r iv e d and I
        th in k t h e t h i r d one i s th e beh aviou r o f th e p e o p l e .
        F i r s t o f a l l , in terms o f numbers in t h e p e r io d
        s h o r t l y b e f o r e t h e k i c k - o f f ? - A. I th in k t h e e a s i e s t
        and most gra p h ic way o f d e s c r i b in g t h i s i s t h a t our
        o p e r a tio n was planned t o s t a r t f i n i s h i n g a t q u a r te r
        t o t h r e e , c e r t a i n l y in terms o f P e n is to n e Road. In
        a l l t h r e e Semi F i n a l s I prepared f o r th e mutual a i d
        h o r se s t o stan d down a t q u arter t o t h r e e and go back
        f o r a m eal. C e r t a in l y in terms o f what happened on
        P e n isto n e Road in a l l th r e e y e a r s we were a b le t o do
        t h a t . By q u a rter t o th r e e on P e n is to n e Road a l l th e
        fa n s were in a t t h a t end. C e r t a in l y i n terms o f 1987
        and 1988 most o f i t was a l l over by q u a rter t o t h r e e
        on Leppings Lane. 1989 i s d i f f e r e n t in r e s p e c t t h a t
        we were s t i l l v er y much in v o lv e d a t one end o f th e
        ground in 1989 w ith huge amounts o f p eo p le and t h a t
        was th e most amazing th in g t o me i n terms o f th e
        th r e e y e a r s .
     Q. Can you make a comparison p l e a s e in terms o f th e
        behaviour o f th e crowd? - A. Yes, I th in k t h a t
        beh aviou r, I c a n ' t say i t was an a g g r e s s i v e th in g on
        th e p a r t o f t h e L iverp ool p e o p le , I th in k more o f a
        complacency. They knew th e ground. I worked i t out
        t h a t th e y had been th e r e fou r tim es t h a t y e a r . I
        f e l t t h a t th e y were as c o n fid e n t in th e ground as I
                                                                               7



                                                                          B. RIDGE


Q. Apart from the f a c t th ere were a l o t o f people th ere a t
   th a t tim e, was th ere anything e l s e unusual as far as you
   y o u r s e lf was concerned, as far as you could see or hear,
   not what other p eop le to ld you, not what you have heard*
   - A. No, not p a r t i c u l a r l y , except th ere were more people
   seemed to come a l o t l a t e r than there has been at
   previous s e m i - f i n a l s .
Q. You did n o t i c e that? - A. Yes.
Q. You mentioned t i c k e t l e s s fa n s.     I d o n 't want to go^into
   what happened away from the ground because you didn t see
   th a t , but did you y o u r s e l f see anybody who you can
   p o s i t i v e l y say did not have a t i c k e t ? • A. No, not
   rea lly .
                       Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q. Mr. Ridge, you did make one comment th at in 1988 you said
   the p o l i c e were h old in g back people without t i c k e t s ? - A.
   Yes, I b e l i e v e i s tr u e .
Q. You d on 't a c t u a l l y know th at y o u r s e l f , do you? - A.
   W e ll...
Q. From anything you saw? - A. W ell, I probably read i t in
   the papers, or something l i k e th a t.
Q. I t i s not something you know y o u r s e l f .           Just look a t the
   bundle o f photographs at C.258.
           THE CORONER:           I d on 't th in k , Mr. Payne, you need to
     go in t o t h i s a t g r e a t len g th .   I am not tr y in g to stop
     you.     I am j u s t saying i t i s f a i r l y c l e a r .
Q.           MR. PAYNE:         J u st look at t h i s p h o t o g r a p h . We need
     not spend very long on t h i s , Mr. Ridge, because i t i s •
     f a i r l y o b v io u s, but you can see your g a te there j u s t to
     the l e f t o f t u r n s t i l e s A to G? - A. Yes.
Q. I f you look out through your p o rth o le you can j u s t see
   across the mouth o f those t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. You can, y e s ,
   and s l i g h t l y towards the main g a t e , very s l i g h t l y .
Q. You c a n ' t see anything th at i s happening o u ts id e the
   oth er range o f t u r n s t i l e s 1 to 16, can you? - A. Not
   u n less we do g et a glimpse through the a c tu a l t u r n s t i l e s
   which fa c e u s , which are t u r n s t i l e s , I b e l i e v e , 1 to 16
   or 1 to 17.
Q. You are not in a p o s i t i o n to g et any s o r t o f a view of
   the system which i s being operated by the p o l ic e i n the
   r e c e p tio n area a t a l l , are you? - A. Not r e a l l y , no.
                                                                                             23
                                                                                J. MORGAN


Q. Which D i v i s i o n were th ey i n i n 1989? - A. In 1989 they
   were in the F i r s t D i v i s i o n .
Q. Which means t h a t o th e r c lu b s who v i s i t e d them would
   o b v io u s ly a l l be F i r s t D i v i s i o n c l u b s , in c lu d in g
   L iverpool? - A. Yes.
Q. On the o c c a sio n o f popular c l u b s l i k e L iv e r p o o l, what
   s o r t o f crowds had a tten d ed ? - A. L iv e r p o o l have q u i t e a
   la r g e f o l l o w i n g . I t i s w e l l known and they have always
   been very w e l l behaved.
Q. Q u ite .     I am concerned a t th e moment about numbers in
   the ordinary run o f lea g u e matches? - A. I w o u ld n 't say
   th at the numbers on an o rd in a ry le a g u e game would a c h ie v e
   ca p a city .
Q. What s o r t o f p ro p o rtio n o f c a p a c i t y have you e x p e r ie n c e d
   a t o th e r lea g u e matches d u rin g th e two or th r e e y ea rs
   b efo re 1989? - A. I have been to matches where th e r e was
   a very l a r g e crowd.          I am u n ab le t o put numbers on , or
   be s p e c i f i c about p a r t i c u l a r m atch es, but c e r t a i n l y I
   have been th e r e when th e away su p p ort has been q u i t e
   la rg e.
Q. I want to ask you a g a i n s t t h a t e x p e r ie n c e about the
   b u ild -u p a t th e t u r n s t i l e s b e f o r e th e k i c k - o f f , b e fo r e
   the d i s a s t e r took p l a c e . - A. Yes.
Q. In your e x p e r ie n c e , s t a t i o n e d as you were o u t s id e the
   perim eter g a t e s on th o se o t h e r o c c a s i o n s , in c lu d in g the
   1987 match and any o th e r match you want to th in k a b o u t,
   have you ever seen p eo p le b e in g cru sh ed up a g a i n s t th e
   t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. Never, no.
Q. Have you ever seen a crowd o f th e s o r t you have been
   d e s c r i b in g today? - A. Never i n my e x p e r i e n c e .
Q. I s i t f a i r to d e s c r i b e what happened o u t s i d e th e
   t u r n s t i l e s - I know i t may sound s i l l y but I want to make
   sure you agree w ith th e word - i s i t f a i r to d e s c r i b e i t
   as an emergency? - A. D e f i n i t e l y , y e s .      I t was unique.
   Something which I have n e v e r , e v e r , s e e n .
Q. Can you h e lp th e ju ry t o und erstan d how t h i s happened a t
   t h i s p a r t i c u l a r match? - A. O b v io u sly I l e f t t h a t a rea a t
   ten p a s t two.            The b u ild -u p p r i o r to t h a t had been o n ly
   moderate and when I returned a t twenty to th r e e i t was
   j u s t u n b e l ie v a b l e .  I was sh o ck ed .       I had n ever seen
   anything o f the l i k e .            There was o b v io u s ly a very l a t e
   i n f l u x o f su p p o rters a r r i v i n g l a t e a t th e ground.
Q. What the ju ry may be i n t e r e s t e d in i s t h i s : on th e o th e r
   o c c a s io n s when you have seen l a r g e crowds a t t e n d in g ,
                                                  A. ATKIN



How much o f i t ,    t o p , a l l o f i t ? - A. I c o u ld s e e th e top
of i t .
      THE CORONER: Show us on a p lan where you were as
near as you can on th e Stand. Okay.
        MR. BEACHEY:        C469 s i r .
        THE CORONER:        Mr. Payne?

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
You and your 15 f r i e n d s a r r i v e d a t th e ground a t about
a q u a r t e r - t o - 3 . I s t h a t r i g h t ? - A. Yes.
Are you a r e g u l a r f o o t b a l l su p p orter? - A. Yes.
What time do you u s u a l l y a r r i v e a t th e match? - A. U su a lly
about the same tim e .
I s t h a t normal f o r you and your f r i e n d s to a r r iv e ? - A. Y es.
When you a r r i v e d th e r e was a b i g mass o f p eo p le o u t s i d e .     I
Is t h a t a normal e x p e r i e n c e f o r you? - A. No.                        I
Can you o f f e r any h e lp as to how i t was t h a t so many                     "
people were a r r i v i n g a t t h a t time? - A. No, n o t r e a l l y .

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Did you regard y o u r s e l f as l a t e ? - A.      No.
Do you go t o many         f o o t b a l l matches? - A. Yes.
Some f o o t b a l l matches you have to pay money to g e t i n ,
d o n 't you, you have to pay? - A. Not a t A n f i e l d you d o n ' t .
You d o n 't have to pay a t A n fie ld ? - A. You have t o
have t i c k e t s in advance to g e t i n .
So be i t , b u t some games you have to pay a t th e t u r n s t i l e s ?
- A. Not many, most L iv e r p o o l games are a l l t i c k e t .
At the a l l t i c k e t     games, o f which you o b v io u s ly have a l o t
o f e x p e r i e n c e , do you norm ally a r r i v e a t th e s o r t o f time
you have t o l d us? - A. Y es.
        MR. KING:      Thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
Mr. A tkin, you s a i d you had a t e r r a c e t i c k e t d i d n ' t you?
- A. Yes.
                                                           54




                                              A. LINDLEY


     you were standing by the forecourt of your garages? -
     A. Yes.
Q. The Officer is pointing to a place which is where we
   think you were? - A. That is about the entrance to
   the car park.

Q. Is that about where you were standing? - A. Yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:   That is on the northern corner we
     will call it of Bickerton Road and Leppings Lane.
     Would you agree? - A. Just a little bit further on
     from the corner of Bickerton Road.

Q.        MR.  PAYNE: Further on towards the stadium or
     towards the roundabout? - A. Towards the roundabout.
     About fifty yards there is about four shops and there
     is the car park.

Q. Mr. Lindley, using your own words and taking your own
   time, explain what you mean by your reference to
   "like putting a lid on a boiling kettle”? Describe
   what you are trying to explain? - A. We could see it
   looked as though there was trouble. There was a
   large number of people outside the ground and we
   could see the Police trying to do something with
   them. It just looked as though there was something
   boiling up into trouble and we said, "There is going
   to be trouble there" and, of course, this surge of
   people came along. That is what it looked like, a
   lot of people outside the ground, massing, moving
   around, going around, and all trying to push towards
   the turnstiles and then this surge of people came
   along and just pushed them on. They just joined them
   and started pushing.  It was just awful.

Q. For how many years have you been guarding these
   garages on big events? - A. About eight or ten years
   now.

Q. Have you ever seen so many people arriving just
   before the kick-off? - A. No, never so many.
   Normally we get three or four cars round about five
   to three, just on the last two or three minutes.
   They just come in, dump their cars on the side and
   then off they go. The number of people, are usually
   finished by about ten minutes to, five minutes to
   three unless there was a late train of course.




                                                             )($
                                                                          72




                                                     J. R. T. BARTHOLOMEW


Q. I know you say i t d id n o t have any e f f e c t on th e
   crowd? - A. I t d id n o t seem t o have, no.
Q. What were p eo p le doing a t th e back o f th e crowd a t
   t h a t time? - A. They were j u s t pushing i n t o th e
   crowd.
Q. I do n o t knowwhat e v id e n c e l a t e r on th e Jury are
   going t o hear but where you were, f o r th e sound o f
   th e announcement t o g e t t o you, i t had g o t t o come
   from th e Land Rover and a c r o s s th e road where you
   were sta n d in g c l e a r o f t h e crowd? - A. You s e e , where
   we were, how can I p u t i t . . . .
Q. I am so rry t o i n t e r r u p t you and I beg your pardon b ut
   what I want t o f i n d o u t i s , from where you were do
   you th in k th e crowd c o u ld n o t hear what was b ein g
   said? - A. I w ou ld n 't th in k s o . I t was i n t h e i r
   e a r h o le s more or l e s s , you know. That Land Rover was
   co m p letely surrounded by p e o p le .
Q. They were c l o s e r t o th e Land Rover than you were? -
   A. They would be to u ch in g i t .   I was 40 yards away
   and I heard i t as p l a i n as th e day.
Q. You had l e f t home a t tw enty minutes or q u arter t o
   t h r e e . By th e tim e you g o t down th e r e and were
   o u t s id e th e ground i t must have been g e t t i n g near
   k i c k - o f f but can you be more a c c u r a te than th a t? - A.
   We s e t o f f a t a slow walk but w ith th e momentum o f
   th e p eo p le we had t o keep up w ith them b ecau se we
   were g e t t i n g pushed. So I would imagine i t would be
   ten minutes to t h r e e - i s h or near t h a t tim e .
Q. When you g o t to th e b r id g e you have t o l d th e Coroner
   th a t th e r e were some p e o p le s i t t i n g ? Whereabouts on
   th e b rid g e were they? There i s a photograph which
   has been very h e l p f u l l y put up on th e screen ? - A.
   They were a l l s a t on th e pavement on t h a t s i d e o f th e
   b rid g e.
Q. They were s a t on th e pavement on the s i d e o f th e
   b rid ge o p p o s ite to th e en tran ce? - A. They s a t on th e
   flo o r.

Q.            THE CORONER:      I d id not hear th e answer. Could
     you r e p e a t i t ? - A. They were s a t on th e f l o o r w ith
     t h e i r backs t o th e b r i d g e . There were some sto o d as
     w e ll but mainly th e y were a l l s a t .
       MR. PAYNE:      Yes -




                                                                               »»S
                                                                    101




    0. So you were, in fact, in a position outside that blue
       perimeter r.ate, that olua concertina gate? - A. Yes, I
       t.iink that was open at the ti.ne. 3/ t ie tiirsi we got
B      tnere taat was open.   There was nobody around.

    0. So waea aid you ask the Policeman?    You nava confused
       rae, or I nave confused .uyself. - A. iie had 5 0 1 tnrou;»;i
       the first gate, the periiieter >ate, and then we
       approacaed tae concertina gate, wnic.i auat nave oeea
       opened, and ne was stood tnere.

    Q. I wonder if it is easier if we l o o : C at tae pictures?
       Could you put 258 up, please?   Can you see tnose, I
       call taen peri.aeter gates - gates wita railings? - A.
       Yes.

    0   . Then beyond that there are  3 o.ma turnstiles and tnen
          tnere is a van there.  Can you sea waera tae van is? -
          A. Yes.  Firstly we were stoo;; outside tne perineter
          gates, rignt to the right hand side.

D         .light at the right hand side, yes. - A. And then when
          the gates were opened we proceeded to tne right and v/e
          kept going througn, past tne van, and kept going.

    0. i/hare were you when you asked tne Policeman, "..'here do
               1?" and
          we go?"  anr5 hp
                        he said.
                           said,   ‘'Get in the ground'*? - A. de war.
                                   "G<
          past the wnite van.

    0. So tnere was some Police Officer down tnare wno.?; you
          were able to speak to? - A. Yes.

    0. unen you first were outsina taose perineter ^ates war.
       cney snut, because you said tney were opened? - A. I
       tain% taey were snut because thera was a Police .an on
       aorseoack right outside ana nobody was noving,
       everyoony -was just pushing forward, so taey nust have
       been close.   I couldn't really see.

    0. So you say tne gates were snut, taere was a Police
       Officer and people were pusaiag forward? - .. Yes.

        0. And taen they opened but you dian't see now taat
           aaopened? - A, t»'0 4

        Q. You went along tnere as you described ana you entered
           through tnese blue gates? - A. Yres.

        0. davin; got in, I think in fact you ap^roacnad a
           steward, is taat ri jht? - A. Yes, tnare was a steward
           stood to tae riant.

           Of tnat ^ete? - A. ■is you went taro,!'       !•: I tain’: it
           was tne stairs taat       • O U: aa            st.od taere
                                                            R. J. THOMPSON



       THE CORONER:          That is C293.
                  Cross-Examined by .MR. HALE
You have been to many matches b e f o r e , I assume? - A
Yes.
The cru sh in g t h a t occurred o u t s i d e th e t u r n s t i l e s on
t h i s o c c a s i o n , nad you e v e r e x p erien ced cru sh in g l i k e
t a a t before? - A. No.
The p ressure was o b v io u s ly very g r e a t th ere? - A. Y es.
Mas i t c o n ta in ed on ly by th e s t r u c t u r e o f the
t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. Oh, y e s .
I f they a a d n 't been tn e r e wiiat would nave happened to
tn a t crowd of people? - A. i / e l l i f tney nad c o l l a p s e d
they would have a l l d i e d , I t h in k .
;<o, assume t n a t th ere was some l e s s s u b s t a n t i a l
s t r u c t u r e t h e r e , say crowd b a r r i e r s , you know, th e
p o r ta b le k in d , or even a l i n e o f P o lic e n e n s ta n d in g
a c r o s s tr y in g to hold t n a t crowd back, would t a e y have
succeeded? - A. I ax not r e a l l y su re what you a r e
rea lly a fte r .           I f tn ere nad been an ything l e s s s t r o n g
than tn a t i t would have gone.
I t would have gone? - A. Y es.
Yes, th a t i s what I was a s k in g you, because when you
got i n s i d e th e tu nnel and onto the s ta n d , the stan d
i t s e l f i s f a i r l y wide, although- i t i s d iv id ed crown i n t o
segm ents, was i t tne sarae s o r t o f p ressu re t h a t cane
from behind when you were down on the stand as th e
p ressure t n a t you had e x p e r ie n c e d a t the t u r n s t i l e s ? -
A. No, the p r e ss u r e i n s i d e was g r e a t e r .
Thank you.
                  Cross-Exanined by .
                                    m R. PAYNE

Hr. Thompson, on the q u e s t io n o f the a t t e a p t s to
c o n t r o l the crowd o u t s id e the t u r n s t i l e s , I wonder i f
you can be shown some photograp n s, p l e a s e , b eg in n in g
w itn tne C oroner's number 282.
tj:i. PAYNii:   I ai3 not s u r e i f t h i s in in the J u r y ' s
bundle, s i r .  I t was not p a r t o f tne o r i g i n a l b u n d le ,
but i t i s th e one wnicn was produced . . . .
     THE COROrifiri:         We have g o t i t up on tne s c r e e n
anyway.
                                                               48


                                            R .A . KNOWLES


     - A. I think they were very frustrated in trying to gain
     access to the ground. The ones at the back were pushing and
     saying, "Come on. Let’s get in", and the ones at the front
     knowing there was nowhere for them to go were shouting back,
     "Please, stop pushing. People are actually getting crushed
     in the front part. Please ease back", but in a situation like
     that you can't really hear or understanding.  You are just
     pushing forward trying to gain access.  I don’t think they
     could hear anything being shouted from the front.

Q. Did you hear any loudspeakers? - A. I saw a Policeman with a
   megaphone actually came from by the concertina gate and walked
   the other side of me, so I d o n ’t really hear what he was
   shouting.
Q. You could not hear what was being said? - A. No, because I was
   on the other side of him.

Q. I am not saying he did, but if he had shouted something about
   the timing of the game you would not have heard it? - A. No, I
   would not.
Q. Is that because there was such a lot of noise going on? - A.
   It was quite noisy, people shouting.

Q. I am not saying he said that.   Don't get me wrong.       - A. No.

Q. Then eventually in fact you heard Officers discuss opening the
   gate? - A. We were standing right by the gate, and there was a
   line of Officers there. I think it was a Sergeant, I remember
   I was standing particularly by him, and he did start to
   discuss the possibility of opening this gate to ease some of
   the pressure from the crowd. They were saying if they kept
   the perimeter gates closed and eased the people by the
   turnstiles through, this may be a way of stopping, unblocking
   the turnstiles and allowing people outside to actually then to
   start to move forward. So I stayed with the boys by that
   gate, expecting perhaps we might get through that way.

Q.   It wasyour hope that would happen? - A. Yes.

Q. As an aside, have you ever gone through a gate as opposed to a
   turnstile? - A. No.

Q. In fact, that is precisely what did happen, the gate did open?
   - A. Yes. The Policeman with the megaphone I think went
   inside, and then after perhaps a couple of minutes came back
   out, and I think it was the Sergeant that was standing by got
   a message over his radio. I remember distinctly standing
   right by and he put his message, it was mentioned, "The gate
   will open” . He enquired, "Open the gate?".   I remember him
   saying, "Open the gate?", and it came back across the radio,
   "Yes". So he then went to the gate and knocked on the gate,
   and it was opened, slightly at first.  The 20 or 30 people
   that had been milling around that area then moved towards it.
   I think I was about two or three behind.   I was offering my
   tickets, but there was nobody even bothered about that. The
                                                        b4




                                                    M.~~C. GOULD .



Q. Whilst you were out there looking in, so to speak,
   you were an observer? - A. Yes.

Q.    What was happening to the crowd on this side of the
     gates? - A. They were trying to get through to the
     other side ©f them, pushing.

Q. How could you tell that? What gave you that
   impression? - A. The way that they were trying to
   push through the gates that were open and to try and
   open the gates that were shut.

Q. How were they trying to open the gates that were
   shut? - A. Either by physically opening them or by
   asking or shouting at other people to open them.

Q. Could you hear that with your own ears? - A. I could
   not hear the words but you could guess what they were
   saying by their gestures.

Q. Could you see whether the gate was moving? I do not
   mean opening but moving backwards and forwards? - A.
   No, I couldn't.

Q. You could not see that? - A. No.

Q. So you are making a bit of an assumption there, that
   they were trying to open that gate? - A. I mean, I
   wouldn't have thought it was an assumption.  If
   people are trying to get through then they would need
   to open the gate.

Q. Okay. I am not trying to catch you out but I am just
   trying to make sure we get it as accurately as we
   can? - A. Yes.

Q. While this was going on you noticed I think a big
   concertina gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is actually on the plan behind. Turn round and
   look. Is that right? - A. Yes.    I could see it
   through the trees because I was standing further
   away.

Q. I think you noticed that it opened? - A . Yes.

Q. It opened slightly? - A. Yes.

Q. Did anybody get through at that point? - A. Only
   twenty or so at the moment.
                                                                        87



                                                         S. K. BOARDMAN



Q.    You d i d n ' t know any o f th e o th e r p e o p le , did you? You
     were j u s t w ith your f r i e n d s , i t was j u s t a coach you
     had boarded? - A. Yes.
Q. You d i d n ' t know who was m i s s i n g , did you? - A. No.
Q. You j u s t knew th a t th e r e were some empty spaces? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Thank you.       You have done very w e l l , I think anyway.
                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
0 . When you went to g e t on th e coaches b e fo r e you s e t o f f
    from L iv e r p o o l, th ere was a delay? - A. Yes.
Q. Because th e r e was a b i t o f       pushing? - A. Yes, and the
   P o li c e were tak in g a l c o h o l o f anyone who was tr y in g to
   take i t on the c o a ch es.
Q. Who was doing the pushing? - A. J u s t p eo p le tr y in g to
   g e t on the c o a c h e s , “j l s t the fa n s .
Q. Why did t h i s cause a d e la y ? - A. The P o l i c e were ta k in g
   t h e i r time checking e v e r y o n e 's bags and they were
   thinking what was the hold up f o r .
Q. Who was th in k in g th at? - A. The fans - w e ll I think
   they were th in k in g what was the hold up f o r .
Q. What makes you th in k th a t? - A. Because people were
   g e t t i n g on the coaches so s l o w l y , because everyb od y's
   bags were g e t t i n g searched and a l l the a lc o n o l was
   g e t t i n g took o f f them.
Q. What was the r e a c t io n o f the p eople when they were
   being held up l i k e that? - A. J u s t , "Hurry up, we want
   to g e t th ere .
Q. When you got o u t s id e the ground ypu heard someone
   shouting through a lo u d sp ea k er, 'i&Qp pushing"? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Was anyone pushing? - A.
   t u r n s t i l e s tr y in g to g e t i n , because although i t was
   a l l t i c k e t the queue w a sn 't going down. I t seemed to
   s ta y the same so everybody was going through q u it e
   slo w ly and people were th in k in g what was the hold up
   a g a in .
Q. And what were they doing? - A. They were tr y in g to g e t
   nearer the fr o n t to g et through the t u r n s t i l e s .



                                                                       \vf
                                                                             88



                                                             S. K. BOARDMAN



Q. How were th ey doing th at? - A. Well th e r e was no
   queues, i t was j u s t a massed crowd.
Q. Then you saw Gate C opened and you went and took refu g e
   by the r iv e r ? - A. Yes.

Q. Why did you do that? - A. In our b e s t i n t e r e s t s , so we
   wouldn't g e t hurt in the pushing or the s h o v in g .
Q. Who was pushing and shoving? - A. J u s t the p eop le
   o u ts id e the ground.

Q. When you g o t i n t o the pen you were t r y in g to g e t away
   from the pushing? - A. Yes.
Q. Who was pushing? - A. The fans i n s i d e .
                   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
Q. I d o n 't th in k very many q u e s t io n s from me e i t h e r . When
   you were w alk in g down the road from the roundabout, you
   s a i d , "A l o t o f people were w alking to th e ground, I
   follow ed th e crowd, they were q u i t e w e ll behaved"? - A.
   Yes.

Q. T e ll us about the ones th a t perhaps w e r e n 't w holly w e ll
   behaved? - A. There were p eople - they were l i k e
   s i t t i n g on w a l l s , but they w e r e n 't doing n oth in g
   s e r i o u s , they were j u s t d r in k in g , but some w eren 't
   drinking a l c o h o l , some were j u s t d r in k in g s o f t d r in k s ,
   and there was people sh o u tin g to f r i e n d s , j u s t l i k e
   there i s a t a normal f o o t b a l l match when you are
   walking to a normal f o o t b a l l ground.
Q. You may be a b le to help about som ething th a t we heard
   about t h i s morning, b ecause we heard from a gentleman
   who was the o th e r s i d e , the o u t s i d e o f the p erim eter
   g a te s that you go t had through a l r e a d y , so you had the
   advantage o f being able to look back and s e e the time
   when the g a t e s were pushed open? - A. Y es.
Q. I t i s im p o ssib le to say any p r e c i s e f i g u r e , but can you
   help us at l e a s t as to some 'g u e sstim a te " o f a f ig u r e
   of people who came through th at g a t e a f t e r i t had been
   pushed open? - A. No. There was q u i t e , a l o t o f p e o p le .
Q. Would you say there were more th an , s a y , 15 or 20
   people went through? You were in a group o f , I th in k ,
   10 or more th a t were at the s i d e o f you th a t you had
   heard t a lk in g about the next time the g a te opened they
   were going in? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there more people than that that came through that
   perimeter gate? - A. Yes, I would say about 50.
                                                              14


                                        T.K. HILTON


Q. You don't know.   About that time? — A. About that.

Q. Arid I think you had lost your friend hadn't you at this
   stage? - A. Both of them, yes.

Q. You didn't go down the tunnel, did you? - A. I went sort
   of, I think I went round, I am not sure.

Q. And you didn't see any big concertina gates open at all?
   - A. No.

Q. Had you been to this ground before? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know one could get round the side? - A. The year
   before I had been in the stands.

Q. So what made you decide to go round the edges rather than
   round the middle? — A. I don't know.  I just did.

Q. Did you see any signs directing you in that direction?
   - A. No.

Q. You did the right thing in the event.   You did not look
   but you decided ___    Did you go left or right, can you
   remember? - A. It was right.

Q.    And perhaps one other thing on theturnstiles.  Infact
     although you proffered your ticket the turnstile operator
     never took it off you, did he? - A. I still had it.  I
     gave it up to the Hillsborough fund.

Q. Were there people pushing behind to try and get through.
   Were people anxious to get through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Because it was getting near the .... A. Right outside the
   turnstiles that is where the real pushing was like.

Q. I see, so there was some pushing there? - A. There was a lot.

Q.   Was it severe or not? - A. Very.

Q.    Did you have the impression that people were getting hurt?
     Were you hurt, perhaps I will ask you? - A. No, my mate
     was having trouble staying up and I said:   "Keep on your
     feet like".   People were treading on the back of your legs.

Q. This was from pressure from behind you? - A. This was just
   right outside the gates.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers right outside the turnstiles?
   - A. No, I didn't look.

Q. You don't have to.   In fact the area just behind the turn-
   stiles before you set off to go round the side was fairly
   clear of people? - A . Yes.                                 —
                                                          6




                                            F. N. GRU NHILL


   at that time, the gates weren't really wide.   They
   were sort of half closed.

Q. This is a very important point, you see, and this is
   what I am trying to establish from your observation.
   If a person is incapable of movement because he is so
   hemmed in it does not matter what you ask him to do.
   You would agree with that, would you not? - A. Yes.

Q. What I want to establish is whether the people you
   were appealing to had a capacity for movement? - A.
   Those at the back had a capacity for movement but
   there again in all the time and all the years I have
   done football matches I have yet to admit, or find a
   supporter that admits, he pushes.  Everybody else
   pushes but he doesn't.  So when you ask them, "It is
   not me.  It is him".

Q. Tell me whether you observed any pushing? - A. Oh
   yes, I observed pushing.

Q. You have no doubt whatever about that? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying this was pushing by people who, so far
   as you could observe and as far as you could judge,
   were not compelled to push? - A. I couldn't argue
   about that, no sir.  The people around were being
   pushed but it is momentum, isn't it? It just comes
   on and on and on until they cannot do anything.

Q. The time came when you decided it was not safe to
   stay there? - A. Yes.

Q. Either for you, the horse or the supporters? - A. At
   that time the crush had amounted to that much that my
   colleague had gone and the pressure on the horse was
   such I felt the horse start to get agitated, really
   agitated, and he was actually as I described before
   like a bar of soap.  The pressure was so great it was
   starting to lift him off his fe etv A horse once he
   feels the insecurity nothing - then I had to take him
   out because then he would start and he would have
   injured somebody.

Q. In fact you did come out? - A. I did go out.

Q. Did you come out towards the perimeter gates? - A. I
   went out towards the perimeter gate and started to
   work at the back. At one stage we did manage to
   close the perimeter gates and we started to try and
   get people to come off the back of the queue but it




                                                              fO
                                                         4



                                P.   KERRY


Q.   Could you see whether the crowd which you were trying
     to push back, where you were trying to enter, did that
     stretch beyond the perimeter gate at that point, could
     you see that? - A. I was not really taking much notice
     of that at the time. I was trying to get the crowd
     back against the turnstiles.  When I found that I
     could not do any good with my horse, I turned and
     looked towards the gates and I could see the people
     pushing through the gates there and I could see that
     the foot officers were having difficulty closing the
     middle gates.
Q.   The gates - do you mean the perimeter gates? - A.       Yes
     sir.
Q.   Carry on. - A. So I rode my horse down there and I
     endeavoured to assist the foot officers to close the
     centre gates so that it would take the pressure off
     the crowd inside.

Q.   Did that succeed, in fact, as far as you remember? -
     A. Yes, it did.  Eventually we managed to close the
     centre gates.

Q.   What effect, if any, did that have on the crowds on
     the inside of the perimeter gates, the ones who were
     moving forwards towards and through the turnstiles? -
     A. I think it alleviated the pressure a bit because
     people were not pushing so much and, as I say, I
     endeavoured to stay there to stop the gates coming
     open again.

Q.   You have mentioned the word "pushing": did you
     observe this yourself? Were people actually pushing,
     or were they in a position, the people whom you
     observed, that they were being pushed and had no
     option in the matter? - A. The people at the back were
     pushing forward and the people in the middle were
     being pushed, so they had not got any option but to
     push themselves.

Q . . So what you are saying is that the people who were
      caught by that metal bar presumably were trapped and
      could not do anything else? - A. They could not get
    ' anywhere, sir, because the bar stopped them.

Q.   But the people further back, you feel, had some option
     in the matter? - A. Especially the people outside the
     gates.  I did try and shout to them to push back, but
     my instructions were just ignored in some places.
     They were that intent on getting into the ground.

Q.   Did you hear any announcements over loudspeakers at
     all? - A. No sir.
                                                  A.       BEST



Would it be fair to say that you saw people who were
distressed? - A. Yes.   There were two particular ones.
There were two children where the funnel bar was at the
same height as their neck and they were being pushed up
against that.   The adults with them couldn't push back
to let their heads out so with a little help from us we
managed to get the kids out on to our side of the
barrier.
You brought them to your side, to the River Don side? -
A. That's right, yes, and there was one from the middle
who was carried out, who was passed overhead.

Did you see whether people were joining just from the
back or whether they were also joining from the sides? -
A. There were numerous people - again, this drunken rowdy
element who weren't happy at the speed they w e r e going
through and they were coming straight down the side ot
the barrier into the front.

Do you mean they were ducking under the barriers? - A.
Yes, or they were attempting to. This caused some
scuffle in between those people, us and the people who
were already in the queue.   Obviously they were already
crushed and they had been waiting there some time and
these people were trying to push in at the front to get
through.
Was this a concerted effort or was it just the odd
youngster? - A. They all arrived together, but whether
there was an organised element I don't know.

We are not talking about hundreds coming underneath the
barrier, are we? - A. No, there would be thirty or forty
stood about, but at any one time there would be perhaps
three or four trying to get through.

You were involved with one particular person? - A. That s
right.
I know you know his name but there is no point in
mentioning it.   Just describe to me how that affected
you7 - A. Well, he was so drunk he had no idea where he
was* to be honest.    He had a blind desire to get through
the turnstiles.    He had been pulled out two or three
times by myself.    He had been pushed out by people at
the front of the queue on numerous occasions.    For his
own safety, he had been assaulted two or three times by
people at the front as he tried to get through, I had to
arrest him.
Did that mean you then had to go away from the scene? -
A. That's right.  I took him back round through Gate C at
the side.




                                                       &
                                                                          51




                                               C. G. WATSON


Q.   I t i s probably p e r m is s ib le f o r me to s a y , because
     th ere has been a good d eal o f e v id e n c e , th a t in f a c t
     the crowds were coming from two d i f f e r e n t d i r e c t i o n s ,
     so would t h a t have d i l u t e d your h o r s e s even f u r t h e r ,
     i f you had had to make two b a r r i e r s , one in each
     d i r e c t i o n ? - A. No. I f I had been o r g a n is in g i t , I
     would have put the h orses i n a p o s i t i o n to have caught
     the two, th a t i s to say s t r a i g h t a c r o s s the gateway.
Q. So s t r a i g h t a c r o s s the gatew ay, which i s where you saw
    the cordon, I t h in k , o f h o r se s ? - A. Y es, the
    p erim eter g a t e s .
Q.   That would have been the b e s t p la ce? - A. I would have
     said so , y e s.
Q.   Because i t would catch everybody coming from both
     d i r e c t i o n s ? - A. I would have s a id s o , y e s .
Q.   But, n e v e r t h e l e s s , t h i s crowd on the day - th ere has
     been o th e r e v id e n c e - got through th a t cordon and a l s o
     pushed your h orse a sid e? - A. That i s r i g h t , s i r , yes
     i t d id .
                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q. What was the game th a t you were d e s c r ib in g ? What was
   the game th a t the s p e c t a t o r s were p la y in g ? You used a
   word. - A. This pushing £rora th e back, ru sh in g forward,
   i n t o the p eo p le who were a t th e t w n s t i l # # ^ i t seemed
   to be enortaous fun to them. As I have s a i d , perhaps
   they did not r e a l i s e the gravitjF^o#                          but
   th a t i s why I d e s c r i b e i t as a game. They see«#d t o
   f i n d i t amusing.
Q.   Was i t th a t pushing which was ca u sin g the cru sh ing at
     the fr o n t? - A. D e f i n i t e l y , y e s .
Q.   You have t o l d the Jury th a t you saw Gate C opened             and
     th a t r e l i e v e d the pressure? - A. Yes.
Q.   Did you s e e the people going through Gate C? - A. Yes,
     I saw p eop le going through Gate C, y e s .
Q.   Whereabouts, which part o f the crowd was i t th a t went
     through Gate C? - A. I t was v i r t u a l l y a l l o f i t .
Q.   I n c lu d in g th o s e people who had been p la y in g the game?
      - A. Y es, i n c lu d in g th o s e .
                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:
                                         A.M.   DODD



         MR. ISAACS:    Is this Gordon Roberts sir?

         THE CORONER:    Gordon Horne.

Yes, what it says is:
         "Mvself and Gordon joined the mass on the
         pavement outside the first blue rail gates
         which were shut."


t am not trying to catch you out or anything, we are just
to“ iSS o S f w h l t happened that is all. Do you understand
me? - A. Yes.
Can you think back now, can you recoilec*              v
gates were shut in the first place or not? -    Honestly
no I can't remember because as I say it is a while
now.
But would you feel if you said that in your sta! ^ n*
you gave this statement, whatever date it was, 31st May I       ,
was your recollection clear then about that?      A. I must
      t- after Hillsborough I did feel a bit, for a while I
w a s upset like and I aSn-t know.   I can't actually remenfcer
whether the gates were open or closed you know.

Fair enough, but you do remember that you were held up,
that there was a crush? - A. Yes.
 Do you remember a Police horse anywhere near you? - A. Yes.

 Tell me about the Police horse, at least the                 on
 the horse? - A. There was more pressure from behind a
 m o r e people started joining on the crowd from behind.
 Thinqs were getting a bit, you know, pushing and shoving
 anrf ? ended up well me and Gordon ended up by a Police
 S r s e and I was pushed against “   a n d l g o t a bit frl^tened
 you know, I thought it was going to kick. Then we maoe our
 way away from there from the Police horse.
    Did vou form any    impression what the horse was doing there.
    Can you remember    whether it was facing you or broadways on
    “ which way was     it to you? - A . Well I was pushed up
    against the back    of the horse.
  How severe was the pressure on you when that was happening?
‘ - A Well I was kind of, it was mentioned before there was
  a gap with the horse, the horse made a gap and
  stopped, but everyone was keeping on pushing from J>ehi
  so that gap was soon filled in and I was one of the people
    It
     t h e f r o n t of the gap so there was nothing I could do.
                                                            21

                                              G.   I.   S E DDON


Q. You had no idea at all what was going on down in front
   of you? - A. No, not at that time.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

0. Mr. Seddon, can you just help us on some of the matters
   you have been asked about already for the moment?  Unen
   you talk about going with the crowd, and the weight of
   the crowd, what do you mean by that? - A. If there is a
   large number of people going the same place it is a lot
   of weight.

0. Do you yourself as an individual have much control over
   your own movements when you are in a crowd like that? -
   A. No.

Q. It has been suggested to you that you stopped and then
   you moved forward again.  What caused you to move
   forward again? - A. At what point was tnis?

Q. While you were by the horse, the Police horse. - A.
   With the weight of the crowd the Police horse
   dispersed.

0. Were you yourself consciously forcing your way in? - A.
   Yes.

Q. In so doing was it with the people around you, tnat you
   were up against the people in front of you then, and
   the person in front of you was naving the weight of you
   behind them? - A. No.   When the Police horses
   separated, I moved.   I went to the turnstile.

Q. And the person in front of you, they went too? - A. I
   think at that time we were near enough at the front.

Q. I see, you were at the front, so you did not have to
   force your way in by the sound of it? - A. No, tne
   Police horses got out of the way, pushed or separated
   themselves, I don't know.

Q. Sorry, I misunderstood you.  I thought you said you
   forced your way in and clearly you did not "nave to
   force your way? - A. No, you went with the weight of
   the crowd behind you.

Q. Let me then take you into the ground, and this does
   interest me.  You say that you went through a gate
   which we know is gate B - I wonder if Hr. Griffiths
   could just show us gate B - that would take you into
   the concourse on the other side of the dividing wall
   from the tunnel? - A. That is right.

0. You see the gateway you went through? - A. Yes.
Q. And also comparing this experience with other occasions
   you have said that your impression was that the very large
   crbwd built up in seconds. Have I got that right? - A.
   Yes, there was no sort of appreciable time at all before
   there was quite a large crowd.

Q. Is this a normal experience that such a large crowd
   should suddenly build up. Have you come across that in
   all your experience? - A. Only if the access is a sort
   of confined area.  Most of Anfield and Goodison are quite
   wide open spaces, there is plenty of room for people to
   move around. There is one area at Anfield and in this
   case at Leppings Lane where the area was quite confined
   so people were sort of funnelled into the area at a
   greater rate I would imagine.
O    You appealed to the crowd to move back which didn't have
     any effect, as you have described? - A. Odd individuals
     appreciated what I was trying to do and made efforts to
     stand aside or get out of the way but by and large it
     was ignored.
Q. Now any policing situation such as this depends upon
   reasonable co-operation between the crowd and the Police
   who are trying to control the crowd, doesn't it? - A.
   There must be co-operation, yes.

Q. Is it usually a waste of time just to shout to the crowd
   to ask them to ease back? - A. No, not as a rule.

Q. I want you to compare this situation with your usual
   experience? - A. Well at Anfield and Goodison we spend
   a lot of the time talking to the people.  If it is
   getting out of hand we shout to the people.

Q. And does it work usually? - A. Yes.

Q. But this time it didn't? - A. No.

            MR. PAYNE:   Thank you.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

 q   . jn your first effort to create a barrier to stop people
       going into the turnstile area you positioned yourself
       sideways between the perimeter gates, as we have seen?
       - A. Yes sir.
 Q. And to that extent you were, for the five or ten minutes
    that you were stationed there, you were successful? - A.
    In my immediate area, yes sir.




                                                             I*
                                                                  18

                                                 F.    N.     GRUI.'HILL




 "       THE CORONER:    What was the reply to        that?

Q. The question was when they joined up did the crowd
   surge forward again? - A. Yes, as much as we are saying
   when we got the gap people didn't move, what I am
   saying is they did not readily walk back six feet but
   they would ease off, so you would get a little bit of
   breathing space but when the crowd came on again, then
   of course everybody goes forward.  It is like the
   surging that you see on terraces.

Q.        MR. MANNING:     How did they get past your horse,
     Officer? - A. Well those that wanted tried to go
     underneath him.    Some did go underneath him, but when
     they got underneath there was nowhere to con e up
     because he was hard against the back, so we then have
     then pushing h i m and leaning into him, and that is one
     of the reasons why you had to come out, because they
     were going underneath.

Q.   What effect d i d that have on the animal? It may be a
     very foolish and obvious question. - A. He would get a
     bit agitated.

Q. You have talked about your horse and your own
   experience, summing up that crowd and that situation,
   in the totality of your own experience, how do you view
   it? - A. I d o n ’t know.     The crowd lost it on that day.
   They just had this one obsession about getting in and
   if they w o n ’t w o r k with you, you cannot break it.

Q. Thank you very m u c h indeed,   Officer.

                  Cross-Examined bv HR. KING

Q. Officer, one of the problems is that you w ere working
   in a very restricted area between the perimeter gates
   and the turnstiles, weren't you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And one of the problems w i t h horses is that if they are
   going to be effective they need a bit of space, and the
   people around them need a bit of* space? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And if the situation arises tnat there is no space,
   there are so man y people tnere that they envelop the
   horse, then the horse becomes frightened? - A. Yes,
   sir.

0. The people around become frightened? - A. Yes.

Q. And really the horse becomes counter-productive, I
   suspect, at that stage? - A. Not the two horses that wc
   had in there at tne tiiae.




                                                                  117
                                                 ,T.   L.   T AYLOR



were no accidents that I                         ^ n i m b e l ^ o f ' o th2r people
were^behaving in a way w          h i c h ^ I   would not have thought




that if they were suffering from drink.

In other words, are you say ing . .. ^ 1                                 and the
o?hernone°inU piSlicn is because they might be a bit_ ^                           ^
w i u l f s a ^ i t ’was                                         and in public
view that it was embarrassing.




                                         ^rie-police i - t h . . ™

 bHf° t ! i heitaseemed tS be not being willing to go back on
 S T j i & w t when the police were doing their best to
 shepherd people along the sidewalk.

 In this area which was quite a long way aw® L ' ' ° ™

 s s - s m a jsrvas: x                                                 ap -
 s iw ^ s r^ ir
 station down to the ground and
                                                       ijc i    -
                                                                r ;;t e
                                                               \ "
                                                                            1^
                                                                        the wav
 £rom° the* railway ^ t a t i o ^ a n d ^ p a r t i c u l a r l y outside one     or


 £r„:urrop
         bubiicih?s"i - i
 public houses.
                                                                 °"kde thosa
. You d on’t know their names? - A. I'm afraid not.

. Were there crowds outside these PubJj* h?“ s®®g “e n
  I mean the overall impression was that it was w e n in
  excess *of the normal people that go touH ?-}lfbor°^2 ’
  inave been to a semi-final before atHillsborough.       It
  seemed in excess of those numbers.

. Were you there in 1933? - A. Yes, the year before.

  Did you park in the same place? - A. Yes.

. About the same time, or was it a different time? - A.
  Yes.
  v.„ havp already ?iven me the answer but I want you to
                                                           31


                                                   R. M A R S H A L L


Q. You have mentioned that there was pushing twice.  You
   have mentioned that.  Can you describe what you mean
   by that term? - A. Just a strong pressure moving
   forward all the time, completely oblivious of the
   welfare of other people, a completely unprecedented
   experience in my experience, people aggressively
   pushing forward completely resistant to advice or
   instructions from the Police Officers who were there,
   from the mounted Officers and from other members of
   the crowd.

Q. Could you hear members of the crowd communicating
   with people or not? - A. Not in so many words.  There
   was an enormous amount of anger and aggressiveness.
   People were upset that they were being subjected to
   that sort of treatment.

Q. This is a deduction you have made from looking at the
   crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. Time was marching on at this stage? - A. Yes, it was,
   sir.

Q. So far as the match itself was concerned? - A. Yes.

Q. Could the anger have been that they felt they were
   not going to get in? - A. Yes, that is possible.     The
   situation was deteriorating by the minute, from 2.35
   onwards. There w a s n 't an enormous amount through the
   turnstiles that I could see and so clearly there were
   difficulties there.     Time itself was imposing an
   urgency on the crowd.

Q. When you say there was pushing and aggressiveness,
   and you have used various words to describe it, can
   you say from where it was emanating from? I do not
   mean can you deduce, but did you see where it was
   emanating from? - A. It was emanating really from the
   back of the crowd.

Q. Clearly we have heard from many other people but the
   people right at the front, say at the turnstiles,
   what was happening to them? - A. They were being
   crushed.

Q. They were not in a position to do much about that? -
   A. That is right.

Q. You would agree with that, would you not? - A. Yes, I
   would.

Q. What I am trying to find out is how far back in the
   crowd did you notice forward activity? - A. There
   wasn't a finite line to the crowd.  The crowd was
   being supplemented all the time from two sources,
   from people coming from the Leppings Lane roundabout




                                                                Ift
                                                                   29

                                                   G.   I. S E D D O N




Q.   The horse moved? - A. Yes.

Q.    You were able to dodge round the horse and into the
     turnstile area? - A. The horses just went.    I did not
     have to dodge them.   The horse wen t and the gates
     opened and we were free to go into the turnstiles.

Q. A m I right about this; you did not wait to be
   propelled through that crowd b y people behind you?
   You made your own way through from the back, is that
   right? - A. You all went through together.      There is
   no w a y you could stand still w it h a couple of hundred
   people behind you.    If you do not wal k with them you
   go under.

Q. It was that sort of unstoppable force, was it? - A.
   That is right, yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say that yo u were a part of that
   force? - A. Yes.

Q. Now I want to take you forward in time to the point
   where you have found your point in the middle of the
   pen where you describe yourself as being in a
   position which was pretty easy, do you remember? - A.
   Yes.




                                    /Q.   I think it is the
                                                                    74




                                                        R.   W.   COBB



Q. Within the turnstile area, basically? - A. That's right,
   yes.

Q. Estimate how many there were? - A. Well, it is very
   awkward to say how many because there are only so many
   can push to the   front to wave their money.

Q. I realise that,   but can you tell me whether we    are
   talking about 10, 20, 100? - A. Well, you can be talking
   about 100.

0.   Would you say there were more than 500? - A. No.

Q.   What I am trying to do is find the bracket.        It could    be
     between 1 0 0 / b u t it was definitely not 500? - A. No.

Q. It could have been 250? - A. No.

0. That's fair enough.  So you suggested to him, get rid of
   those people, move them outside? - A. Move them outside
   and all those with the tickets could have gone in.

Q. He said, "I can't do it."? - A. "I haven't the force."

0. What happened then as far as you are concerned? - A. As
   far as I was concerned it was just a matter of holding
   tight at the gates. At about twenty minutes to three I
   had to lock the   gates with the key, which is the first
   time I have ever locked it with the keys.    The   forcewas
   that much on the inside that the gates were gradually
   going like that. The wrought iron gates, they are
   collapsible, but they weren't going that way, they were
   going like that.

0. By "wrought iron" you mean the concertina type gates? -
   A. That's right.   It was that bad I thought they had
   some tools or something that was doing it, with them
   being collapsible gates.   I look through the mirror but
   it was just human power that was doing it.

Q. Did you form the impression that people were deliberately
   moving the gate or was it just that there were such a lot
   of people that they were being pressed against it? - A.
   No, no, absolutely deliberate - "If you don't open the
   gate you so-and-so, we will smash it down.

Q. You could hear that? - A. Definitely, yes, two or three
   times.
Q. You locked it because you thought it mightn't hold? - A.
   That's right, yes.
                            R. W. COBB


You did not hear that? - A. No.

Having heard that sound, what time interval was there
between when you heard that and your opening of Gate
A? - A. It was only a few minutes.  I couldn't say
exact, but it was only a few minutes, it wasn't long.

You have obviously had an enormous amount of
experience manning Gate A? - A. Yes.

In your experience, has this situation evsr presented
itself before in a semi-final that you have attended?
- A. No.

Or, indeed, any large league match? - A. No, not to
this scale.

If I were to ask you to summarise the difference
between 15th April 1939, as far as you were concerned
- I am not interested in anybody else - how would you
do that? - A. I should call it mass hooliganism
against my gate anyway.  The intention was to smash
the gate and that was it, and to get in that ground no
matter what.

You do not think that the people who were pressed up
against your gate, or at least who were up against
your gate, were pressed up in such a way that they
could not do anything about it? - A. I thought, 'Well,
if they had tickets, they wouldn't be there', so they
were all without tickets, in my opinion, that was
opposite my little window that I could see and that
lot there had no tickets and they were just trying
whatever they could to get in.

You do not think that it might be that they had moved
      Of course, you do not know.  I will change this
question.   You are quite satisfied that the people
outside your gate, or at least a substantial number,
were waving money at you and the other gateman? - A.
Yes .

You were not obviously very pleased with the idea of
opening Gate A, were you? - A. No.

Apart from the fact that you thought that there might
be a rush, and that people might fall over and hurt
themselves. - A. That is right.

Was there any other reason why you did not like it? -
A. Well, for the simple reason that in my own mind I
knew that they hadn't tickets and wasn't entitled to
be into a place where people had reserved a seat and
that they should go where a seat was reserved.
                                                      65


                                 M.A.   HURST




Q. Before this happened, before the gate was opened had you
   observed the gate itself, Gate A, had you noticed anything
   about it? - A. Yes, I had.  I noticed a lot of banging on
   the gate and the gate which is a concertina type gate was
   actually doing a considerable amount of toing and froing
   and it looked from where I was, it gave the impression
   that there were a lot of people putting a lot of pressure
   on the other side of the gate.

Q. But you of course could not see that? - A. I could not see   |
   the people.  All I could see was, I could hear the noise     I
   of people and I could see the gate doing a considerable      I
   amount of moving to and fro as though people were pushing    1
   at it from the other side.                                   "

Q. The people having come through did you then continue
   selling programmes in the normal sort of way? - A. Yes, yes.

Q. Did any of these people who came through speak to you at
   all. Did they say anything about what they had experienced?
   - A. I can't remember anyone actually referring to it.

Q. Was there any other event that happened after this which
   is significant as far as you can remember? - A. When the
   people were led into the Leppings Lane terraces a few
   minutes after that - again I have lost track of time -
   a few minutes after that we actually finished selling
   our programmes because we had sold them all so all we did
   then for security reasons we got a bolt on the door where
   we were selling, we stayed there, we did not move at all
   until about 10-past-3 by which time as far as we were
   concerned in our little corner everybody was in the ground
   and the game had actually kicked off.  We did not know
   about any of the problems that were happening behind the
   goal or in the tunnel area.

Q. You did not know anything about that? - A. No.

Q. And you never went down? - A. No.

Q. You will have to have lunch like all of us. Can you come
   back at 2 o'clock if you would and we will carry on then.
   You are on oath - and you are in the middle of your
   evidence - which means that you must not discuss the
   evidence or what you are going to say with anybody until
   after you have finished, okay? You can talk about anything
   else you like. You don't have to be isolated but just
   don't talk about what is happening here until we have
   finished. Okay? - A. Right.

                    (Luncheon adjournment)
                                              P. S. SMITH



performed duty at a football match at Tranmere in
Merseyside.   It is a football ground which gets an
average of 4,000 supporters but this particular £>ame
was the last game of the season, which Tranmere had to
either win or draw to get promotion, and there were
15,000 at the game as opposed to the normal 4,000.
When it got to kick-off time we had somewhere in the
region of 5,000 people still outside the ground, and
there were only two turnstiles working for those
people,  tfe formed them into queues and they remained
in orderly queues, there was no problem, and the last
person got in at 4 o'clock, just as the second half was
kicking off.

So what is the difference then between that match,
because you have already said to me that you w e r e n ’t
surprised at the fans wanting to move forward, and this
was normal for a football match, why did the people at
Tranraere apparently behave differently to normal.

The only possible thing I can think of, sir, is that it
was after this incident at Hillsborough and perhaps
that was in the minds of the fans then.      Having said
that, the fans at the Tranraere game behaved as I would
expect them to behave at any match, as they have
behaved at other games.      We have had games at AnfieId,
Liver p oo l ’s home ground, where fans have not got into
the ground until half an hour after the kick-off, and
we have had no problem with them, they nave queued up
and waited until they could get into the ground.      Why
they behaved as tney did on this occasion is something
I will never know or understand.

Are you saying there was, in fact, a very marked
difference between this crowd and normal crowds? - A.
When you say normal crowds, sir, t.nese people were our
normal crowd from Anfield.  These people are people who
we police every other week at Anfield Football Ground,
but on this particular day for some reason they did not
act, react or behave as we would normally expect them
to do at our own ground.

That is a good answer,   thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

There has been evidence, Officer, and I suppose you
w o n ’t disagree with it, that it was a very hot day? -
A. That is correct, sir, it was.

And there is some difference of opinion between various
people about the amount of alcohol tnat had been
consumed, but on a very hot day would you expect people
                                                              40



                                                       P. S. SMITH


      type of thing.   However, the crush inside started to
      build up. When I say inside I am talking now about
      between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles.   I could
      see it was getting more and more intense the crushing
      there.
B
    Q. Did you time it at all? - A. All I can say is that it is
       some time after twenty past two, because I remember
       looking at my watch and it was twenty past two.   |hat
       was shortly after the fans had arrived from the railway
       station and gone into the ground.   That was the last
       time I looked at my watch.   I can only say it was after
       that.
    Q. It was after that but you don't really know when? - A.
       No, sir.
    Q. These fans who were approaching, obviously coming either
       down or up Leppings Lane, were   they coming in both
       directions as a matter of interest? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And who you were trying to impede?   I think that is what
n      you are really saying, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                                                     I
    Q. Did they respond to you in any    way? - A. Not really, sir, I
       no.   I wouldn't have expected    them to with my experience|
       of football fans but I tried anyway.     Some will but
       others are more determined.    You can try and stop one^
       but while you are trying to stop one six others are going
       round your back.   It's a difficult situation. Some
       people will respond but again some people are then
       carried along in a crowd whether they wish to go or not.

    Q. That is what I am trying to find out.     You were outside
       the gates? - A. Yes.
    Q. Were the people who were coming forward capable of
       voluntary movement or not? - A. Yes, sir.   The crowd
       outside the perimeter gates were not subject to the same
       crushing or pressure as the ones inside.   They had ample
       room to move outside because they had the whole of
       Leppings Lane to move in.   There was no pressure on them
       to go forward other than voluntarily.

    Q. How far up Leppings Lane could you see? - A. The way I
       was positioned I was actually facing down Leppings Lane
       towards, I think, Halifax Road and I had quite a good
       view along that road.
    Q. I will ask you two questions about that. As    far as you
       could see, the crowd were not being impeded,   I'll say
       higher up or further back. - A. No, sir.
                                                                 33


                                                        S. FEY



       ✓
      the head as you have described, did anything else
      actually happen to the horse? - A. There were attempts
      to grab the reins and at one stage certainly one
      individual struck him several times in the face, about
B     the muzzle, which is a sensitive area.

    Q. Could you see why that was being done? What was the
       cause of that? - A. I imagine it was the frustration of
       my obstructing their progress towards the ground. It
       is certainly not something that we come across on a
       regular basis.
    Q. I was going to ask you that. You have been asked by
       the Coroner to compare this situation with your
       previous experience of policing crowds on horseback? -
       A. Yes.
    Q. So you have in fact given the answer, that sort of
       behaviour towards the horse, how frequently do you come
       across that sort of thing? - A. From personal
       experience in eleven years, people have tried to wrest
       control of the horse from me on perhaps three or four
       occasions, but in a less pressured situation and I was
       able to remonstrate with them on a one to one basis.
       It was certainly not in a situation as critical as this
       one.
    Q. So this was exceptional in that way? It was
       exceptional that the horse should be struck in these
       circumstances? - A. Yes, this was the only occasion
       that the horse has actually physically been beaten. As
       regards the grabbing of the reins, this is an
       infrequent but not unknown practice.

    Q. Right, and following up the same point about a
       comparison of this with other events, when you were
       inside the turnstiles and people who were not under
       pressure were still pushing forward to try to get at
       the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. Is this a normal experience that you have come across?
       - A. I have seen it before. There is one particular
       area that I work regularly at Anfield, they endeavour
       to push from the very edges of the crowd. Appeals to
       back off are usually met with ”It*s the people behind
       me".
    Q. Are these visiting supporters at Anfield? - A. No,
       these are local people I deal with at Anfield.

                         /Q. And also comparing ....
                                                              46

                                       R.   PURDY




Q. And what other attitude did you see so far as that part
   of/the crowd was concerned to those Officers on horseback.
   What can you tell us about the way they behaved? - A.
   There was disregard to their instructions and abuse towards
   them.

Q. Put that into more common parlance, Inspector, what was
   happening? - A. They were shouting at the horsemen and
   I saw missiles projected at them.

Q. As a result of that behaviour were the objects of that
   particular exercise the Officers on horseback trying to
   ease the pressure, were those frustrated by that behaviour?
   - A. By that and by the sheer volume of people I would
   suggest sir.

Q. So despite your efforts as the Officer if you like in
   immediate charge in front of the turnstiles you then
   perceived that you had what you called a "life threatening
   situation" in front of you? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. Indeed you graphically described the child that you thought
   might very well have been seriously injured or worse being
   passed out? - A. That is correct sir.

               THE CORONER:  I think the Officer has made this
        point.   I am trying to "become a little further" I think
        is the saying.

q   .         m r . MANNING: You then went through the chain of
        command and discussed the options open to you which
        included the opening of the gates? - A. That is correct
        sir.




                            Q. One more question ....
                                    G.   SYKES




     announcement.  I asked you specifically whether you heard
     one from a mounted Officer and I think you said no to that.
     Then I think we stopped more or less.

           Is that a reasonable summary of how far we have got?
     - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

0 ^ j just want to go on for a moment or two with the public
    address announcement.  I asked you whether you heard that
    particular announcement.  Can you remember, and I am not
    asking you to remember verbatim, word for word, but can
    you remember what the gist of the announcements were that
    you heard and if you can't remember just say  I can t
    remember"? - A. The gist of the announcement from the
    Police Land Rover was to the effect:  "Stop pushing .
    They were pleading with supporters to stop pushing that
    people were getting crushed at the front.

0. Did you notice whether this had any effect on the people
   whom you were observing? - A. No sir, the loud speaker
   was pointing towards the turnstiles and the people were
   coming from behind and still on Leppings Lane and it
   was having no effect whatsoever.

0. Which side of the loud   speakers were you standing? - A.
   I was standing just to   the right of the Police Land Rover.

Q     Was it pointing towards you or away from you, that   is what
     I am trying to find out, as far as you remember? -    A- It
     was pointing towards the turnstiles.

0.    But in relation to you? - A. Yes, I was stood at the
     right-hand side of the vehicle so Iwould be    at the side
     of it.

Q. Quite close in fact? - A. Yes.

Q. Apart from that you heard no other public address
   announcement? - A. Not that I can recollect.

Q. You having seen Gate A open rushed over because you
   thought it had been opened in an unauthorised manner
   initially? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Because you could not see what was going on? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. But when you got there you discovered that it had been
   deliberately opened I think by a Sergeant who felt that
   he had to do it for the safety of the people around that
   gate.  Is that correct? - A. Yes sir.

 Q. it didn't stay open very long? - A. No, just a few minutes,
    the surge went through and then we managed to close it
    again.
                                                                               86


                                                                  L.   F.   CAMPBELL



                  C ro ss-E x a m in ed   by   MR.   M ANNING ;

Q. I want to go back in time.    I hav e been having a look at
   the evidence given by that Liverpool police officer, the
   mounted officer you recognised from Anfield.       I want to
   read you something and see whether you agree because you
   talked, and let me just remind you of the sort of words
   you used, "People were pushing.    The buzz just gets
   people going.    They get hyperactive because they could
   not get in.    Those were the sort of things you were
   saying.   This is what the officer said, "The crowd just
   lost it on that day.    They had this obsession with
   getting in and if they won t work w i t h you, you can't
   work with them."     He was talking there about trying to
   stop people pushing forward.    Do you agree with that
   sort of observation of the officer?      Is that similar to
   what you were trying to telling us in perhaps rather more
   modern words? - A. Well, similar, but he should have had
   more back-up.

Q. He should have had more back-up? - A. Yes.

Q.    You    were saying that you were quite cl ea r there was no
     doubt in your mind that people were pushing?      That it
     was quite clear to you that the officer was trying to
     stop people pushing and that the people were not taking
     any notice of that? - A. That's right, yes.

Q.    The other thing is when you had actually gone on to the
     terrace by the fierce shove from behind that you have
     just told my learned friend Mr. Isaacs, when you went on
     to the terrace you didn't find it then all that difficult
     to get through and take up a position at that time?
     When you first got in? - A. When I first got in.

Q. That was similar to, it is obviously a different place,
   but similar to crowds on terraces that you have
   experienced personally at big matches at that time? - A.
   Yes.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. K I K G :

Q. You yourself at all times were being carried into the
   ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You yourself had no choice about it, you were carried
   along with the crowd? - A. Yes, that's right.

Q. Were there people ahead of you?   Y ou weren't at the
   front of the crowd? - A. I wasn't at the front of the
   crowd.

Q. Unwillingly, perhaps, you would be exerting pressure on
   the people in front of you? - A. I had no option.
                                         K.   E.   H O RSFIEL D




decided that something had to be done.    The only thing
tha-t I could see from ray position was to try and shut
the outer gates to the enclosure, to try to alleviate
the crushing up against the turnstile walls.    I managed
to grab my colleague on the next turnstile, which was
P.C. Alexander, and together we managed to force our
way along the edge of the metal fence up to the large
wrought-iron gates at the front of the enclosure.    I
went to the right-hand gate.

Is that the one near the sweet shop? - A. It was the
gate directly in front of my position, along the side
of the metal fence, the first double gate section.
Together with P.C. Alexander we tried to close the
right-hand gate to stop people from entering the
enclosure and causing the crushing.  At first we didn't
have much success.  However, I did attract the
attention of one of the mounted Officers who were on
duty outside the area, and he positioned his horse
across the front of the gates, which enabled us to
close the right-hand half of the gate and after some
difficulty, because the gate was being moved constantly
by the crushing, the to-ing and fro-ing of the crowd, I
managed to get the bolt into the floor, the large bolt
wnich holds the gate shut into the floor, and I
attempted to hold this bolt into the floor while the
other gate was pulled to.

      IThile I was stood in this position people had
already started to climb over the gate which I had just
closed.    I can't remember exactly how long I was there
for, probably a minute, a minute and a half, not too
long.    I was jostled and I was thumped a couple of
times by people in the crowd, who I have no idea, but
this caused rae to let go of the bolt in the floor and
the gate was just swung wide open again and we just
could not manage to close it after that.

So are you then saying that the demeanour of the crowd
at that position was not satisfactory from your point
of view? - A. Not at all, sir.   I received quite a bit
of verbal abuse from the crowd because of my efforts to
snut tne gate.   They were intent on gaining entry to
the football ground.   I was sworn at and like I said I
did receive at least one blow because of my efforts to
try and close the gate.   They were a little bit
incensed by ray actions.

Did you begin to fear that there would be injuries
within this enclosure at that point? - A. Yes, I was
certain that - at that point I was certain that someone
was going to be seriously injured, if not worse, in the
crush outside.
                                                          92
                                                          •*   f


                                           G.   WRIG HT



Q.   What did you then attempt to do? - A. It was
     difficult, but I managed to close the wrought iron
     gates that I went to.   The right-hand one I was able
     to close and then put the bolt, which is at the bottom
     of the gate, into the concrete ground.   That held that
     one in place. . The left-hand gate unfortunately
     normally padlocks to the right-hand one.   Obviously I
     am not in possession of .a padlock so I had to hold
     that one closed \asing physical force.

Q.   Did you stay turnstile side of the gate, or did you
     place yourself on the outside? - A. Iwas on the
     turnstile side of the gate.

Q.   So you were holding it closed? - A. They closed
     outwards.  I was on the inside as they open.

Q.   So there you were with a crowd approaching the
     turnstile behind you? - A. I am sorry, sir.

Q.   There was a crowd behind you going towards the
     turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then there was you? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Then there was a gate? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Then there was something ahead of you? - A. That is
      correct.

Q.   What was ahead of you? - A. There was a considerable
     crowd on the other side of the gates.

Q.   What was happening with that crowd as far as you could
      see? - A. Again they were pushing, they were trying to
      get the gates open.  They were trying to come forward,
      obviously determined to get in to see the start of the
     match.

Q.   Did you see any horses, can you remember? - A. I had
     seen horses when I had been on the turnstile.    One
     horse had come close in when I had been on the
     turnstile.  I was aware of horses in the area, but I
     didn't notice   the specific function of the horses.

Q.   I think whilst you were on that gate you managed to
     hold it for a   time, didn't you? - A. I held it for
     most of the time, but it was brought to my attention
     that there was a woman, I think, being crushed up
     against the gate at one stage, and so I managed to
     filter one or two people through, and then I managed
     to close it again.   But two or three times the force
     of the crowd against it just pushed it open.    I
     couldn't hold them.
                                                                36



                                                   D . ' M.   SCHOLEY



   couldn't because the gates were closed, so there was a
   lot of pressure almost immediately on that gate.

0. We have heard from one or two other people who were also
   on gates who said that they opened them to let ladies
   through or children.   Did you have occasion to do that
   as far as you remember? - A. I seem to recall opening the
   gate once because we had got a young boy on the inside
   and his father was on the outside, to let him through,
   but I don't think I opened it on any other occasion.
   That was only possible because we had got two mounted
   officers in front of the gates keeping the pressure off.

0. That is what X am trying to find out.        Was the pressure
   on those perimeter gates continuous or was it not? - A.
   The horseman in front of the gates, obviously every time
   the horse moved   the crowd moved as well.       They tend to
   try to   keep out of the way of the horses which
   momentarily would relieve pressure on the gate.       As soon
   as the horse moved to another p os i ti o n the pressure was
   back on.

Q. What you are saying is that there were momentary periods
   when the pressure was less? - A. Yes, but as time went on
   pressure built up.   It was early on that I let this chap
   through to join his son.

Q. What happened to the gate in the end? - A. In the end
   myself and Sergeant Proctor w e r e leaning against the gate
   and it   suddenly just sprung open. W e were both knocked
   out of   the way. Well, certainly I was and Sergeant
   Proctor disappeared.    The crowd surged through.       They
   were coming through in such a rush, I think they were as
   surprised as we were because one or two of them fell
   down, some had lost their shoes and we w ere were picking ,
   them up before they were trampled.       Obviously the people
   at the back couldn't see there were people on the floor.
   We were pulling them out before they got trampled by
   other people trying to get in.

Q. You have explained quite graphically ho w this gate
   opened.   Did the it just burst open because there was
   such pressure on it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were there people trying to rattle it or trying to open
   it as well, as far as you remember? - A. No, there was no
   way anybody could have rattled it b e c a u s e of the pressure
   on it, sir.

Q. So they were at that point squashed up against        it? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. For whatever reason? - A. Yes,    sir.
V,
                                                                            37


                                                               D . ' M.   SCHOLEY



         Q.   At some point it just burst open?   - A. Yes, sir.

         0.    It was like a cork out   of a bottle?   - A. That is correct t
              sir.

     B   o. You then noticed that the bolt had bent? - A. After the
            crowd had got through...    The gate had been opened and
            the crowd vanished like somebody letting a plug out and
            the water running through.   I went back with Sergeant
            Proctor and pointed it out to Sergeant Proctor, because I
            wanted to know myself what had gone off, and then I could
            see that the actual bolt fastener was bent, quarter inch
            steel was bent and there was a mark in the tarmac where
            it had bent and dragged itself out as it had been pushed
            along.

         0. I think we have got an acetate of that now.   Can we put
            it up and we will show it to you and see whether that is
            the one you are talking about. - A. That is the same sort
            of bolt, sir.    I couldn't say it was definitely the one
            but that is identical to the bolt.    That is the same
            sort of bolt I fastened down.

     D




     E
                                                                                 %




     F




                               Q. From that photo,




     H
                             L.   PROCTOR



don't, but the crowd on the outside of the gates
seemed to manoeuvre the horses out of the way and then
they came to the gates and the pressure on the gates
was such that I almost had to ride the gate to stop my
ankles being chopped off by the gate.  The other gate
sprang open and later on PC Scholey pointed out that
the bolt had bent, the pressure had been so great.

We will be hearing from PC Scholey in a few minutes? -
A. Yes.  The mere fact of the crowd coming in had
pushed me towards the riverside, but as they came in
one or two fell down and we helped them up to their
feet, but I was still towards the riverside.  Some
minutes elapsed and then there was another surge and
at this time I had got my back to the gates.  I was
obviously speaking to someone and one of the Mounted
Department came through and unfortunately the horse
decided to take it out of me and kicked me behind my
left knee which incapacitated me somewhat.

You know this gap which you said was created? - A.
Yes.

That was created on the inside? - A. On the inside of
the gate between the turnstiles and the perimeter
gate.

You are saying that the people adjacent to that gap
did not step back at that point? - A. They didn't come
back.  We shouted to them to come back.   We obviously
had to remain near the gates to stop them being
opened, but we shouted to them for them to come back
and they just didn't take any notice.   They were just
intent on getting in.

The people on the far side of the gate in the
Reception Area, it was they who were pressing forward
towards the gate, is that what you are saying? - A.
That is correct.




                           /Q.    Were you there
                                                      S. A. B E R R Y -



W he n you got to that position, not whe n you got
through, w ere the gates open or shut? - A. They were
shut.

How wer e they being secured? - A. By one Policeman.

There are several sets of gates there.   Can you
r ecollect by chance whether it was the middle set,
the left or the right, or can you not remember? - A.
If I ha d a map, the one before that?

Yes,   it is 254.   Can you see it? - A. Yes,     I can.

Those are the perimeter gates w h i c h control or guard,
w h a tever wo r d you care to use, the turnstiles A to G.
Can you remember whether they w e r e all shut, whether
some were open or shut? Which one was secured by the
Policeman? - A. There were some p e o p l e the other side
of the gates but b efore the gates w e r e shut and there
were some people the other side of the gates,
whether they had climbed over or whatever, there was
an actual Policeman on the gate b u t out of these I do
not know which one it was.

If you do not know please say? - A.       I wouldn't like
to say.  It was one of those.

It was one or other of those? - A. Yes.

This was a foot Officer, was it?    He was not on a
horse? - A. No, he was just re ad y to open the gates.

W ha t time about w o u l d that have b e en ? - A. It must
have been about ten to three, q u a r t e r to three.

The gates were shut at that time in your opinion? -
A. Yes.

They were secured, if that is the right word, by a
Police Officer? - A. Yes, whether they w ere locked or
not I don't know.

But just saw the one? - A. The one Policeman.

All I am interested in is what yo u saw.       Did you hear
anything being said within the c r o w d in which you
were gathered? - A. There were p e o p l e complaining
because it would be about quarter to three or ten to
three and they weren't in the g r o u n d yet.   Then
somebody did shout out that there was only one copper
on the gate and to rush him or p u s h him.     Then there
                                                                  9




                                                          S. A. B E R R Y .


   was like a b i g surge from the c r ow d an d obviously the
   Policeman couldn't hold all the crowd.         A b o u t ten or
   twelve people, with the gates opening about two feet,
   managed to p u s h through.    With me being like, sort
   of, three or four away from the gate wi t h Martin, we
   were like p u s h e d through.  We h a d no choice really.

Q. So the shout, did it come from behi nd you or in front
   of you? - A. The shout actually came from in front of
   me.  In front of me.

Q. From in front? - A. Yes,     it was in front of me.

Q. Did the p e o pl e in front of you move forward and then
   the rest b e h i n d you followed or what? - A. It was
   just like a universal push.       Everybody pushed.

Q. The gate o pe n ed at that point and you got through? -
   A. It didn't actually open wide.     The P oliceman was
   trying to h o l d the gate and you could see he was
   really, really trying to hold it but there was no way
   he could h ol d it against the pressure of people.
   Mind you, w hen we got through there w a sn 't a steady
   flow of people.     There was only ten, twelve, fifteen
   people actually got through.




                                       /Q. Did he manage
                                                               76



                                               L. F. CAMPBELL



Q. Do you know what I mean by the perimeter gates? - A.
   The big blue gates.

Q.    The big blue gates, yes.  Was itpacked outside those?
     - A. Well, people were still walking down, hanging
     around waiting for the queues to go down, but it was
     getting late, towards kick-off, so people started to
     hurry in.

Q. Were the gates open, those perimeter gates, can you
   remember? - A. Yes, they were.

Q. They were? - A. They were to start off with.

Q.    Did you see any Officers, either mounted or otherwise?
     - A. I seen one mounted Officer.   I have seen him at
     Anfield.

Q. He is a Mersey chap? - A. Yes.

Q. Where was he? - A. He was in front of the perimeter
   gates?  The turnstile side of the perimeter gates - he
   was inside.

Q. Inside but near the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice what he was doing? - A. He was trying to
   get an orderly queue going but the people at the
   turnstiles were checking everyone so he couldn't quite
   get them to be orderly, because there were still people
   coming in.

Q. What was stopping him? - A. There were too many people.

Q. It was just too many? - A. Too many, yes.

Q. Did you notice whether people were pushing? - A. People
   were pushing, yes.

Q. Hard, soft? - A. Well, it is the buzz of the football
   match, the buzz that gets people going.  They are
   getting hyperactive because they are not getting in
   early enough.

Q. So there was quite a bit of it, in other words? - A.
   There was quite a bit of pushing outside, yes.

Q. The Officer whom you saw on the horse, was he shouting
   and waving or what was he doing? - A. He was just
   shouting to people, can they stop pushing.  In the end
   he shut the perimeter gates but he couldn't keep them
   closed on his own.  People were trying to still come in
   so he couldn't keep the gates locked on his own.
                                           L. F. CAMPBELL



opened ajar people just pushed it open anyway.    That is
when the crowd were going in.

Had you seen it open before or was that the first time
that you had noticed it? - A. That was the first tirae I
had noticed it.

Having got swept through, so to speak, or carried
through, you finished up inside the concourse area,
didn't you, a biggish area on the inside, that is
right, isn t it? - A. Yes.

You didn't hand in your ticket or anything like that? -
A. No.

Nobody asked you? - A. No,   I was waiting for someone to
ask for the ticket.

Having got through that big blue gate, did things
quieten down?  Were you able to get your feet back on
the ground? - A. I stopped and I looked round and I
seen the players on the pitch.

How did you see those?  Where did you see them? - A. I
looked down the tunnel. I walked down the tunnel,
people were still rushing in, and when I got to the end
of the tunnel I looked round to see which was the
emptiest part, but then I was pushed into the left hand
side of the tunnel.

So you were able to actually walk down the tunnel under
your own steam, so to speak?  There may have been a lot
of people around but you weren't being carried? - A. I
wasn't being carried, no.

You got to the exit, if I can use that word, and you
were just surveying the scene, trying to make up your
mind which way to go, and you say you then got carried?
- A. Pushed down, further down the pen, then I was
getting crushed against the barrier so I sort of
lowered myself underneath it, thinking it would be okay
the other side of the barrier, but then everyone seemed
to carry on pushing, people were coming underneath it
anyway.  I got myself into the centre where the
perimeter fence was, and I was standing there next to
Steven Robinson, who unfortunately didn't make it out.
I tried to help him.  He was with a young lad.

Did you know Steven Robinson?   - A. No, I didn't know
him at all.

When you first entered the pen - I am just going to
take you back a moment - we know the players were on
                                                              6




                                                        B. R ID GE


Q. He undid those? - A. Yes, he pulled the bolts     do™-
   Once he had undid the bolts we were all right, we were
   covered.
Q. When he did that you and your mates...    - A. Opened the
   doors.
Q. What happened to the people outside the gate? - A. They
   started to run in.

Q. Them came in? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see where they went? - A. A lot of them went
   straight to the toilets.

Q. If you go in Gate B you come in and the tunnel is
   shielded by a wall? - A. Yes.

Q. You can get to it because there is a gap? - A. Yes.

0     When you first come in can you see the tunnel instantly
Q*   o r do you have to look for it? - A. You have  to look for
     it.
Q. Are you saying there are toilets visible? - A. Yes,      the
   toilets are visible.
Q.   So quite a lot of them went to the toilets? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see what happened to them after that? - A. No.

Q. There was no reason why you shouldn t? - A. No.

Q.   I think there were some people who lost their shoes when I
     they came in? - A. That is correct.                      1

Q.   How many pairs did you pick up in the end? -    A. I think      I
     five pairs and umpteen odd ones.                                |

0. Did people come back for those? - A. Well, as the
   disaster had happened, people came back and some just
   picked a pair of shoes up and ran and put  them on.
   Whether they fit or not I don t know.

Q. VJhat I meant was not after the disaster happened, but di<*
   people turn round straight away and say.   Where are my   I
   shoes?** - A. Oh, no, they just ran straight into the     |
   ground.
Q. It was only later that people came and started      hunting
   around? - A. That is correct.

0. You didn't go into the      terracing area until very much
   later? - A. I d i d n ’t go into the terracing area at all.




                                                          p©
                                                                   20
                                                   G.   I.   S E DDOH


Q. Did you see anybody punch a Police horse? - A. No.              I
   seen a couple of people get under the Police horse.

Q. That was the next question - you actually saw somebody
   going right underneath the Police horse, under its
   legs? - A. They had to, yes.

0. Do you agree a dangerous tfting to do for everybody? -
   A. Well, maybe if I was in their circumstances I would
   have gone under myself.

Q. Let's please move inside the ground.  You said that you
   would not have gone in through that gate straightaway,
   you wanted to see what it was about and wnether you
   could get through tne turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. So you waited for a couple of minutes outside the
   turnstile, before you decided that you were not moving
   anywhere and you may as well go through tne gate as
   well? - A. That is right.

0.   So you were not in the first crush ofpeople    going
     through that gate? - A. No.

Q.   You have described the way in which they entered        as
     being severe? - A. That is right.

0. Would you have liked to have tried either to have gone
   and got a programme or gone to the toilet, if you had
   been part of that first onrush througn the gate? - A.
   No, you would have just gone with the crowd.

Q.   When you came to the terrace were the three of you
     still together then? - A. Yes.

0.   You were able, by pushing through the people at the
     back, to gain a position on the terrace? - A. That is
     right

0. The three of you in that position marked witn the "x",
   the three of you together? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. I just wanted to ascertain whether that "x" really
   marked the position of all three of you.  You were
   still together on the terrace? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. At that stage you were not uncomfortable? - A. No,             it
   was quite easy where we were.

Q. Quite easy, and you would have been content, had it not
   been for this disaster, you would have been quite
   content to nave watched the match from there? - A. Yes.
                                                           16
                                               S. M. D. GRAY


   So far as the people coining behind you were
   concerned, I took it from your evidence to perhaps a
   little quicken your pace to stay ahead of them before
   they got to the tunnel? - A. Yes, it was quite clear
   a substantial number of people had followed in behind
   us. The number that went through with me initially
   was pretty small really and there wasn't any
   particular problem but as soon as one got near the
   tunnel you were conscious of a large number behind
   you. Just simply by looking round you could see a
   large number of people.

Q. A large number of people in a sort of mass almost? -
   A. That is correct.

Q. Travelling faster than you were travelling? Walking
   faster than you? - A. Marginally I would think, yes.

Q. At one stage, I think it was early on you actually
   used the word trotting? - A. Yes, I mean that is
   really to describe just slightly faster than walking.

Q. These people were walking at a speed which was
   catching you up? - A. That is right.

Q. You were anxious not to be caught up, I suppose, to
   try and get in through the tunnel and gain a position
   on the terrace before the mass behind you? - A. You
   are certainly conscious that the game was just about
   to kick. You are wanting to get into the ground and
   so forth and so on and you are well aware of the
   numbers of people behind you and you are just wanting
   to get into the ground. Certainly this seemed to be
   the opportunity to get into the ground quickly.

Q. Would you have been worried from where you were
   outside the tunnel on your way there if, for example,
   you had stopped to tie your shoe lace? - A. Yes, you
   would have been.

Q. Can you just perhaps put that into slightly more
   words? - A. I think certainly with the experience of
   going to football grounds and in large crowds you are
   aware you really do not stop for anything.  I was
   certainly conscious of a large number of people
   behind me aiming towards or heading towards a narrow
   entrance to the ground and it wasn't a place you
   would have stopped for anything.




                Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
                                                             15
                                                  S. M. D. GRAY


                  Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Q.    When you went through Gate C, how many were there in
     your group? - A. There were three of us at that time.

Q. Did you go straight through as soon as it opened? -
   A. Yes, we did.

Q. Describe to the Jury in what manner you made your way
   across the concourse? - A. We were walking fast
   across the concourse and continued in that vein right
   through the tunnel.

Q.    Were you conscious of other people coming through
     Gate C at the same time as you, apart from your
     group? - A. Oh yes, there were a number of people
     came through with us and just as we entered the
     tunnel I was certainly conscious of a large number of
     people coming through behind u s .

Q. Were they travelling at the same pace as you? - A.
   No, I think it is fair to say that the pace speeded
   up behind u s .

Q.   Then you got into Pen 4? - A. Yes.

Q.    Almost immediately there was a big surge from behind
     you? - A. That is correct.

Q. I have taken you through that to bring out the fact
   that the whole episode happened very quickly? - A.
   Yes, it did.

Q. That is from being outside the gate until getting
   into Pen 4 and the big surge coming was one close
   sequence of events? - A. That is correct.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING

Q. Mr. Gray, when in the previous year in 1988 you had
   had a seat, had you been conscious - and I think it
   was around half time - that people had, in fact, been
   lifted from the Leppings Lane terraces into the stand
   above? - A. Was that the year before?

Q. Yes, the 1988 match? - A. I don't recall that.

Q. I thought you must not have done because you said
   that you had not seen it except on one occasion at
   Goodison or something like that? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. In answer to my learned friend, Mr. Payne, you said
   all of this happened as a close sequence of events.
                                           L. F. CAMPBELL



So he tried to do it but he failed? - A. He tried to do
it.

That was because of pressure from outside? - A. Yes.

You were by this time already on the inside, or were
you still outside? - A. I was inside.  Still outside
the turnstiles.

Yes, but on the inside of the perimeter gates? - A. On
the inside of the perimeter gates, yes.

Did you in the end get through the turnstiles, or ...?
- A. No, I got carried through the gates. With all the
pushing my feet weren't touching the floor    and I got
carried through the gates.

Which gate are we talking about? - A. The gate to the
right of the turnstiles.

Do you want to show me on the model and then we will be
able to identify it.  Just walk up to it.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    He is   indicating Gate   C, sir.

      THE CORONER:   Tell me a little bit more about
this.   You can see on the model there is a railing
there.   Can you remember that from real life? - A. The
fence at the side, there    is the river going along and
there is a little fence.     I ended up moving towards the
fence to get out of the crush and then people just come
from behind me and we got carried through.

So you tried to escape, if I can use that word, from
the main crush going into the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

And you took refuge,   so to speak, on the bank? - A.
Yes.

And then are you saying that a whole crowd came from
behind you and carried you forward or what? - A. Well,
someone said the gate was open then everyone just
started going round towards the gate.

So you could hear a cry, "The gate's open"? - A. I
could hear someone shout, "The gate's open".

You say you were actually lifted up off your feet? - A.
Off ray feet.

You are sure about that, are you? - A. Positive, yes.

Was the gate wide open or only partially open? - A. It
was wide open because people were pushing it.  As it
                                                             73


                                        A-M.   DODD



q   . Did it make any difference to the way you and the other
      spectators were reacting to the situation? - A. Well me
      and Gordon we said:  "It is going to be kick-off time soon,
      so I hope we get in like".

Q. Did you hear anybody else say anything like that? - A.
   I didn't really listen to anyone else in the crowd.

Q. Once you had got through the big blue gate, right, got it,
   you told me that you were in a stream of people which were
   walking fast but not running but there was sufficient people
   about that you could not see where you were going and that
   you really had to follow the crowd.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you have turned round and left that stream at that
   point? - A. No.
Q. Could you have stepped to one side and taken a breather^ to
   go to the toilet, to do anything like that? - A. Not really
   because me and Gordon were in the middle of it.

Q. I see, we now want to get to the tunnel, okay. You got to
   the tunnel, what was the tunnel like? - A. Very dark and it
   sloped down towards the end.

Q. And how many supporters were in it, how full was it? - A. It
   was full.
Q. When we say "full" do you mean it was jam packed so that
   you could not move or that there were just a lot of people
   all of whom were walking like you have described? - A. Well
   it was full and people were moving forward, yes.

Q. They    weremoving? - A. Yes.
Q. Were they moving touching each other or were they moving
   withsteps in between them? - A. You know as I said before
   I had my hands on this bloke in front of me so I didn't
   fall over. I had hold of Gordon as well, Gordon had hold
   of me, you know.

Q. I see, so that is the way you were advancing       anyway through
   the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the speed of the crowd pick up? - A. It remained
   constant.

Q. The slope didn't make any difference then? - A. It was not
   that much of a slope, you could feel yourself walking down.

Q. You are sure that the speed, pace didn't accelerate? - A.
   Well where I was it didn't.
                                   D. BUTLER



So this was a rather big occasion? - A. I had worked the
previous year but I had not worked at the Leppings Lane
turnstiles, I had worked in the North Stand.

What happened then? What further observations did you
make? - A. Once the gates had been opened a second time
we had lost control of the situation on the concourse
really to a degree. Obviously we could not search anybody.
The thing I noticed there were Programme Sellers. There
was a large group gathering around them and obviously they
had got large amounts of money, so I thought it best to
go and stand near them. The situation was it was like a
tinder box, it could explode at any time. As I say every­
body was very mad, aggressive. There was a strong smell
of beer. Men were urinating all over.

In the toilets you mean or outside? - A. No, just against
the wall.
Did anybody say anything to you about what had happened
outside. Can you remember? - A. Oh as fans were coming
in they were complaining about being crushed outside, yes.

So what you then did was position yourself near these
Programme Sellers as a protection for them? - A. As a
protection for the sellers, yes sir.

What happened after that? - A. I think at that point
obviously they had kicked off and the ringing going through
the crowd that they had kicked off and I think the main
intention of everybody was to get in and go and see the
kick-off. A few minutes after that there was a large
number of Officers who came from the North Stand end of
the West Stand, if you know what I mean, and obviously
something had happened on the pitch, so myself and the
other Officers in my Serial tagged on. We assumed it had
been a pitch invasion or something of that order, followed
them down towards the South Stand and over on to the pitch.

When you got on to the pitch, first moment when you got
a view, did you see whether there were any players still
on the pitch? - A. No, the players had left the pitch
at that time.
Definitely had left by the time you got on? - A. Definitely.

You were not given any instructions, you merely followed ...
- A. No specific instructions.  I was beckoned by the
Officers that were already moving and me and the rest of
the Serial just joined on.

What did you do having got on the pitch, did you go towards
the Leppings Lane end or not? - A. Yes, when we got on the
                                                 J. MORGAN


Did you then see a gate open? - A. I did, yes.

Which one did you see open? - A. The concertina gate C
opened.  I think it was opened by a steward, although I
can't be sure, and there was a rush of people.  I would
think about 200 people rushed through.  My impression
was that it wasn t opened wide and it was only opened
for a short length of time.  I tried to stop these
people, or slow them down, by putting myself in their
path and trying to push in the opposite direction, and
I shouted for them to calm down, but I was just knocked
to one side.

When you say knocked, do you mean onto the floor or
pushed aside? - A. No, pushed aside.

Did you see that gate shut again at that point?  You
said 200 people came through. - A. No, I actually went
out after the initial influx had subsided.

So you don't know what happened to the gate behind you?
- A. No, sir.

Does it follow that you did not see it open again? - A.
I did not see it open again, although I was aware later
that it had opened again.

But you never saw it? - A. No.  There were a couple of
horsemen outside, mounted Officers outside.

Near the gate? - A. Yes.

What was the mood and what was your perception of the
people who came through at that time, or the people who
you saw outside when you exited through that gate? - A.
They were in a state of haste really, and they were
quite aggressive.  That was my impression.

Anything else? - A. I saw the crowd surging.  I mean
they were there to enjoy the football match and they
were in high spirits, they were chanting and singing.
It just seemed to be quite a happy sort of crowd,
although there was a pervading smell of intoxicants in
the air.

The 200 people who came in or however many it might
have been - I am not holding you to 200 - are you
saying that they ran in headlong or did they walk in
slowly, did they walk fast or was it just that there
was a substantial number of people who were walking
which is why you were moved to one side?  Can you see
the difference, as to what I am trying to find out? -
A. Yes, sir.  My impression initially was that they
rushed in rather than walked calmly in, and that is the
                                                                                45
                                                                                     f

                                                               G.- MILTON



        /

Q. Was i t j u s t one Policeman th ere or more than one
   Policeman? - A. I on ly n o tic e d one Policeman. As I
   sa y , I was busy, I kept turning round.
Q. How many stewards would you say th ere were? - A. There
   were two stewards h e lp in g h im .to open i t .
Q. Did you n o t i c e anybody d i r e c t in g the people who were
   coming through Gate C as to where they should go? - A.
   You had no chance o f d ir e c t in g anybody because th ere
   was j u s t a mad su rg e.
0   . Thank you very much.
                 Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
Q. Mr. M ilton, could you j u s t am plify th a t in your own
   words? You sa id th ere was a surge through, th ere was
   no chance o f d i r e c t i n g anyone. What was i t l ik e ? Was
   i t j u s t l i k e uncorking a b o t t l e , p eople rushing out? -
   A. That i s r i g h t , y e s , rushing i n .
Q. Pushing in?      Did you a c t u a l ly see people pushing? - A.
   Rushing.
Q. I am so r r y , rushing i n . They were moving more q u ick ly
   than walking? - A. Oh y e s , they j u s t charged in and
   that was i t .
                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN
Q. Mr. M ilton, do the th in g s you have d escrib ed today
   u su a lly happen a t a f o o t b a l l match, or was t h i s a
   com pletely unusual s i t u a t i o n to you? - A. I t was an
   unusual s i t u a t i o n , y e s .
Q. You sa id p eop le were goin g through your t u r n s t i l e , not
   through your f a u l t , w ith ou t t i c k e t s . You co u ld not
   stop them because they were b ein g pushed so much. - A.
   T h at's r i g h t .
Q. But you d id not see the P o lic e O f f ic e r s in the
   concourse area e j e c t i n g th ose fa n s , did you? - A. No,
   because i t was th a t h e c t i c a t th a t tim e, even the
   P o lic e could not do        anything about i t - I d id knock to
   one and to ld him th a t he had not g o t            at i c k e t , and he
   s a id , "I*iii s o r r y , I c a n 't do n othing   about i t ' , and
   th at was i t . There         was th a t many.
Q. Yes, but in the concourse area where the P o lic e
   O ffic e r s were, th ere was a l o t o f room w asn't there?
   In the concourse area once people went through the
   t u r n s t i l e s , the P o lic e O f f ic e r s who were in the
   concourse area beyond th e t u r n s t i l e s had p le n ty o f room




                                                                          P*
                                                                     53




                                                                A. R. M A R S H


       afterwards when we were t o ld by th e P o lic e to take
       the tabards o f f .
    Q. You were then asked about th e entrance t o th e tu n n el
B      where a l l th e s e p eop le went? - A. Yes.
    Q. You were reminded th a t th ere are two b ig doors a t the
       end o f th e tu n n el by th e concourse? - A. Yes.
    Q. Which can, in f a c t , be clo sed ? - A. Yes.
    Q. You were asked to co n sid er whether th ey could have
       been closed ? - A. Yes.
C
    Q. And you sa id i t was im p ossib le? - A. Yes.
    Q. In your own words, and ta k in g your tim e, I want you
       to put th e Jury in th e p ic tu r e and e x p la in why th a t
       was? - A. When th e g a te s opened, when th e r e were
       probably an estim a te d 150, 100/150, sup p orters j u s t
       making t h e i r way towards th a t tu n n e l, no one would
       have stopped them.
D
    Q. What? - A. No one would have stopped them.
    Q. No one would have stopped them? - A. Not a t a l l , no.
    Q. Suppose th ere had been some Policeman stan d in g a cro ss
       the entrance t o t h a t tunnel? - A. They may have done
       but they would have had d i f f i c u l t i e s .

E   Q. If th ere had been some stewards stan d in g th e r e a cro ss
       the entrance t o th e tunnel? - A. The same th in g
       a p p lie s.
    Q. They may have been a b le to? - A. They may have been
       able to but w ith d i f f i c u l t i e s .
    Q. Why would i t be im p o ssib le t o shut th e g a tes? - A.
       Because i t would have meant going i n s id e th e tu n n el
F      because the g a te s c l o s e in towards th e tu n n e l. I t
       would mean goin g i n s id e th e tunnel to g e t th e g a te s
       opened and in my op in ion th ere would have been no
       chance of g e t t i n g th o se g a te s c lo se d a t a l l .
    Q. There has been a n o is e o u t s id e . Why would th e r e have
       been no chance? - A. Because th e surge was th a t quick
       you w ouldn't have tim e to g e t th e r e . You have g o t to
       ap p reciate th a t th e P o lic e had been search in g a l l the
       supporters as th ey came through th e t u r n s t i l e s and so
G      they were th e r e a t th e t u r n s t i l e s .
                                                                             54




                                                                    A. R. M A R S H



Q.       THE CORONER: You did not s e e any o f t h a t , did
     you? - A. Pardon?
Q. You d id not s e e any se a r c h e s , d id you?         A. I saw
   people b ein g search ed , y e s .
Q. Outside th e t u r n s t i l e s ? - A. At th e t u r n s t i l e s but
   th a t was p r io r t o i t .
Q. Only t e l l us what you y o u r s e lf saw or heard and not
   what would norm ally happen? - A. Yes.
Q.          MR. PAYNE:          What were you tr y in g to e x p la in
     then? Whereabouts were th e P o lic e when th e people
     came through th e gate? - A. They were a t th e s id e of
     th e t u r n s t i l e s .
Q. What were you tr y in g to e x p la in about them? What was
   i t ? - A. They c o u ld n 't have p o s s ib l y got to th e
   tunnel i n tim e to d iv e r t th e fan s from th e tu n n el.
   Once th a t g a te had been opened th e search came to an
   end and th a t was i t .




                                       /Q.    Now w ith regard to t h e . . .
                                                                       48




                                                               A. R. M A R S H


   stewards not t o open th e g a te s and th e word came,
   "open th e g a te s " . The g a te s were then opened and i t
   was j u s t l i k e a flo o d t i d e .
Q. When t h i s second tim e i t opened, and you heard th e
   i n s t r u c t i o n , do you remember whether th e g a te - i t
   has two le a v e s has i t not? - A. Yes, i t opens l i k e
   th a t, y e s .
Q. Were both c o n c e r tin a h a lv es opened or n o t, can you
   remember? - A. The second time?
Q. Yes? - A. Both were open wide.
Q. Both were open wide? - A. Yes.
Q. Do you know about how long i t stayed open on th a t
   occasion? - A. I d o n 't think i t was c lo s e d a g a in .
Q. You do n ot remember i t clo sin g ? - A. No, I d o n 't
   remember i t c l o s i n g .
Q. This second tim e did a l o t o f p eop le come through? -
   A. Oh y e s .
Q. Did you n o t i c e anything about them a t a l l ? - A. The
   o n ly th in g I d id n o t i c e was th at as th e search came
   through th ey a l l made towards th e tu n n e l.
Q. Were you y o u r s e lf knocked over or anything l i k e that?
   - A. Yes, when th ey came through.
Q. On th e second tim e or th e f i r s t time? - A. Not th e
   f i r s t time because I was a t the back but on th e
   second tim e I was more or l e s s in l i n e and I g o t
   knocked down.
Q. You were n ot p a r t i c u l a r l y hurt or anything l i k e that?
   - A. No, no.
Q. This i s th e group th a t came through who went through
   th e tu n n el, th a t i s r ig h t? - A. Yes.
Q. Above the tu n n el th e r e i s th e word "Standing", i s
   th a t r ig h t? - A. Yes.
Q. Did any o f th e s e p eop le ask you, or d id you s e e them
   ask anybody e l s e fo r any d ir e c tio n s ? - A. There was
   no tim e. There was no time a t a l l . A pparently in my
   opinion th ey j u s t saw th e g a te , th e tu n n el and th e




                                                                       I    #
                             /                                           19




                                                            R.   W.   BEAD&LEY




Q. So i f the g a t e s were c lo s e d th en th e f i r s t p eo p le up the
   tu n n el o f th e crowd in the emergency would have to p u ll
   the g a t e s towards them? - A. Y e s, but s u r e ly i f th o s e
   g a te s were c l o s e d and "Mr. Meadows" was c a l l e d , whoever
   c lo s e d them would go and stan d by them th e same as we
   stood by our g a t e s .
Q. So the crowd would need someone to h e lp them to open the
   g a te s? - A. W ell, the crowd d o n ' t know what "Mr. Meadows"
   means, do they?
Q. They would know th e r e was an emergency though? - A. Would
   they?
Q. Are you t o ld what s o r t o f e m erg en cies you are p rep aring
   for? - A. We are j u s t t o l d to go to our p o s t s and w a it
   fo r fu r t h e r in fo r m a tio n .
Q. Like a f i r e ? - A. F i r e , bomb s c a r e .
Q. Somebody behaving l i k e a maniac? - A. W e ll, I d o n 't th in k
   they would c a l l Mr. Meadows" f o r somebody a c t i n g l i k e a
   maniac.       They m ight do, I d o n 't know. We do what we
   are t o l d .
Q. When Gate C was opened in 1989 your e v id e n c e i s th a t you
   stood out o f the w a y .. . - A. The second tim e.
Q. Where d id     you stand? - A. To th e w a l l .
Q. Did you s e e where th e o th e r gatemen stood? - A. I would
   not be su re but I th in k they were s t o o d . . .     You s e e ,
   th ere was o n ly one s e c t io n o f th e g a te open.   There are
   two s e c t i o n s and I th in k they were sto o d behind to t h e i r
   s id e o f the g a t e .
Q. Was th e r e any chance to g iv e any d i r e c t i o n s to the fa n s
   when they came through? - A. I th in k i f we had been t o ld
   to d i r e c t we would have t r i e d .  Whether we would have
   g o t trampled on and k i l l e d we w i l l n ever know, w i l l we?
    If we had been told to do something we would have done.

Q. What makes you th in k you might have been trampled on and
   k i l l e d ? - A. I reckon - w e l l , s e e i n g hundreds o f p eo p le
   running t h r o u g h ...  I f I s a id to you, "Can you go r i g h t
   or l e f t ? " and everybody i s p u sh in g behind you, they are
   not g o in g t o tak e any n o t i c e , a r e they?     They a r e j u s t
   going to ca rry on g o in g .        They were pushed w ith the
   crowd.
Q. I f anybody sto o d in th e way o f th e crowd do you th in k
   they would be in danger of b e in g trampled? - A. I think                    I
   so, yes.
                                                         S.   R . - THORPE




You c a n 't s e e them immediately c l o s e to the t u r n s t il e s ?
- A. No.
But you can s e e them where they are fu r th e r back? - A.
Yes.
What time was th is ? Have we g o t a time fo r that? - A.
About h a l f - p a s t - 2 , s i r . Somewhere round about then,
sir .
Did you n o t ic e anything p a r tic u la r about the crowd a t
that tim e, about the behaviour o f the crowd? - A. No,
not r e a l l y , s i r .
Were you a t the same p o s it io n when you saw Gate C open
and the crowd come in? - A. Y es, I was.
You went s t r a ig h t to your stewards and your evid en ce i s
that you say th a t th ere was no chance fo r the stewards
to g iv e d i r e c t io n s or check the t i c k e t s ? - A. No, there
w asn 't, s i r .
This i s the people who were coming up th e s t a i r s in to
the stands? - A. That i s q u ite c o r r e c t .
So they have got to go u p h ill towards the stewards? -
A. No, they come up to the bottom o f the s t e p s .
Then they are going up some ste p s? - A. Yes.
Can you e x p la in why th ere was no chance fo r the
stewards to sto p them or g iv e d ir e c t io n s ? - A. Well
when there i s about 100 o f them running, I c a n ’ t see
anyone try in g to sto p them, "Have you g o t a t i c k e t " ,
because i f you had stopped them the people from the
back are going to knock them down, s i r - in my o p in io n .
We have got two g a te s a t the bottom and one s a id , "Shut
those". I s a id , "Don't do th a t fo r God's sake". I
sa id , "Let them come".
I f there had been some stewards on the con cou rse, on
the area between the t u r n s t i l e s and the tu n n e l, would
they have been a b le to sto p th e fans? - A. No, s i r , not
whatsoever.
Would you have to ld them to try and sto p the fans? - A.
No, I w ou ld n 't, s i r .
I f there had been some there what would you have sa id
to those stewards? - A. I would have sa id "Let them
go", because you c a n 't sto p them. The p eople coming
from the back, in my o p in io n , i f you are going to stop
them they are going to knock each oth er o v er. I t i s
b est to l e t the th in g flo w , to my o p in io n , s i r .
                                                              25




                                                       I. MARSH




Q. i/hat I want to know - that is slightly different to
   what you have told me - what I am interested in is
   which, having looked at it now again, which is correct,
   what you told me today or what is written down here? -
   A. I think both of them, because if they had kept
   coming through as they were, there was a danger of a
   wall collapsing.   I didn't see it moving or anything,
   but the sheer number of people, if they had continued
   on, not opening the gate could have caused the wall to
   collapse.

Q. Read out what is said now that you have explained to me
   and then we will leave it at that. ~ A,. It says;

         "At this time there was a mass of supporters
         outside attempting to gain access and impatient.
         I agree that the gate needed opening as there was
         a danger of walls collapsing and people being
         seriously injured outside.  As the gates opened
         there was a mass of fans surged into the ground
         through them.  The sheer number coming through
         frightened me enough to move away from the gate
         and seek protection by the crash barriers by the
         programme sellers."

     That is what I meant by that.

0.   And you would stick by that? ~ A. Yes.

Q.   And you would stick by    your reply today? - A. Yes.

0.    What you are saying is   this is a deduction from the
     numbers? - A. Yes.

0.   Let me ask you    this - you have half answered it already
     - this is from   the Jury.   When the gate was opened, and
     I think we are   talking about what I call the main
     opening, where   did you stand? ~ A. At the side of the
     all behind the   crash barriers, about ten yards from the
     gate.

Q. When this happened, when the gates were opened and
   people were coming in, did you see anybody directing
   the fans to the other entrances to the terraces? - A.
   No

Q. Finally, did you see any Police Officers at the
   entrance to the tunnel when the crowds came in,
   directing people in any way? ~ A. No.

Q. Did you see them at any time that day directing people
   at the entrance to the tunnel? - A. No.
                                                     78




                            R.   W.   COBB



You are quite sure that they used words to the effect
of forced? - A. Yes, definitely.

You are certain about that? - A. Certain, yes.

You see, all the evidence we have heard up to now is
that the gate was opened at least on two occasions
deliberately, so it is important to know what words
you heard. - A. Yes.

Having heard that, what happened, as far as you are
concerned? - A. As far as I am concerned, it could
have been a couple of minutes after when a Police
Sergeant came up to me and said, "Well, we are going
to open A Gate", and I said, "Well, I don't think it
is advisable".

What did you say, I am sorry? - A. I said I didn't
think it was advisable with the crowd that was
outside, and he had a policewoman with him, so he
said, "Well, we want it opening to get rid of them",
so I said, "Could you get it from higher authority for
me to open it?" you see.  So he said, "Well, I'll go",
and during that time I thought, 'Well, there's nowhere
they can go through A Gate' because you can't see the
match.

Is that because A Gate leads to the back of the North
Stand? - A. To the back, straight through to 0 Gate on
Penistone Road, so it didn't make no difference there*,
but what I was — not frightened, but what I didn't
want to happen was for a rush and somebody to fall
over coming through that gate.  So I did ask.  When he
came back he said, "I have authority", but I did ask
for more police.

You did? - A. I did, which he definitely fetched, and
then they had two lines of policemen up and Jack gave
them the keys to the gate and I picked out the tallest
copper and thought, 'I'm standing behind you', which I
did. They opened the gates and that was it - whoosh -
gone

How many came through, would you say? - A. You are
talking in hundreds.

You heard this comment, you know, "Gate C has been
opened", or forced opened or whatever it might be? -
A. Yes.

Perhaps I just ought to ask you this.  In addition to
that, did you hear who was supposed to have forced
this gate open? - A. Oh no.
                                         R.   G.   HEWSTONE




Why unquestionably? - A. Because people were so
packed together at the back.

What do you mean by force? What would you actually
have had to do? - A. I would have had to use my
shoulder and I recall those five or six fans who did
come down the tunnel whilst I was there, they
virtually did that themselves because they took a
little bit of a run, a bit of a charge, from the back
of the crowd and bulldozed their way in.  Yes, I
think that is the description.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

You were later than you wanted to be getting to the
ground? - A. Yes.
Were you surprised or not at the numbers of people
who were as late as you in getting to the ground?
A. Yes, I was.
Therefore, does it follow you were even more
surprised that there were, as you stood on your knoll
at the back, some five minutes or so later still
seeing large numbers of people coming down Leppings
Lane ? - A. Yes.
You had, as you told my learned friend, Mr. Hale, you
made a decision not to force your way forward? - A.
The decision was almost forced upon me because there
were a number of people like myself who were circling
the edge of the wedge and constantly changing their
position, thinking that they might improve their
chance of moving forward and people were just not
having any success. It seemed to matter not where
you stood.
 You heard the Police loudhailer from the Land Rover
 van and the Officer using the words "Ease back"? - A.
 Some such words.  I can't remember the exact words.

 The implication from that is that people were
 pressing forward? - A. Yes, I realise that.

 Is it something, as you viewed it, you-could clearly
 see? - A. Yes, I could see obviously there was
 pressure.
                                                                f                        11

                                                                               B. L. MOLE


    now opened th e n e x t pen and a c c e s s t o i t would be from
    a d i f f e r e n t r o u te and th e y would be b r i e f e d .        The
    s e r i a l t h a t was on t h e r e and th e I n s p e c t o r who would be
    a s k in g t h e q u e s t io n in th e f i r s t p l a c e n o r m a lly , he
    would be s a y in g , "Caft I now op en ?”, he would have t o l d
    h i s O f f i c e r s and th en by word o f mouth would have
    m erely d i r e c t e d them t h a t way round.            I t would depend
    b e c a u se what happens when you open t h e g a t e you w i l l
    f i n d a l o t w i l l go o v er t h e r e in any c a s e . A l i t t l e
    b i t more room and th e y m ight want t o sta n d a t t h e back
    on t h e to p o f t h e s t e p s and a l o t w i l l go th rou gh th e
    g a t e or clim b th e f e n c e . Once t h e y know th e y are
    a llo w e d i n t o t h e n ex t pen you w i l l f i n d t h a t some from
    t h e c e n t r e w i l l go t h a t way. So th en i t i s a m a tte r o f
    b o th a r e a s open and r a t h e r than h a v in g P olicem en a c r o s s
    t h e narrow fu n n e l a t t h e c o r n e r , t h e so u th and t h e w e st
    sta n d which would have a s e r i a l t h e r e , s to p p in g p e o p le
    coming round t h e r e when you have n o t g o t t h o s e pens
    opened, th e y would be moved so t h a t p e o p le c o u ld th en
    f lo w round t h e r e .
Q. Would you so f a r as you remember h ave p la c e d a s e r i a l
   a c r o s s a tu n n e l or even c l o s e d a t u n n e l g a t e i n o rd er
   t o make i t e a s i e r f o r p e o p le t o r e a l i s e th e y ou gh t t o
   come round th e sou th corn er? - A. I th in k th e
   d i f f i c u l t y i s t h a t when we have f i l l e d in t h i s manner
   we have n ever r e a l l y f i l l e d c e n t r e p ens t o a p o i n t
   where you th in k i t i s b u r s t in g a t t h e seam s. The ty p e
   o f f i l l i n g in a graded f i l l i n g i s where t h e r e a re q u i t e
   a few p e o p le in and we have g o t p l e n t y o f sp a c e and so
   why n o t u se i t ? I t i s a d i f f e r e n t f i l l i n g .   So r e a l l y
   you a r e n o t sa y in g t h a t t h e c e n t r e pen i s b u r s t in g a t
   t h e seams and, t h e r e f o r e , do so m eth in g . What you a r e
   s a y in g i s , t h e r e i s q u i t e a l o t . We have a n o th er 300
   o r 400 t o come, open i t up. So t h a t i s s l i g h t l y
   d iffe r e n t.       I have n ever had o c c a s io n t o s e a l th e
   t u n n e l and I have no knowledge o f i t b e in g s e a l e d in my
   o p e r a t i o n a l e x p e r ie n c e .

Q. The rea so n why I ask you i s t h a t we have had e v id e n c e
   from a t l e a s t two, p rob ab ly t h r e e , s o u r c e s . I am n o t
   t a l k i n g o f p e o p le but so u r c e s ? - A. Y es.
Q. We have had e v id e n c e from fa n s who t a l k e d o f t h e tu n n e l
   b e in g s h u t , th e g a t e s b e in g sh u t? - A. Y es.
Q. I am n o t t a l k i n g about j u s t h a v in g a P o l i c e p r e s e n c e ? -
   A. No, no.
Q. But t h e g a t e s a c t u a l l y b e in g s h u t . We have had
   e v id e n c e from e x -S e r g e a n t H iggin s who s a y s t h e same? -
   A. Y es.




                                                                                  |V
                                                                                     B. L. M O L E


 Q. There i s I th in k o t h e r e v id e n c e as w e l l w hich would
    support t h i s p r o p o s i t i o n t h a t from tim e t o tim e ,
    r i g h t l y or w rongly and I am n o t a rg u in g a b o u t t h a t , th e
    d iv e r s io n o f fa n s was a c h ie v e d by c l o s i n g o f f t h e
    tu n n e l. We have a l s o h eard from Dr. Eastwood who,
    alth ou gh he d id n o t p a r t i c u l a r l y approve o f c l o s i n g th e
    o u te r b lu e g a t e s , s a i d he had s p e c i f i c a l l y i n s t a l l e d
    th e in n er b lu e g a t e s in o rd er t o e n a b le t h i s t o be
    done. Can you h e lp me on t h a t ? - A. What I can s a y , as
    I have s a i d , I have n e v er e v e r g iv e n t h e i n s t r u c t i o n t o
    c l o s e th e t u n n e l o f f .    I have n o t been aware o f i t
    b ein g c l o s e d o f f .    I have heard what you h ave j u s t
    o u t l in e d t h a t t h i s has been s a i d . My own e x p la n a t io n
    i s t h a t I e x p e c t O f f i c e r s t o a c t in d e p e n d e n tly i f th e y
    s e e som ething and l i k e w i s e I would n o rm a lly e x p e c t them
    to report th a t a t d e b r ie f.

            I have tak en tim e t o check t h e d e b r i e f s i t u a t i o n
     and i t i s n o t e v er b een b rou gh t t o my a t t e n t i o n t h a t
    t h a t t a c t i c was u se d .       I have t o admit t h a t i t i s an
    o p tio n open t o me t o u se and I , as an O p e r a tio n a l
    Commander n o t j u s t f o r f o o t b a l l b u t f o r any o p e r a tio n
    in p u b lic o rd er te r m s, would be w e l l aware o f t h e
    p o s s i b i l i t y o f u s in g su ch a t a c t i c .    I have t o r e p e a t
    i t has never e v e r been b rou gh t t o my a t t e n t i o n t h a t i t
    has a p p lie d . Knowing what human n a tu r e i s I can a c c e p t
    i f somebody has s a i d th e y have done i t t h a t th e y may
    have done i t and i t i s sa d t o sa y t h a t on o c c a s i o n s
    p e o p le do t h i n g s and when th e y have r e s o l v e d th e
    problem r e a l i s e d t h a t th e y have n o t g o t a problem any
    more and so th e y do n o t t e l l anybody.                    I t may w e l l be
    t h a t t h a t i s a p o s s i b l e e x p la n a t io n , t h a t t h e S e r g e a n t
    d id i t , r e s o l v e d h i s s i t u a t i o n and t h a t was i t , f i n e .
    There was no problem t h e n , b u t i t has n ev er b een
    rep o r te d t o me.

Q. I l e f t one p erso n o u t who was a c t u a l l y q u i t e im p ortan t
   in my summing up and I have n o t g o t t h e e x a c t wording
   in f r o n t o f me b u t t h e s e n s e o f what Mr. Lock was
   sa y in g was t h a t in h i s day when he was p o l i c i n g t h e
   ground t h i s was c e r t a i n l y , I u se t h e word s e a l i n g but
   t h a t does n o t mean h e r m e t i c a l l y s e a l i n g ? - A. Y es.
Q. I mean a c l o s i n g which was c e r t a i n l y so m eth in g which
   was b e in g done and t h a t was, in f a c t , a known and
   a ccep ted method o f d o in g t h in g s ? - A. I am e x tr e m e ly
   su r p r is e d a t t h a t . Mr. Lock I am su r e would have
   p a ssed t h a t on t o me i f i t had been t h e c a s e . As I
   sa y , i t i s an o p t i o n .   The o n ly tim e - I t h i n k b a r r i e r s
   have been m entioned a t some tim e t o me - I h ave e v e r
   been in v o lv e d w ith b a r r i e r s was t o b a r r i e r a programme
   s e l l e r in t h a t area b e c a u se g o in g back t o a match many
   y ea rs ago b e f o r e t h e w a l l in t h e back a rea was t h e r e we



                                                                                       W
                                                                                      58

                                                                      B. D. MURRAY

    N o t t s . F o r e s t su p p o r te r s coming ov er t h e i r end, and
    having a m elee in th e m id d le, th a t was th e problem.
Q. 1988 i s q u i t e a few y ea rs ago now, but in th e co u r se o f
   your d u t i e s you would have been lo o k in g round the
   Ground, I take i t ? - A. Y es.
Q. Have you any r e c o l l e c t i o n o f a n y th in g u n u su a l in any
   way about th e t e r r a c i n g a t Leppings Lane, i n 1988? - A.
   No. I d i d n ' t s e e an yth in g p e c u l ia r about i t a t a l l .
   There was some c lim b in g from th e t e r r a c i n g a t h a lf
   tim e, i n t o th e West Stand, from b oth th e te r r a c e s in
   fr o n t o f th e sta n d and th e t e r r a c e s a t th e s i d e o f the
   sta n d , but I n o t i c e d n o th in g unusual about i t .         I t was
   the f i r s t tim e I had seen a c a p a c it y match f o r some
   years and i t seemed to go very w e l l in d e e d .
Q. You were n o t e i t h e r aware a t th e tim e or l a t e r th a t
   th ere were some p e o p le who f e l t u n co m fo rta b le w ith in
   the c e n t r e pens a t Leppings Lane - 1988 I am t a lk in g
   about? - A. I r e c e i v e d no in fo r m a tio n on t h a t from
   e i t h e r p e o p le who had a tte n d e d th e m atches or any o f
   the O f f i c e r s who were th e r e fo r th a t p a r t i c u l a r e v e n t .
Q. We have heard e v id e n c e from q u i t e a l o t o f p eop le - i t
   d i f f e r s in s l i g h t d e t a i l but th e s u b s ta n c e o f i t i s -
   th a t in 1988 th e tu n n el was fo r s h o r t e r or lon ger
   p e r io d s c l o s e d o f f pre-m atch , w ith th e presumed
   i n t e n t i o n o f d i v e r t i n g th e f a n s . F i r s t o f a l l , d id you
   know a n y th in g a t a l l about th a t? - A. No, s i r .
Q. The seco n d q u e s t io n , o f c o u r s e , f o l l o w s : you th e r e f o r e
   did n o t g i v e th e order fo r th a t to be done? - A. No,
   sir .
Q. Was i t r e p o r te d back to you by anybody? - A. No, I o n ly
   le a r n t about i t a f t e r th e 1989 s e m i - f i n a l .
Q. So t h a t i s the f i r s t you knew about th a t? - A. That i s
   the f i r s t I knew th a t th e tu n n e l had e v e r been c l o s e d .
   I o b v i o u s ly made e n q u ir ie s a f t e r th a t e v e n t .
Q. That b r in g s me t o th e second a s p e c t o f th e m atter.
   Leaving a s i d e th e s e m i - f i n a l , th in k in g j u s t o f le a g u e
   m atches, were you aware or had you e v er se e n anybody
   c l o s e th e tu n n el o f f ? - A. I had no knowledge o f th e
   tu n n el e v e r b ein g c l o s e d . No one had e v e r t o l d me i t
   had b een c l o s e d ; no one had e v er t o l d me i t had been
   used a s any s o r t o f measure to p rev en t p e o p le going
   down.
Q. So what you are sa y in g - I am n ot t a l k i n g about sem i­
   f i n a l s , I am j u s t t a l k in g about o r d in a ry m atches . . . . -
   A. I am t a l k in g about every match I a t t e n d e d , s i r , y e s .
                                                                                              '39

                                                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. Did you s p e c i f i c a l l y b r i e f t h e O f f i c e r s w ith regard t o
   m o n ito rin g overcrow ding? - A. No, I d i d n ' t . I d i d n ' t
   b r i e f PCs who were on t h e t r a c k and I d i d n ’t b r i e f
   I n s p e c t o r s s p e c i f i c a l l y ab ou t overcrow ding but i f I
   may, I would l i k e t o e n la r g e on t h a t .
Q. Y es, t h a t was my n ex t q u e s t i o n . Can you t e l l me why? -
   A. Y es. I t h i n k two r e a so n s r e a l l y . One i s t h a t th e
   O f f i c e r s on t h e tra ck a re v e r y e x p e r ie n c e d O f f i c e r s .  I
   have made th e p o in t a lr e a d y t h a t I norm ally would n o t
   b r i e f pcs and I have g iv e n t h e r e a so n s why I had so
   b r i e f e d th e PCs on th e S pion Kop. Y es, I would b r i e f
   th e I n s p e c t o r s and th e C h ie f I n s p e c to r s and I would
   e x p e c t them t o b r i e f t h e i r men on t h o s e s a l i e n t p o i n t s
   i f n e c e s s a r y . My b r i e f i n g l i n k s i n t o th e main b r i e f i n g
   which i s g iv e n on th e m orning.
            In r e l a t i o n t o th e q u e s t io n o f overcrow ding or
    m o n ito rin g o r what have you I d i d n ' t b r i e f th e
    I n s p e c t o r s on t h a t . They a re e x p e r ie n c e d O f f i c e r s t h a t
    o p e r a te on t h a t p erim eter t r a c k . The p r i n c i p l e o f t h a t
    i s q u i t e s im p le . You may have seen t h a t on o th e r
    f o o t b a l l grounds you do n o t s e e P o l i c e O f f ic e r s on th e
    tr a c k a t a l l .       I t was d e v e lo p e d I th in k by Mr. M oseley
    in t h e f i r s t i n s t a n c e . I t was enhanced by Mr. Mole in
    term s o f h a v in g them in o th e r a r e a s . They worked th e r e
    c o n t i n u a l l y week in week o u t and th e y a re very
    e x p e r ie n c e d i n th e q u e s t io n o f m o n ito rin g crowds
    w hether i t b e f o r any p u r p o se , m isb eh aviou r or
    o t h e r w is e . The sim p le answer I suppose i s th a t i t was
    n o t n e c e s s a r y f o r me, i n my v ie w , f o r me t o i n s t i l i n t o
    I n s p e c t o r s t h a t p a r t i c u l a r problem . Moreover i t h as t o
    be s a i d t h a t on th e main b r i e f i n g t h a t morning t h e r e
    was an em phasis which was p la c e d on s a f e t y . So i t had
    been c o v ered in d i r e c t te r m s, th e s a f e t y o f th e crowd.
Q. Did you know a t th e end o f t h e 1988 match or b e f o r e th e
   1989 match began th a t               t h e tu n n e l le a d in g t o th e c e n t r e
   p en s may have been or               was c l o s e d o f f i n 1988? - A. No,
   I d i d n ' t know and I have th o u g h t about i t s i n c e .                I
   would have come p a ssed t h e r e a t some p a r t i c u l a r tim e
   from th e L eppings Lane end and I have no r e c o l l e c t i o n
   o f a n y th in g b e in g c lo s e d t h e r e a t a l l .
Q. Whether you r e c o l l e c t i t or n o t , you d id n o t know i t a t
   t h e tim e . That i s what I am t r y in g t o f i n d o u t . - A.
   No.
Q. I f we th en tu r n t o th e d ay. - A. Y es.
Q. The b r i e f i n g has taken p l a c e and you have t o l d me about
   t h a t ? - A. Y es.
23    JUL   ’ 91   12:11       FROM SOUTH          YORKS   POLI CE                                        PAGE. 0 0 3


                                                                                                    O
 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE                                                                             wmmtesr
                                                                     POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                     SNIG HILL
                                                                     SHEFFIELD    S3 8LY
                                                                     TELEPHONE (0742) 768622
                                                                     TELSX 947996

 ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO "THE CHtEP CONSTABLE*
  r                                                          n
         IN OONFIDEMCE
         BY FAX                                                      Your Ref: COM 91/131/39

         Brigadier J Pownall          OBE                            Our fief:     CCO/AF/CJD 235/F27/89
         Deputy Chairman
                                                                     Date:         18 July 1991
         Police Complaints Authority
        London                                               J
         SW1




        Dear Brigadier Pownall
        HILLSBOROIK2H 1 9 8 9

        In confirmation of our telephone conversation today I am forwarding, by
        fax, copies of the proposed fiv e disciplinary charges prepared for service
        on Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and one disciplinary charge prepared
        for service on Superintendent Murray.
        The wording of the prepared charges while couched within the terms of the
        Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 follows exactly that wording specified
        by the Authority in the direction that the charges to be preferred should
        be those set out in your le tte r of 7 May 1991.
        I should be grateful i f you would advise me whether or not they meet with
        the approval of the Authority and shall not move to have service effected
        until I hear from you.
        Yours sincerely




        Acting Chief Superintendent
        pp Assistant Chief Constable
        (Discipline & Complaints)




 The officer de&ling with th>s correspondence is                                 P*.®.!.!..   Extension

 AQM/1
        23   J UL        ’ 91    12:11         FROM SOUTH       YORKS   POLICE                                    PAGE. 0 0 4




                                             SOUTH          YORKSHIRE              P O L I C E

                                                            DISCIPLINE FORM
 Charge against (nane)                               DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

 No* _ _ _ _ _ _                      Rank       CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT               Rate of Pay

 Particulars of Service:
              £                                    £*t~L*AiU.
             i- ¥ ■? -          *■***' a           f**



                                                                   charge    one


 Offence of which                               Particulars of alleged offence            Names and addresses of witnesse
 member is accused                              including time, date and place            in support of charge and whose
                                                                                          statements are attached


Neglect of Duty                            Being a member of South Yorkshire              To be supplied later.
                                           Police you did without good and
Contrary to                                sufficient cause neglect or .obit,
R e fla tio n 5 and                        to carry out with due promptitude
Parjagraph ft of                           and diligence that which i t was
Schedule 1* The                            your duty to attend to and carry
jPolSce (Discipline)                       out, viz. that you failed to,.-'’'    I
Regulations 1985                           acquaint yourself with thVPlanninS I
                                           and problems related to the control j
                                           of the football match Jield at        1

                                           Hillsborough footbal^t stadium,       *
                                           Sheffield on 15 An*il 1 9 8 9 \ * •
                                                           I7             's* b
                                                                              JL
                                                           * H-d

 U4~»        J M 4**




                                                          /\y* ^
                                                          j+&.                     0
                                                  w ,^ c ^ >                        *                 *4 -h


                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                      p^V“»W^ 4        "^   ..



                                                           t >>/trra ^ ft**f»*-*




  fWhere applicable. The charge has been brought on th e d ir e c t io n o f the Police Complaints
  A uthority in accordance w ith s e c t io n 93(3) o f the P o lic e and Criminal Evidence Act 19 *




                                                                                                              LinCr{
          23        J UL    ’ 91       12:12                    FROM SOUTH                  YORKS           POLICE                                         PAGE. 0 0 5




                                                         S OUTH                       YORKSHIRE                         FOLI C E

                                                                                         DISCIPLINE FORM
Charge against (name)                                                     DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

No.                                                                                                                     Rate of Pay
                                               Rank                      CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT

Particulars of Service:
                                                                                                                  4(~
               £ It-M-j              UrMM*
               £ <,#4—-X-l..

                                                                                                CHARGE TWO

Offence of which                                                 Particulars of alleged offence                                  Names and addresses of witnesse
ngmber is accused                                                including time, date and place                                  in support of charge and whose
                                                                                                                                 statements are attached

Neglect of Duty                                       Being a member of South Yorkshire                                         To be supplied later.
                                                      Police you did without good and
Contrary to                                           sufficient cause neglect or omit
R eflation 5 and                                      to carry out with due promptitude
Paragraph U of                                        and diligence that which i t was
Schedule 1. The                                       your duty to attend to and carry
Police (Discipline)                                   out, viz. that you f ailed to monitor
Regulations 1985                                      crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4 at
                                                      Hillsborough football stadium,
                                                      Sheffield on 15 April 1989*




                                                                                                                                       AM/
  /-/I                           ^^ ~~                                                                                         ■My*-          /»«-        J *-^C
 sfu*ef&w                                                   UA-+V                     ***********

      **■*£.                     *
                                                                      >JU~ i                                                   A-*v« £«*. stt-VtM'
                                                                                                                           ?
 l j> M         J                ''v ^
                                                                  I**-.
                                                                                                                               'fzpi&'i/*         ‘*’0 /-***-#&<■        (}



          /**•»            ^ n«.Q9iL^J                                                                                         ^4j     p*K~v*o‘




 {Where a p p lic a b le . The charge has been brought on the d i r e c t i o n o f the P o lic e Complaints
 Authority in accordance w ith s e c t io n 9 3 (3 ) o f the P o lic e and Criminal Evidence Act 198•

                             ^     /* C m *   <4/4,   £S»-t-ivC ,-?        t ^ tc t                 sSt-e, £ j,
     23   J UL   ’ 91   12:12       FROM SOUTH       YORKS         POLICE                                  PAGE. 00S




                                  S OUTH          YORKSHI RE                          POLI CE

                                                   DISCIPLINE FOKM
  Charge against (name)
                                                DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

                           Rank            CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT                       Rate of Pay
 particulars of Service:
               (Lia3-'<(


                                                           CHARGE             three

 Offence of which                      Particulars of alleged offence                      Names and addresses of witness
 aember is accused                     including time, date and place                      in support of charge and whose
                                                                                           statements are attached

Neglect of Duty                 Being a member of South Yorkshire                          To be supplied later.
                                Police you did without good and
Contrary to                     sufficient cause neglect or omit
Regulation 5 and                to carry out with due promptitude
Paragraph ft of                 and diligence that which i t was
Schedule 1 , The                your duty to attend to and carry
Police (Discipline)             out, viz. that you f ailed to act
Regulations 1985                when Peng 3 and ft’ at Hillsborough
                                football stadium, Sheffield were
                                obviously overcrowded on 1 5 April
                                1989.



                                                                   '   ®ftt
                                 "?S                       (4»vs



                                    2>     A* A*t<*«'*'<? v«3




 {Where a p p lic a b le . The charge has been brought on the d ir e c t io n o f the P o lice Complaints
 A uthority in accordance w ith s e c t io n 93 (3 ) o f the P o lic e and Criminal Evidence Act 19841



                                                                                                                            I
       23   J UL   ’ 91   12:13       FROM SOUTH     YORKS   POLI CE                            PAGE. 0 0 7




                                    SOUTH          YORKSHI RE          POLICE

                                                     DISCIPLINE FORM
 Charge against (name)                         DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

 So.
                             Rank          CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT            Rate of Pay

 particulars of Services




                                                        CHARGE FOUR

 Offence of which                      Particulars of alleged offence            Names and addresses of witness
 aember is accused                     including time, date and place            in support of charge and vhcse
                                                                                 statements are attached

Neglect of Duty                   Being a member of South Yorkshire               To be supplied later.
                                  Police you did without good and
Cqntrary to                       sufficient cause neglect or omit
Regulation 5 and                  to carry out with due promptitude
Paragraph 4 of                    and diligence that which i t was
Schedule 1. The                   your duty to attend to and carry
Pcjlic e (Discipline)             out, viz. in that you fa iled to
Regulations 1985                  control the movement of supporters
                                  subsequent to the opening of Gate
                                  *C’ at Hillsborough football stadium,
                                  Sheffield on 15 April 1 9 8 9 .
   ^iw j       J/c I




                                                                               CrSto**/
                                                                               /vtA*afKsi&&£
                                         r<j 4*«




 (Where a p p lic a b le . The charge has been brought on the d ir e c t io n o f the P o lic c Complaints
 A uthority in accordance with s e c t io n 93 (3) o f th e P o l ic e and Criminal Evidence Act 1984)
       23   J UL   ’ 91   12:13      FROM SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                               PAGE. 0 0 8




                                   SOUTH       Y0 RKSHIRE           POLI CE

                                                  DISCIPLINE FORM
 Charge against (name)
                                           DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

 *o.
                             Rank      CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT            Rate of Pay
 Particulars of Service:


                                       £

                                                     CHARGE FIVE

 Offence of which                     Particulars of alleged offence         Names and addresses of witness
 ftember is accused                   including time, date and place         in support of charge and whose
                                                                             statements are attached

Discreditable Conduct             Being a member of South Yorkshire          To be supplied later.
                                  Police did act in a manner reasonably
Contrary to                       likely to bring discredit on the
Regulation 5 and                  reputation of the force or of the
Paragraph 1 of                    police service at Hillsborough
Schedule 1. The                   football stadiupi, Sheffield on
Pdlice (Discipline)               15 April 1989.
Regulations 1985




 {Where a p p lic a b le . The charge has been brought on the d i r e c t i o n o f the P o lic e Complaints
 A uthority in accordance with s e c t i o n 93(3) of the P o lic e and Criminal Evidence Act 19841
     23   JUL   ’ 91   12:14     FROM SOUTH          YORKS    POLICE                           PAGE. 0 0 9



                               S 0 I I H          Y O R K S   H I R E   P O L I C E

                                                    DISCIPLINE FORM
 Cjharge agdinst (name)
                                                BERNARD DEAN MURRAY


                          Rank              SUPERINTENDENT               Rate of Pay

 Particulars of Service;

                                 1      3L
                                 £   y.j-.SV'

                                 tri-m
                                                        CHARGE ONE

 0£fcnce of which                    Particulars of alleged offence            Names and addresses of witness*
 Member is accused                   including time, date and place            in support of charge and whose
                                                                               statements are attached

Neglect of Duty            Being a member of South Yorkshire                   To be supplied later.
                           Police you did irithout good and
Contrary to                sufficient cause neglect or omit
Kekulatlon 5 and           to carry out with due promptitude
Paragraph ft of            and diligence that which it was
Schedule 1. The            your duty to attend to and carry
Police (Discipline)        out, viz. jn that you failed to
Regulations 1985           control the movement of supporters
                           subsequent to the opening of Gate
                           *0* at Hillsborough football stadium,
                           Sheffield on 15 April 1989 .




{Where a p p lic a b le . The charge has been brought on the d i r e c t i o n o f the P o lic e Complaints
A uthority in accordance w ith s e c tio n 9 3 (3 ) o f the P o lic e and Criminal Evidence Act 19841
23   JUL   ’ 91   12:14   FROM SOUTH     YORKS   POLI CE                                 PAGE. 0




BRIGADIER J L POWNALL, OBE                   POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Deputy Chairman (Discipline)

                                                                            London SW1____
                                                                          Telephone: 071-273^ jq

  IN CONFIDENCE



  G Moore, Esq                                                    Your Ref: ACC(D&C)CJD
  Assistant Chief Constable
  South Yorkshire Police                                          Our Ref: COM 91/131/39
  Snig Hill
  SHEFFIELD                                                                    7   May, 1991
  S3 9LY




                   Aw     H i


                                HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                     15 APRIL,1 1989 ^
   1. The Authority have now com pleted a careful and detailed examination of the report
  and the evidence relating to the individual complaints arising from the Hillsborough
   tragedy on 15 April, 1989, We have considered Mr Anderson's memoranda, subm itted to
  us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal
   Evidence Act, 1984, and his le tte r of 10 April, 1991. We have noted your force's
                                          arges against any of the officers who are the
  subject of com plaint and your reasons for these proposals, However, as I told Mr
  Anderson on the telephone, the Authority were disappointed th at he did not explain
L your reasons               We have also taken into account the views expressed by Mr
  Sharp, the investigating officer.

 2. Having considered the evidence relating to the com plaints against Police Constable
 Smith, Police Constable Illingworth, Superintendent Marshall or Superintendent Green­
 wood we have concluded th at the evidence in respect of these four officers does not
 justify disciplinary proceedings and we agree with your proposal. ip     t* ’"1       “

 3* We have also considered those complaints which have been laid against Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray which allege th at they were in
 'neglect of duty'. These complaints raise difficult issues* In reaching our conclusions
 we have borne in mind the decisionTlM I I K lS S to S r f .^ B L M Ic Prosecutions as one
 factor amongsTMfiers. ' AT^y6u are aw are we do not accept th at culpable misfeasance
 and neglect of duty a re coterm inous nor th a t, even if they were, we would be bound (as
 far as discipline is concerned) by the decision of the D irector not to bring criminal
 prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne in mind the definition of neglect of duty set
 out in paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 of The                     (ni^r-ipi infO Rgpniatinnc ]9g5.
£3    J UL   ’ 91    12:15      FROM SOUTH     YORKS    POLICE                                  PAGE. 0


                                                                                            ^

     4, The incident which gave rise to the tragedy a t th e Hillsborough Stadium on 15
     April, 1989 would not have occurred had sensible and ^impie steps been taken to secure
     the safety of jg ectatot^Jn_P ens_ 3 and 4 on the Leppings Lane Terraces. It is clear
           rae pasic cause ot__tn e 'd is a s te r was overerowoing m ^inese pens. We have
     concentrated on this m atter.                      —ar 1 111-

 5. In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m atters which can be
 advanced as argum ents for taking no disciplinary action on the grounds th a t to take
 such action would be unfair and/or oppressive. Amongst such m atters we refer briefly
 to the following:

                    a. the passage of tim e since 15 April, 1989;

                    b. the various consequences arising from the earlier hearings
                    before Lord Justice T^yior and the Coroner}

                    c*       effe c t of the extensive media coverage of the incident
                    itself, m atters associated with it and the hearings referred to in
                    b. above;

                    d. the perception th at if any officer is charged he may be seen
                    as a scapegoat carrying the blame for the acts or omissions of
                    others;

                ,e. the recent promotion of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
                I the fa c f.
                j sxmteoi^e-~eise Artd' his 'Eelle? th a t t he plan had o p e ra te d
                | &ucitrcSSiulIy Deiore|

                    f. the anguish which both Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
                    Superintendent Murray must have experienced as the result of the
                    tragic and unexpected events on 15 April, 1989, and

                    g. the e ffe c t th a t disciplinary action against any officer would
                    have on the m orale and well-being of the South             Yorkshire
                    Police.

 6. Despite these factors it cannot be denied th a t the police, under the control of Chief
 Superindent Duckenfield, assisted by Superintendent Murray, were de facto in control of ,
 the grgynd a t the relevant tim e and had responsibility for the safety ol the IjbfeffgflF lT j
 in the opinion of this Authority there is su ^ icien t evidence to support disciplinary* 1
 charges on the following grounds;

                 a. Chief Superintendent Ducken field, as the officer in overall
                 command, failed to Address him self properly to the problems
               11 involved in, and the plans for, crowd control even before the
                 spectators arrived;              "                     ~

                    b, failed to monitor the numbers of spectators entering Pens 3
                    and
£3    JUL   ’ 91    1 £ : 15   FROM SOUTH    YORKS   POLICE                                PAGE.01£




                     c* M M to take any action when Pens 3 and 4 became nhvinnsiv
                    .overcrowded:
                         ..M    7

                     c* auth° 5 lsed.--pa^„„»<;». to be opened and, together with
                     Superintendent Murray, failed to take~any^ steps to control the
                                  th^ewho                              this"gate at'S'
                   ,      whciii& j!iffls^.,fihou^^                          of them
                     tnat Pens 3 and 4 were, or were likely tp become, overcrowded..
  7.    In the view of this Authority responsibility for the safety of those in Pens 3 and 4
 and blame for overcrowding in those pens should rest with those in the Police Control
 Boxfrom which the pens could be observed, the depIoymeniTof police l^]wwef~cc 5uia"
 Dedirectedand the decision to_OE»n^.Galgj£I,was made with its attendant responsibil­
 ity for controlling those who entered through it. The Authority are conscious of the
—5^mpI5^ cir^jmtancg^which M M have contributed to the tragedy, but we do not
 accepT-thaOhe fact, that there may be otheFs who are a ^                     blameworffiy“
 should cause us to decide against the recommendation of charges under the Regulations
 if, as here, the evidence is available to support such charges. You will appreciate the
 Authority are concerned solely with the evidence in respect of the matters which are
                                                           would only become rele^ tT T iT
 charge          P ^ were to oeproved against an officer who is the subject of a

                                                  decided tc
     yjyit oi rne ponce and Criminal Evidence Act 1984  thaT tfte TOUOWlflfe tftXfit&HSe
                                                   I9S4 tBa!                                 -
     brought against Chief Superintendent Duekenfields

                   i. Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
                   the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to
                   acquaint himself with the planning and problems related to the
                   control of the semi-final.

                   “* Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
                   the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to
                   monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4 .

                        Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
                      the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in that he failed to
                   act when Pens 3 and 4 were obviously overcrowded.
                   iv* Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
                   of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 19S5 in that he failed to
                   control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of
                   G&tc

       We have given separate attention to the degree of responsibility attributable to
 _5ugenndent_Murray. We concluded that in view of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
  very recent appointment ,and promotion to his position as Divisional Commander,
                  Murray hadjispecjajLjres^^                      advise Chief Super-
  lntendent DucKeni^MpSHicularly in view of Superintendent Murray's greater expe’r-
                                   He was aware that authority had been given to open'
23   J UL        ’ 91      12:16              FROM SOUTH                 YORKS           POLICE                                                 PAGE. 0 1 3




     10. We therefore recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence
     Act 1984 that Superintendent Murray also be charged with:

                            Neglect of Duty - contrary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the
                            Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to control
                            the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of G ate
                            'C'»

     11. We have also carefully considered th e allegation th a t Chief Superintendent ■
     Duckenfield was deceitful and misled senior police^ officers and members of the public.
                      wlth tt)e investigating"oY ficerTs ^ nclu sibhs tfia F lW F li^ tfe r Bar—
     tl i K t S n f i a f A r i   I*   Sc   (•'I a « ** 4>k«4   &!•   V » I I «.   tlx            ___j   ii„ M m   «•   _ _ __ _    ,   . > i


     ^ cii.ucimciii u u tw n iie ia max i.a ie 'i,' nao oeen torcea. and th a t there Tiad"been an
     in-rush ^o f L i v ep o o i, suppor te r s. While we a re aw are th at he did not wish to encourage


     explanation led to serious allegations beingm ade against Liverpool supporters in general
     causing grave                                       — ..

     12   We have, therefore, decided to recommend under Section 93(1) of the Police and
     Criminal Evidence Act 1984 th a t Chief Superintendent Duckenfield also be charged


                           Discreditable Conduct - contrary to paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of
                           the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he acted in a
                           manner likely to bring discredit on the reputation of the force or
                           the police service.

     13. I would be grateful for your response to our recommendations as soon as possible.

     14. If you accept the A uthority's recom m endations we shall be minded, in view of the
     exceptional circum stances a ffecting this case, to direct th at the charges are heard by a
     tribunal, in accordance with Section 94(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
     TSSr

    15.     I would particularly request th a t you maintain the confidentiality, of this
    correspondence until such tim e as the procedures laid down in the Act for determ ining
    the disciplinary charge^ to be preferred have been com pleted. This will involve not
 || informing those against whom we are agreed th a t no charges should be preferred until
 If the whole m atter has been resolved betw een us.




     J L fUWNALL




                                                                                                                        **         TOTAL        PAGE.013      **
                                                                                  jr. -      ,



                 Telephone:
                                                                                                                                 South Yorkshire Police
                 Sheffield (0742) 766522
                                                                                                                                   Police Headquarters
                 Telex: 547996
                                                                                                                                               Sftig Hill
                 Fur (0742)523409
                                                                                                                                     Sheffield S3 SLY




                                                      Facsimile Transmission




                            COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT
                                                                             Ext 3421


                                                                Head of Department
                                                Acting Chief Superintendent Fell




v ,

               The following document consisting of                                 . >$-...               page(8) is for the attention of:
                 •                                                                .....................

                 .               .Up                             Jirfo*
                                            ......................



                 .   w   I / yns ( ^   .....................................................................................................

                     $7o        aip$




,     T U .’ ZPP 0£i 9220                ^-9Tt7£2S0t7i0                                 WdS0:ST            T6-i - £ Z !               3D I nod SMajQA HinoSiAg 1KI3S
 Telephone:                                                                      South Yorkshire Police
 Sheffield (0742) 768522                                                           Police Headquarters
 Telex: 547996                                                                                 Snlg Hill
 Fax: (0742)520409                                                                   Sheffield S3 8LY




                           Facsimile Transmission




         COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT
                                          Ext 3421


                                 Head of Department
                       Acting Chief Superintendent Fell




The following document consisting of .                    ,. page(s) is for the attention of:*
 .                                             .........................................
 .           .U x                   JU v c *                       .....................................
 . fe.        S? J............




                    <r9TP£E9QP^t2              !   W d 0 0 sS T   T6   -L -£Zi      aDinod s^yoA Hinos:A9   inqs
  TELEPHONE:                                               SOUTHYORKSHIRE POLICE
  SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                   POLICE HEADQUARTERS
  TELEX: 547996                                               SMGHILL
  FAX! (0742) 823243                                           SHEFFIELD S3SLY

  G MOORE ESQBA
  ASSISTANTCHIEFCONSTABLE
  (Discipline & Complaints)                         Our ref;   ACC/AF/CJD 235/F27/89
  OOWPlDBrnAL                                                           23 July 1991
  R C Johnston Esq
  Clerk and Financial Officer
  South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
  PO Box 37
  Regent Street
  Barnsley
  South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
  For the attention of Miss M Oadss




  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15 APRIL 1989

  You w ill be aware that service of disciplinary charges i s about to be effected
  on Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray following a
  direction by the Police Complaints Authority in accordance with- procedures'
  laid down in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, I enclose copies
  of related correspondence.

  The wording of the proposed disciplinary charges was laid down in the letter
  of 7 May 1991 from Brigadier Pownall. Acting Chief Superintendent Fell used
  this wording to set out the charges on the appropriate forms which were sent
  for consideration with the letter* of 18 July 1991.                     ----
  Yesterday I received a telephone c a ll from the Brigadier during which he
  expressed agreement with the chargee except that he f e l t that the substance
  ^ P^§g.r*PjL^..-SiLMB-Aft3itgg-_gf 7 May 1991 should be incorporated in the"-
  "discreditable conduct" charge. He also expressed' the'view t M f 'all" of™the
  chargeT~1 1 ^ T d " ^ l^ ^ iif at by counsel and stated that in the ligh t of f
U counsel's opinion the chwgesmlgSriBric'econsidered.                           f
 I should be grateful i f you would seek an opinion from counsel as to the
 efficacy of the wording of the proposed charges the evidence in support of
 which w ill form the substance of the presentation before the Tribunal.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                             SNtG HILL
                                                             SHEFFIELD    89 SLY
                                                             TELEPHONE (0742) 768822
                                                             TELEX 547996

ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO 'THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
r                                                  "i
      HI OOKFIPBHCS                                          Yourftef:    COM 91/131/39
      BY FAX      “
                                                             Our Ref;     CC0/AF/CJ0 235/F27/89
      Brigadier J Pownall OBE
      Deputy Chairman                                        Date:        18 July 1991
      Police Complaintfi Authority
.     10 Great George Street
      London
      SW1P 3AE




      Dear Brigadier Pownall

      HILLSBOROUGH 1989

      In confirmation of our telephone conversation today I am forwarding, by
      fax, copies of the proposed five disciplinary chargee prepared for service
      on Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and one disciplinary charge prepared
      for service on Superintendent Murray.

      The wording of the prepared charges while couched within the terms of the
      Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 follows exactly that wording specified
      by the Authority in the direction that the charges to be preferred should
      be those set out in your letter of 7 Hay 1991.

      I should be grateful if you would advise me whether or not they meet with
      the approval of the Authority and shall not move to have service effected
      until I hear froo you.

      Voure sincerely




      Acting Chief Superintendent
      pp Assistant Chief Constable
      (Discipline & Complaints)




Theofficerdealingwithth<$currvfpondenceis                               ,Pell __   Extension       ,

                         «-9Tt>22S0WJ3          : W dT0:2T    T 6-A —£ 2 f     3 D I“10d SMyOA M inO S : AS I KI3S
                                0 U T H      YORKSHI RE               POLI CE

                                                 DISCIPLINE FORM
Charge against (name)                  DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD

Ho.                      Rank      CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT                Rate of Pay

Particulars of Service:




                                                     CHARGE ONE

Offence of which                  Particulars of alleged offence               Names and addresses of witness*
member is accused                 including tiae, date and place               in support of charge and whose
                                                                               statements are attached


jglect of Duty            Being a member of South Yorkshire                    To be supplied later.
                          Police you did without good and
sntrary to                sufficient cause neglect or omit
tgulation 5 and           to carry out with due promptitude
          k
iragraoh of               and diligence that which it was
shedule 1. The            your duty to attend to and carry
slice (DiaciPline)        out, viz. that you failed to
emulations 1985           acquaint yourself with the planning
                          and problems related to the control
                          of the football match held at
                          Hillsborough football stadium,
                          Sheffield on 15 April 1989




[Where applicable. The charge has been brought on the direction of the Police Complaints
Authority in accordance with section 93(3) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 19841




   P U'.ZPPBZt 9 2 2 0          *-9TPZES<2Pt,B          ! W d 20:2T   T6 ~L -£Z!   3D I “IOd S»yOA H J.n 02:A g 1N3S
SENT BY:SOUTH YORKS POLICE      123-   7-91    2:10PM ;                  0740523416-?                0226 730442;8 1




          Telephone:                                                                South Yorkshire Police
          Sheffield (0742) 766522                                                     Police Headquarters
          Telex: 547996                                                                           Snig Hill
          Fax: (0742)523409                                                             Sheffield S3 8LY




                                    Facsimile Transmission

  }




                      COMPLAINTS & DISCIPLINE DEPARTMENT
                                                 Ext. 3421


                                        Head of Department
                               Acting Chief Superintendent Fell




         The following document consisting of         . S ....        page(s) is for the attention of:-

              .y W    ?.   .            ..........



              .                         ....................................................................
          <                    ....................................................
                  v S %
   BRIGADIER J L POWNALL, OBE                        POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
,* Deputy Chairman (Discipline)

                                                                                           London S W 1

                                                                                        Telephone: 071-273^

     IN CONFIDENCE



     G Moore, Esq                                                             Your R ef:    ACC(D<5tC)CJD
     A ssistant Chief Constable                                                                     '
     Sni1g H i I r kShire P° lk e                                             Our Ref: COM.91/131/39
     SHEFFIELD                                                                          Y       , oo ,
     S3 9LY                                                                             May» 1991




                                             i

                                       HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                            13 APRIL. 1989

     1* .    Authority have now completed a careful and d etailed exam ination of the repo rt
             «eVI| M      fo ? 2        indlvidual com plaints arising from the Hillsborough
       g dy on 15 April, 1989. We have considered Mr A nderson's memoranda, submitted to
    us in accordance with the provisions of Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal
    Evidence Act, 1984, and his le tte r of 10 April, 1991. We have noted your fo rce's
    proposals not to prefer disciplinary charges against any of the officers who are the
    subject of complaint and your reasons for th ese proposals. However, as I told Mr
    Anderson on the telephone, the Authority w ere disappointed th at he did not explain
    your reasons more fully. We have also taken into acco un t the views expressed by Mr
    Sharp, the investigating o fficer.                                                 7

\ 2.
N
                c ° ™ d e r e d th e e v id e n c e r e n tin g to th e com plaints against Police Constable
  Smith, Police Constable Illingworth, Superintendent M arshall or Superintendent C reen-
"        w .e hav.e e x c lu d e d th a t the evidence in respect of these four officers does not
. justify disciplinary proceedings and we ag ree w ith your proposal.                   4      ,*»

    3.      We have also considered those com plaints which have been laid against Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray which allege th a t they were in
     neglect of duty . These complaints raise difficult issues. In reaching our conclusions
    we have borne in mind the decisions o f the D irector o f Public Prosecutions as one
    fa c to r amongst others. As you are aw are we do not a c c e p t th a t culpable misfeasance
    and neglect of duty are coterm inous nor th a t, even if they w ere, we would be bound (as
    far as discipline is concerned) by the decision of the D irector not to bring criminal
    prosecutions. We have, throughout, borne in mind the definition of neglect of duty set
    out in paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 o f The Police (Discipline) Regulations, ' k S !
l     The incident which gave rise to the tragedy a t th e Hillsborough Stadium on 15
April* 1989 would not have occurred had sensible and sim ple steps been ^ k e n to se^ r e
the safety of spectators in Pens 3 and 4 on th e Leppings Lane T erraces. It is c le ar
th a t the basic cause of the disaster was overcrowding in th ese pens.          We have
concentrated on this m a tte r.
5 In reaching our decisions we have taken into account various m a tte rs which can be
advanced as argum ents for taking no disciplinary action on th e grounds th a t to tak e
such action would be unfair and/or oppressive. Amongst such m a tte rs we re fe r brie y
to the following:
               a. the passage o f tim e since 15 April, 1989;

               b. the various consequences arising from the e arlier hearings
               before Lord Justice Taylor and the C oroner;

               c. the e ffe c t of th e extensive media coverage o f th e incident
               itself, m a tte rs associated with it and th e hearings re fe rre d to in
               b. above;
                 d. the perception th a t if any o fficer is charged he may be seen
              .. as a scapegoat carry in g th e blame for th e a c ts or omissions of
             | others;
               e. the recen t promotion of C hief Superintendent Duckenfield and
               the fa c t th a t he took over th e m atch arran g em en ts devised by
               som eone e lse and his b e lie f t h a t th e p lan h ad o p e ra te d
               successfully before;
                f. the anguish which both C hief Superintendent DuckenfieW and
                Superintendent Murray must have experienced as th e result o f the
                tragic and unexpected events on 15 April, 1989, and

                b.  the e ffe c t th a t disciplinary action against any officer would
                have on the m orale and well-being of th e South              Yorkshire
                Police.
    6 Despite these facto rs it cannot be denied th a t th e police, under th e control o f Chief
    Superindent Duckenfield, a j s i s t e ^ _ ^ j ^                            f th i" ^ r i t i r s
    the ground a t the relevant tim e and had responsibility for th e sa fe ty of th e sp ec ta to .
    In the opinion o f this A uthority th ere is sufficient evidence to support disciplinary
    charges on the following grounds:
                a.
                a. C hief Superintendent Duckenfield, as th e o ffice r in overall
                command, failed to address him self properly to the problems
                involved in, and th e plans for, crowd control even before the
                spectators arrived;
                     failed to m onitor the numbers o f sp ec ta to rs entering Pens 3
                 and 4;
              c. failed to take any action when Pens 3 and 4 becam e obviously
              overcrowded;

              d. a u th o ris e d G a te 'C ' to be o p e n e d a n d , to g e th e r w ith
              Superintendent Murray, failed to ta k e any steps to control the
              movement of those who e n te re d the ground through this g a te a t a
              time when it was, or should have been, c le a r to both of them
              that Pens 3 and 4 w ere, or w ere likely to becom e, overcrowded.

 7. In th e view of this Authority responsibility fo r th e s a fe ty of those in Pens 3 and 4
 and blame for overcrowding in those pens should re s t w ith those in th e Police Control
 Box from which th e pens could be observed, th e deploym ent of police manpower could
 be directed and the decision to open G ate 'C ' was made w ith its attendant responsibil­
 ity for controlling those who e n te red through it. The A uthority are conscious of the
 complex circumstances which may have con trib u ted to th e tragedy, but we do not
 a'uCeEit       ^  faCt t ^iat t ^ere m ay be others who a re also in some way blameworthy,
 should cause us to decide against th e recom m endation o f charges under th e Regulations
 a f      . re ’ e evidence is available to support such charges. You wilj appreciate the
 A uthority are concerned solely w ith th e evidence in re sp ec t o f the m atters which a re
 the subject of complaint and not with m itigation which would only become relevant if a
 breach of discipline were to be proved against an o ffic e r who is th e subject of a
 charge.                                                                          '

 ^• ^ or t ^ s e reasons th at th e A uthority have decided to recommend under Section
 93(1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 th a t th e following charges be
 brought against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

             i. Neglect of Duty - co n trary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
             the Police (Discipline) R egulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
             acquaint himself with th e planning and problem s related to the
             control of the sem i-final.

             ii. Neglect of Duty - co n trary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of
             the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
             monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and 4.

             iii. Neglect of Duty - c o n tra ry to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
             of the Police (Discipline) R egulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
             a ct when Pens 3 and 4 w ere obviously overcrow ded.

             iv. Neglect of Duty - co n trary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1
             of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to
             control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening of
             Gdtc

 9. We have given separate a tte n tio n to the degree o f responsibility attributable to
 s.4 PeIi. 0 deDXM.yriay. We concluded th a t in view o f C hief Superintendent Duckenfield's
 very recen t appointment and promotion to his position as Divisional Commander,
 Superintendent Murray had a special responsibility to assist and advise Chief Si ippr-
j n t ^ d e n t ^j£.kenfield particularly in view of Superintendent Murray's greater e x p e r t
ience of policing a t Hillsborough. He was aw are th a t a u th o rity had been given to open
G d tC
   Act 1 9 * 5 5 ? ? * reC+
                          ° rn!Tend ,u nder Section 93<J> of Police and Criminal Evidence
   Act 1984 that Superintendent Murray also be charged with:

                        ° f DutY • co n trary to paragraph 4(a) of Schedule 1 of the
                Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he failed to control
                the movement of supporters subsequent to th e opening of G ate


   D ucken^feW w L dec0eitCf . efUHy T Sj dered th e allegation th a t Chief Superintendent
   Wo £     I       deceitful and misled senior police officers and members o f the Dublir
   We do not agree with th e investigating o ffic e r's conclusion* th a t thi* +* ^       *




  * £ &              £ £ &              ■ = : » j w                 s s t - s t s s a
  C ^ im ^ a l^ W d e n re ^ A c T '                         UndT SeC,i0n 93(11 01 th e P o lic e and
  with-         cv,aence             1984 th a t Chief Superintendent Duckenfield also be charged


               § :f Crp d|ltabl/erxCOndlUCt i~ contrary t0 paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 of
               the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 in th a t he a cted in a
               manner likely to bring discredit on th e reputation of the force or
               the police service.

  13.   I would be grateful for your response to our recom m endations as soon as possible.

  14. If you accept the A uthority's recom m endations we shall be minded, in view of thP
  tHhnnpl0     circum stances a ffe c tin g this case, to d ire c t th a t th e charges are heard by a
  tribunal, in accordance with Section 94(2) of th e Police and Criminal Evidence Act


f 15.   I would particularly request th a t you m aintain the confidentiality of t h is
 correspondence until such tim e as th e procedures laid down in t h e A c ? for d e t e ? L t e
  he disciplinary charges to be p referred have been com pleted. T h l? will S e            m
 tthe
   h i Swhole
         h a ll m°tSf a fhas
                m atter   ainSK
                              t Wh0m
                              been resolveda re agreed
                                              betw      th a t no ch ar8es should be preferred until
                                                   een us.




 3 L POWNALL
                                                                         C orf*'* ~U
CH       Cl     ,STABLE:   L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
*■   *
                                                                                             k l'.i*'.&■
My Reference:     CC/BMT

Your Reference.                                                                        POLICE HEADQUARTLRS
                                                                                             CARLETON H A L L
                                                                                                     PENRITH
          STRICTLY               CONFIDENTIAL                                              CUMBRIA CA10 2AI
                                                                                       TELEPHONE: 0768.
          P Hayes Esq QPM LLB MA                                                                 TELEX: 64240
          Deputy Chief Constable                                                             FAX: 0768-217099
          South Yorkshire Police
          Snig Hill
          SHEFFIELD
          S3 9LY

                                                                                        16 May 1991




          Dear Mr Hayes
          HILLSBOROUGH 1989
          In response to our recent telephone conversation on 10 May 1991 I w rite to
          say that I have now had the opportunity to study the copy of the Police
          Complaints Authority l e t t e r of 7 May 1991.
          I have set out, in t h is l e t t e r ,   the d e ta ile d reasoning which lay behind the
          recommendations and conclusions            in my Complaints and D iscipline reports in
          respect of Chief Superintendent            Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In
          addition, I have made reference            to the points and issues raised by the PCA
          in i t s l e t t e r .
          I t cannot be argued th at the PCA is not bound by the decisions of the
          Director of Public Prosecutions in respect of the criminal conduct issues
          because the PCA has to consider whether or not the complaints are
          substantiated and whether d isc ip lin a ry charges should be la id . However, i t
          could be argued th a t i f the evidence required to prove a criminal offence
          is identical to the evidence required to prove a d isc ip lin ary offence, and
          the decision of the           DPP is th a t there is in s u f f ic ie n t evidence to provethe
          criminal offence, then i t follows th at there w ill be in s u ffic ie n t evidence
          to prove the d isc ip lin a ry offence.
          The PCA is       of the       view th a t the ancient crim inal offence of "culpable
          malfeasance" is not           coterminous with "neglect of duty". That is to saythe
          le a s t, arguable. Every malfeasance or culpable non-feasance of an o ffic e r
          of ju stic e , which includes/a police o f f ic e r , in respect of h is o ffice , is a
          misdemeanour a t Common L
          old cases which arose           oqbttv.
                                              The case-law a ris e s predominently from very
                                            of fa ilu re to do things required to be done
          because of the accused’s /o f f ic e , (see CROWTHER s CASE (1593) Cro. E liz. 654
          and R v VYAT (1705) 1 Salk 380). The cases in dicate there is an offence of
          a public o ffic e r w ilfu lly neglecting to perform a duty which he is bound to
          perform by common law dr s ta tu te but the neglect has to be w ilful and not
          merely inadvertent.       Ijp has to be culpable in the sense of being without

                                                         1

                                      ‘                  v (
reasonable excuse or j u s t i f i c a t i o n . In th is sense c u lp a b ility Is not
« « “ cted to corruption or dishonesty but has to be of such a degree the
misconduct impugned i s c a lc u la te d to in ju re the public in te r e s t. I t .o u ld
be fo r the jury to decide whether the evidence revealed th a necessary
degree o T c u l p I b i l i t y in performing a duty badly .h ic h .o u ld include
•neglect of duty". (R v DYTHAM (1979) 2QB 722).
I t does not appear to be necessary to prove th a t by so doing, or not Joing,
the accused Intended to gain some personal b en efit or advantage but ** “ J
S t i « to appropriate ca'ses. e .g . • R e g is tra r, there must be a b en eficiary
to whose In te re st there has been no proper regard.
From th a t I t can be argued th a t the offence of -culpable malfeasance*
re a u ires proof of a degree of negligence or recklessness which i s close y
akin to "neglect of duty*. I t is my view th a t the mental element require
to prove " c u l p a b l e malfeasance* is the same a . for t h e d isc ip lin a ry offence
Of "neelect of duty*. In view of the DPP’ s decision in resp ect of
•                 malfeasance* i t would be q u ite wrong, in my view, to pursue
« « ? p ? L A char” , of "neglect o f d u t y , p a rtic u la rly as the Inquest Jury
Krouiht in a verdict of -Accidental Death*. The Inquest ju ry ’ s v e rd ic t of
- a c c i d e n t taken together with the DPP’s decision not to prosecute fo r
                 ..V fe-sancf. i s . a p o .e rfu l . ^ e n t . ^ i n ^ v i e . . * r pursuing
ha*Ctaken*cognisance of the f a c t t h a t each case should be considered^ on i t s
■ e r i t s and has decided th a t in a l l the circumstances i t i,i fair^ and
                     To ^ r / M           Y      d 7 suclTproceedings V r t ' E - T                         U -u ld

                             d e a i ^ f u r n n s u l l i r i o n 1: ^          s        v

 There can be no          argument     about the d e fin itio n of -neglect of duty* which is
 c le a r ly se t out     in Schedule 1of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.
                                                  ££         rt uh1.‘ r t t. r / , e Z \ e^                        * >   .
 sas                                                              ss^srsitTt
 su ffic ie n ^ m e re ly to s h o . 't h a t the a c t or M is s io n «as caused through a
                                                                                                                 i : z i


 lack of due care.
 The PCA in i t s l e t t e r a t paragraph 4, makes i t c le ar th a t i t s
 d elib eratio n s have been centred upon the core of the issue^ th a t is o s y

 -                                       *were'

  c o ^ U ^ V 'm a ^ e f t o ^ s f y ' V h a t   th /j

  (Para
  issue


  tie" e r d i c t
                                       i»ue “b u t ^ n            ” t
                                                                    eh ,th.0,d.ciiVi‘i f,of t*he DPP
                     of the Coroner's Jury i t i s c e rtain ly very persuasive.
                                                                                                                     £
  Sim ilarly, the e a rlie r hearings before Lord J,Stice                          ot be
                                                                                     t . ? l o r   s h o u 1<l


  conclusive e ith e r to prosecute d is c ip lin e charges or to d isc red it them.
           not 1 ,  forgotten th a t those" hearings .e r e not based upon s.orn

                                                         2
testimony, whereas the Coroner’s Verdict of accid ent, was.               W hat.the
tra n s c rip ts of the Inquest reveal is a m atter fo r you, as are the words of
the Coroner and h is Jury. I wonder i f the PCA have had the
studv these t r a n s c r ip ts , p a rtic u la r ly those of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray.
over and above my In v estigating O ffic e r 's rep o rt ^ h “ r ®cerve(TThe PCA^s
r p r r tf ic a te of  s a tis fa c tio n before the Inquests were cone u .
^ ^ g l v e n a t t h e Inquest was probed thoroughly By sk iU ed lawyers
representing the complainants so they must be relevant to any consideration
as to d isc ip lin e .
Neither would          I dismiss so lig h tly the d etrim ental e ff e c t th a t the
extensive        and       often contradictory media coverage has had on the
p o s s ib ility of    a f a i r hearing for any accused o f f ic e r s . I t is the
of a " fair t r i a l * which is important, more so than the anguish of the
accused o ffice rs or the morale and well-being of South Yorkshire Police.
Now to address the specific d iscip lin ary offences proposed against Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield.
<i>       Neglect of Duty in th a t he fa ile d to acquaint him self with the
          planning and problems related to the co n trol of the sem i-final.
          The only clue in the PCA l e t t e r as to how t h i s offence could be
          proved i s a t paragraph 6 (a ):-
          •Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. . . the o f f i c e r in o v erall
          coomand. failed to address him self properly to the ProbUm.
          involved in . and the plans fo r. cro*d co n tro l even before
          spectators arrived.*
          Mt r e c o r t a t paragrapahs R22 to R47 covers the a s p e c t s o f b i t t e n
          in stru c tio n s available tr c H I iF T u p e r in te n d e n t Du^ en“ eldn bef^ J
          the ev en t.       Paragraphs R48 to MS cover what he actually did
          b e f o r e the event.   A U h o S g T T h ^ o t studi,ed t              °
          evidence nlven a t the Inquests. I am of th e v i e . that Chiet
          Superintendent Duckenfield did enough in h is planning.
          b rie fin g s to s a tis fy the requirements of the South Yorkshire
          Police Standing In stru c tio n s.         Time »as sh o rt;           he . . . ne«ly
          promoted in to an area .here Hillsborough « « « • « « _                         "Jll-
          to a considerable degree he had no reason not to take the well
           tried and overtly successful South Yorkshire Police System as he
           found i t ; he received the best p o ssib le advice and followed i t ,
           and he knew that on the day he would have a ve rJ expe^le" ced
          working with him with reserve resources a v aila b le to deal with
           unforeseen contingencies. I t is d i f f i c u l t to see how the Proposed
           d isc ip lin a ry offence could be proved beyond reasonable doubt.

  (ii)     Neglect of Duty by f a ilin g to monitor crowd numbers in Pens 3 and
           4.
           I can add nothing to paragraphs R91 to R98; of my rep ort. G i v e n the
           f a c i l i t i e s available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on the
           day he did not, and could not monitor the crowd ^ e r s i n t h e
           fa te fu l pens. The issue is linked to the question of whether he
           should have done so. an issue addressed a t some length in my

                                              3
         rep o rt, .nd to t h . South Yorkshire P o lio , p o lio , o f t h . d a , t h . t
         the crowd would find i t s own le v e l.
         Heglect of Dut, b , f i l i n g to . c t -hen Pen, J and * - e r e obv iou sl,
(iii)
         overcrowded.

         paragraphs *103 to till                              ^ jV          n d '/ n t * ^ c k e n f U l T ^
         question             »h*lh,er. “^ " “^ f       U J X               ov.rcro.ded. in time for
         aware th at Pens 3 and 4 were *e r i °                        *     report discu sses th is
         h ia to take action to a ev
         issu. «t soa. length *"d r
                                                    ae^
                                       ^ overcrowding    .ight »ell
                                                                       problems there would be in

         ^ » % ^ , ,ro\t^rV.,*but1°i.t beg, th. question,

         neglect of t u t , b , f i l i n g to c o n tro l t h . » o » e « n t of sup po rter,
(iv)
         subsequent to the opening of Gate C.

          In support of th is c h .r g . I
          n * l   o f   .7   report.    There c.n M               ^             open«d          G.t.   C.
                                                                                                            To.\l
                                                                                                               Chief

          Superintendent' Duckenfield              ponitor.d^r^                e’e ^ o r n ^ t i n g ’ ft' his
          t t .d lv » i th a t o th er i«por               ^ to p. r , gr. phI * 1*7 to «1M
          f , '” , “ p o rt     paragraphs *157 to H »                        th . . r g u ..n ts
                                                                                c o n t . i n


          se ttin g out the d i f f i c u l t i e s of proving the ch.rge.

in so fa r . . Superintendent H urra, i s concerned t h . PC* i s proposing o n l,
one d iscip lin ary charge:-
(v)      . Neglect of Dut, b , f i l i n g to co n tro l t h . . o v . . . n t o f su p po rt.rs
           subsequent to the opening of Gate C.

           I„ support of t th*t c h srg . t h .
           S u p erin ten d en t  £%,        had . 8P- i . l r « p o n . i b U i t , t o
           . d v i s . Chief s u p e r in te n d e n t
                                                    D u c k e ni.ld   p. tic u U rl,
                                                                                                       a s s i s t .n d
                                                                                                           «
           Superintendent              Murray’ s    g rea ter experience                          01      P
           Hillsborough.
           , t i s not absolutely c le a r but the PC* see«s«to *
           i t was rig h t th a t Superlntenden          J■J lr e c tlo n ,                             for Gate C


                                                                                                       a,...
            through the open Gat e C .
                                     PCA takes                        the    view      th at       e ith e r    Chief

            t^em^should6have°controlled the                "Z^TTs^lltlrsSequent
            to the opening of Gate C.
                            *              and subordinate r e s p o n s ib ility is
            The question of in d iv id         D iscipline Report in respect of
            considered in ny Complaints                                  paragraphs
             Superintendent Murray a t paragraphs Rll to R14.     me p

                                                    4
              which r e la te to t h i s p a r t i c u l a r d is c ip lin a r y charge are a t K.28 to
              R.36, but p a rtic u la r ly R43 to R55 and paragraphs R43 to K55 and
              paragraphs R56 to R58.
              I t could be argued t h a t e it h e r the p o in t of view of Chief
              Superintendent Duckenfield i s taken, i . e . th a t he had to rely on
              the o ffic e rs in the command s tr u c tu r e u sin g t h e i r d isc re tio n to
              act to the s itu a tio n as they saw f i t , o r he should have given
              specific orders h im self. I f th a t be so, then i t seems q u ite wrong
              th at two senior o f f ic e r s should face a d is c ip lin a r y charge a ris in g
              from the same f a ilu r e to a c t. The p o lic e s tru c tu re of individual
              d isc retio n , r e s p o n s ib ility and a c c o u n ta b ility suggests th a t i f any
              o ffic e r is to be d isc ip lin e d fo r t h i s offen ce, i t ought to be one
              or the other.

F in a lly , I turn       to   the    proposal      to    d is c ip lin e   Chief   Superintendent
Duckenfield fo r:-
(vi)         Discreditable Conduct by a c tin g in a manner lik e ly to bring
             d isc red it on the rep u ta tio n of the force o r the police serv ice.

              The PCA fee ls th a t i t is c le a r Mr K elly, Mr K irtin and Mr Mackrell
              were to ld by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield th a t Cate C had been
              forced and th a t th ere had been an inrush o f Liverpool supporters.
              The PCA accepts there was a need to d e te r h o s tile reaction which
              might have impeded the rescue work, but t h i s did not require the
              te llin g of any falsehoods.
         •
               The PCA suggests th a t the m isleading explanation given by Chief
             - Superintendent Duckenfield to the persons named above, resu lted in
               serious alleg atio n s being made a g a in st Liverpool supporters in
               general causing grave offence and d i s t r e s s .
              Paragraph R233 of my rep o rt in resp ec t o f Chief Superintendent
              Duckenfield addresses the p o in t, and the paragraphs th a t follow
              indicate some of the p ossible defences (NOT m itigation) which
              Chief Superintendent Duckenfield could r a is e should he be called
              to answer the d is c ip lin a ry charge.
              I am not aware of what was said about the m atter a t the Inquests,
              i f the matter was raise d a t a l l . Also I would draw a tte n tio n to
              my Complaints and D isc ip lin e Report in respect of Mr Walter
              JACKSON, then an A ssistan t Chief Constable, where sim ilar
              questions are addressed a t paragraphs R47 to R50. In th a t report
              there is an explanation as to how a misunderstanding could have
              arisen (paragraphs R53 to R62). The rep o rt on Mr Jackson is with
              the South Yorkshire Police Authority because of the rank held by
              Mr Jackson a t the time.
              In my report on Chief Superintendent Duckenfield paragraphs R240
              to R244 discuss the question s p e c if ic a lly .

In conclusion, may I say th a t the PCA l e t t e r p o in ts out th a t i t is concerned
so le ly with the evidence in respect of the m atters subject of complaint, and
not with m itigation. Although the Inquest tr a n s c r ip ts may bring to lig h t

                                                   5
m atters not covered in my Complaints and D isc ip lin e Reports, the problems of
proving the d is c ip lin a r y offences proposed by the PCA are formidable.

I hope th a t t h i s l e t t e r w ill a s s i s t you w ith your con sid eratio n s. A ll of
the information contained th e re in i s covered in the Complaints and
D iscipline Reports already submitted to you.
I s h a ll be considering the PCA l e t t e r f u r th e r in c o n su ltatio n with Detective
Chief Superintendent FOSfER of West Midlands Police and I w ill contact you
again in the n e ar fu tu re.




Chief Constable




                                                6
   /                     Director o f Public Prosecutions
                                        Allan Green Q.C.
                                                                              Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                                                              O S Candy CBOBC
                                                                                                                     It




                                                 Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                            C. W. P. Newell




           The Chief C o n sta b le
                                                                                  Crown Prosecution Service
           South Y o rk sh ire P olice
           Snigg Hill                                                             Headquarters Casework
           Sheffield
           S3 8LY                                                                 London
                                                                                  E c r ^


                                                                                            Ext.




Y0urRef:                                     OurRef:                                        t o ,';

                                                     PGK.3341.89                             30       A ugust 1990


       Dear Sir

       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

       The D irector o f P u b lic P ro s e c u tio n s h as now rec eiv ed from th e West
       Midlands Police th e fin a l r e p o r t in t h i s crim inal in v e s tig a tio n to g eth er
       with s u b s ta n tia l s u p p o rtin g e v id e n ce and do cu m en tatio n. You will recall
       in August 1989 t h a t th e D ire c to r re q u e s te d a f u ll crim inal in v estig a tio n
       following p u b lic a tio n o f th e In te rim R eport p ro d u ced a f t e r th e Public
       Enquiry co n du cted by Lord J u s t i c e T aylor in to th e circu m stan ces
       1989°     lng           d l s a s t e r a t H illsb o ro u g h Stadium , S h e ffield on 15th April

      The most c a re fu l c o n s id e ra tio n h a s been given to a ll th e evidence and
      documentation. The D ire cto r h a s decided t h a t t h e r e is no evidence to
      ju stify any crim in al p ro ce ed in g s b ein g i n s t i t u t e d a g a in s t South Y orkshire
           cu ’i               Wednesday F o o tb a ll Club, M essrs Eastwood and P artn e rs
      o r S h e f f ie ld C ity Council in c o n n e c tio n with th e d i s a s t e r a t th e
      Hillsborough F o o tb a ll Stadium S h e ffie ld on 15th A pril 1989.

      The D irector h a s a lso concluded t h a t th e re is in s u f f ic ie n t evidence to
      justify ^pro ceed in g s a g a in st any o f f i c e r of th e S outh Y o rk sh ire Police o r
      any o th e r p erso n f o r any offence.

      I am sending a copy o f t h i s l e t t e r t o you by FAX.

     I am also sending copies to t h e in v e s tig a tin g o ffice r, C h ief Constable
     Leslie Sharp, to th e Coroner Dr P o p p e r and to th e Police Complaints
          ? y* Copies will also be s e n t to s o lic ito r s r e p re s e n tin g th e
     Hillsborough S te e rin g Committee, th e S heffield City Council, Sheffield
     Wednesday F o o tb all Club and M essrs Eastwood and P a rtn e rs .
I a lso en clo se a copy o f a p r e s s r e le a s e t o be is s u e d by th e Crown
P ro se c u tio n S erv ice P re ss O ffice a t 3.00pm to d ay .

Y ours f a ith fu lly




C J Cleugh                         , .
Head o f Police C o m plain ts D iv isio n
     (MiSifcllSS I
                                                                                                                 ACC(0&C)CJ0

    PER80WAL A COMFIDBOTAL                                                                                    10 April 1991

    B rigadier J Pownall OBB
    Deputy Chairman (D iscip lin e)
    Police Complaints Authority
    London
    SH1\


    Dear

    My p o lice career terminate* on the 5 May 1991 when I r e t i r e                                               «


 *y Wish, ae D isciplinary A u thority fo r the South Y orkshiw Polic*
 o f the former Chief Constable P e ter Wright th a t t h H v e n ^            th at
 be looked a t ex te rn ally and q u ite independently without any suggestion*©?00"
 influence hy the management of the fo rce.                         »uggestion of

pp rin
   r ? nc cipl ^le. s” q^ uite
                           1l1t. OU
                                  n™ w
                                  firm ly.t l n In
                                                5 my'?l *e t t“e r Octob«
                                                                    to you' dated
                                                                            « * > 28 March
                                                                                      I « p r1991
                                                                                              . . . . dI ot huo t..l i e
how my recommendations contained on the memoranda were baaed so le ly on
supervised in v estigatio n re p o rt completed by Mr L e s li!
not proposing D l.o ip U n .r , ’ r o o d l S , . ' *                        th .
                                                                                                    ill*
                                                                                                    ZjnTlSl"        !

f l l l l T Z l ’T'                                   th,,dr 1’l0n of th* reA (Bl-clplin.) nor.
v              l          S            l            ** ,1,h '* *° d0 ,0- 1 thlnk « “ *     * *°«




a      s   p       m       s So
—     t I tav. .lp«ady ..Id .ould aff«ct your rw.onlnt 0^ . “ ifon.

U r d o * ^ i l i 0? ,'* * 1 *h , t ”       l”1' h t pur,u* t h l * m , t t , r f u r t h . r by . . . t i n . , l . t



Yours
b~ !G ADIER J L POWNALL, OBE                      POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Deputy.Chairman (Discipline)

                                                                                   London SWI
             QI f
                                                                                 Telephone: 071-273
                                                                                                      6410



     PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL

     K S Anderson, Esq                                                               /       April, 1991
     Assistant Chief Constable                                                       rO *
     South Yorkshire Police
     Snig Hill
     SHEFFIELD
     S3 8LY




                                               HILLSBOROUGH

     On 28th March you sent us th e memoranda in resp ect of the individual com plaints
     relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

     As I told you on th e telephone I was disappointed th a t you had not se t out more fully
     the reasons why you do not propose to p refer disciplinary charges against th e o fficers
     complained about in accordance w ith Section 90(5) of the Police and Criminal Evidence
     Act 1984. It seems to us surprising th a t in a case o f such im portance you have d ealt
     with the m a tte r so summarily.

     You point out th a t       th e D irector o f Public Prosecutions has considered th e possible
     criminal offence of       culpable m alfeasance, and has indicated th a t th ere is insufficient
     evidence to w arrant      crim inal proceedings. You say th a t, similarly th e re is insufficient
     evidence to w arrant      disciplinary charges. I would make tw o points:

                 a. the disciplinary offence o f neglect o f duty is d ifferen t from
                 th at o f the very ra re offence of culpable m alfeasance.

                 b. the case o f Rhone and Madden makes it clear th a t a decision
                 by the D irector o f Public Prosecutions not to prosecute a police
                 officer who is the subject o f com plaint did not relieve the Board
                 [as it then was] o f the duty to make th eir own decision as to
                 whether disciplinary charges should be brought, although they were
                 entitled to have regard to th e D irecto r's decision. This same
                 point is made a t paragraph 5.16 in Home O ffice Guidance to Chief
                 O fficers on Com plaints and Discipline Procedures.
 eAp^a^l*ti^n:tr^ e^ U^ ' ^ ^ ltn^teCa' ^ r,^Cti° t^ t<t^iean(^ S^ ^ t^ P ^ e ^ V3 rTOre^fuH^^asoned

             a.   a s to why you c o n sid e r , h e e v id e n c e f a ils s h o rt, and


            th a t^ th e re                                             “ we « " < * *
            proving the case a f a d i s l ^ y     &   $ £    * ~        ble < * • " » of


r r M ^ c o r w ^ w n ^ s ^ ^ a n ^ ' d d e ^Hiitiaent
lightJy.                                        ^ s u c hsuch
                                                          ^ ' ^as
                                                                H UHiJlsborough
                                                                   I s b ^ 56 h"""*”
                                                                                cannot' be
                                                                                         ' am
                                                                                           tre aSure
                                                                                                 te d




3 L POWNALL
J UL   ’ 91   14:15   FROM SOUTH YORKS P O L I C E                           PAGE.004

                                                                               l/e




(Complaints & Discipline)                                Your refj   COM 91/131/39

                                                         Our ref:    ACC(D&C)/LM

Brigadier J Pownall, OBI                                 26 June 1991
Deputy Chairmen
Police Complaints A uthority                             RECORDED DELIVERY

UMIUCII




CONFIDENTIAL




HUXSBORQUGH TRAGBDY 15 APRIL 19&9
1*      In your letter of 7 Kay 1991 you set out your reasons for recemaending,
        under Section 93(1) of the Police and Criainal Evidence Act 1984, that
        disciplinary charges be brought againat Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
        end Superintendent Murray. Thia followed from your consideration of    my
        predecessor's Memoranda respecting the report by Mr Sharp of his
        investigation into the conplainte against police «ade against these and
        other officers. I note your agreement with the proposal that the evidence
        does not Justify disciplinary proceedings being taken against the  other
        officers.
2.      You will recall from earlier correspondence that my predecessor was anxious
        to make clear that his memoranda were baaed on a consideration of the
        evidence of the report as specified in Section 90(7) of the Act. He also,
        I feel, was anxious that it should be manifest that South Yorkshire Police
        was in no way seeking to influence or persuade the Authority in lta
        deliberations, but on the contrary sought to show that the Force recognised
        the importance of being seen to accept the independent and Impartial
        judgements of others as to the police performance on that fateful day.

3.       Now that in accordance with Section 93(3) the appropriate stage in the
         statutory process has been reached when a broader based discussion should
       ' occur, I have sought to provide, a full and reasoned body of Material which
         I hope you will find pertinent to the issue and which includes evidence
         given at the Inquests that aay not previously have featured in your
         deliberations. I note your reatsEe of the factors which nilltate against
         disciplinary proceedings set out in paragraph 5 of your letter and that
         you have considered then in your deliberations. Nevertheless they remain
         significant and relevant and ehould be weighed together with this material.
J UL   ’ 91   14:15   FROM SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                         PAGE. 0 0 5




Brigadier J Pownall, OBR


26 June 1991

4.     The material Is twofold* Firstly, I have asked Mr Sharp to expand on the
       reasoning that led to his conclusions that were distilled in the
       recommendations of his report* This he 1m s kindly done and I enclose a
       copy of his letter of 16 May 1991 in which he sets out the detailed
       reasoning which lay behind the recommendations and conclusions in his
       Complaints and Discipline reports in respect of Chief Superintendent
       Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In addition he has made reference
       to the points and issues raised by your letter,

 5.     Secondly, I have sought counsel’s advice and Mr Richard Payne has l e t me
        have his conclusions as set out in the copy of his opinion and accompanying
        appendices. You mey recall that Mr Richard Payne represented the Chief
        Constable of South Yorkshire in the civil actions arising frow the
        Hillsborough Disaster and at th* inquestb and so has considerable detailed
        knowledge of the evidence that has been accumulated from *11 sides.

 6.     I am sending a number of copies of these documents, together with the
        summing up of HM Coroner at the Inquests for your use.   I hope you will
        agree that this extensive body of material and the expressed views of Mr
        Sharp and Mr Payne add to the sum total of useful information to be
        considered in arriving at a decision on these matters. I have made
        considerable efforts to ensure that everything possible that might be done
        has been done. If anything has been omitted that you would wish to have,
        please inform me and we will make every effort to assist further.

 7.      If you feel that it would be helpful to meet and discuss these issues,
         X would be pleased to do so*
23     J UL   ’ 91   14:14        FROM SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE                             PAGE     002
-as,      1991-0?-*! 1   IIS 18    POLICE COTPLRINTS            01ZT36401              p .0 2

                                                                                                  II £
                                                   POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY

                                                                              London S W 1
                                                                                                 6410
                                                                            Telephone; 071-273



       <5 M oors, B ra                                                      #i t i   •
       Assistant Chief Constable                                            ' ■•   y• 1991
       West Yorkshire Police
       P.O. Box 9, Wakefield
       WEST YORKSHIRE
       WFi 3QP




                                         IIEEPgQ*OU<m TRXflgDT

       Thank you for your letter of 26 June, 1991 and for the various
       £ apets you enclosed. The Authority are also grateful to you and
       Mr Pell for coming to our offices to discuss this matter.

       The Authority wish to assure you that we have given the most
       careful consideration to the representations made by yourself and
                 v   fo««^ these by far the most compelling arguments.
       IS        have considered Mr Sharp’s letter of 16 May addressed to
       Mr Kayes, we did not feel it was altogether appropriate for the
       investigating officer to set out so fully his views on the
       disciplinary action to be taken.

       we have also taken into account the opinion provided by Mr Richard
       Payne. It is our view that the extracts which he quotes and the
             fnS4.                     selective and, ^do not reflect so«B
       important points especially some of those n&de by the Coroner wSo
       o", .®°re than oneoccasion separates the question of unlawful
         ^ i n g from the question of neglect# for example, pacres 8, 4~s;— 54
       on 21 March, 1991 and page 31 on 26 March, 1991.

             °ur,_roee*-ing v® have held a separate meeting at which the
       Chairman has fully rehearsed the arguments to be considered in
       deciding whether or not the Authority should direct that charges be
       preferred against any of the officers involved. We can assure y o u
       that we gave very serious consideration to all the points which you
       and'Mr Pell raised. We are, of course, bound to set these against
       our duty to consider the complainants* allegations of "neglect of
       duty" as defined in the Regulations. Wa considered the question
       strictly in the context of cosplalnts by nenbers of the public
       against individual police officers and in accordance with the
       procedures and guidance laid down.
JUL   ’ 31   14:14        FROM SOUTH   YORKS   POLICE      PAGE. 0 0 3
 1991-07-11      11 =19    POLICE COMPLAINTS              ---




 The Authority have decided in accordance with Section 93(3) of the
 Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to direct that disciplinary
 chargee be preferred against Chief Superintendent DucXenfield and
 Superintendent Hurray as set out in our letter of 7 Hay, 1991 and
 for the reasons explained in that letter*     We confirm that the
 Authority do not consider it appropriate to prefer disciplinary
 charges against any other officers.
The Authority hope that it will he possible to confine the
presentation of the case which is concerned soliiy" wlth the
overcrowding in~ Pens 3 and 4 and Mr OucXehfield1s alleged
^discreditable conduct to within a week and thatthe hear £nq can be
arranged for-sarly October,

 1 would be grateful if you would inform me of the date of the
 tribunal as soon as you are able to arrange it so that 3 may
 appoint two members from the Authority.




 J L POWNAliL
