                A,.- vy„ V ,**■..       ;

        ffla o :    y p o '";c      c
^   CXa k CA.
      Module Three

      As soon as possinxe' after arriv
      a tutorial w             'J
      in Module Tw
      light of or
      r e q u i r e fo i?
     In.     Pepultima|e week of th.
     probationer and tutor should com
     be examined by the supervisor/D'
     can discuss how 'the probationer'
     Plan, were met. The DTO should a
     Module Four

              after arrival as poss:
     different one from Module Two, s
     probationer where any outstanding
     At this time the probationer wil
     Plan in respect of the remaining

         In week 3 of the module (week
'*«■*. , Development Exercise will take
         Trainer will review the Action P
        it according to the p robationer '
Statement re Hillsborough Sheifield (
Terence Canadine PC 2^+66     ^ ']o p


C1 Rotherham.




At 8.50am Saturday 15th April 1989, I paraded for duty with other officers at
Main Street iolice Station, Kotherham, for transportation to the Hillsborough
.Football ground, Sheffield. I was in serial kZ with PS keenan ana oxciav oxxxCci-B.
After the briefing inside the ground in the North stand, we went to our positions
on Halifax Hoad,north of the railway station at v.'adsley Bridge at its junction with
Southey Green Kcrad. V.e ari’ived at our position at around 11 .Iparn cine, at thio time
there did not appear to be any football supporters present in the area.
At this location ie a public house and several shops, including a Thresher Off
Licence and shortly after 12noon, Liverpool Football Club supporters started to
arrive in private vehicles and hired Transit vans and the majority were advised to
park their vehicles in the near vicinity and walk to the football ground. Iiany
of the supporters went into the public house, these persons were mainly men who had
travelled with friends and youths. At 12^5pm Halifax Road travelling from Hillsborough
towards the 111 north, was virtually full of parked coaches carrying Liverpool
supporters and these people had began to leave the coaches in the direction of the
ground and into the public house and shops nearby. At 2.15pm, the staff at Threshers
Qff T i    ~ T’AmifiR+.sd the Police to supervise a larre crowd of Liverpool youths who
were congregating in the shop and allegedly taking packs of canned beer from the displ?
and leaving without paying for them, eventually the staff decided to close the shop
     :-rs t.hn i.-vc1' of ^taff and volume of prospective customers and stock being taken.
The area of the Off Licence was cleared but several ox the youths naa ooviousxy oeen
 , - ,.   __-    ...._...... ;          p+pn / W m . no undue f'cnnrr-n vws evident at thxs
time as this is normal in my experience, when a large football match is to take place.
At 2.50pm customers were leaving the public house nearby in large numbers and all
were in good spirits and they-made their way towards Hillsborough with P£ Keenan and
the rest of the officers escorting them down, at 3.pm we reached the junction of
Claywheels Lane and we halted there for a few minutes in order to allow all of the
other officers to join us, the supporters continued on their way to the ground and the
match had just started. A few minutes later we were requested via the radio which
PS Keenan had been issued, to attend at the I.eppings Lane end of the Hillsborough
ground. PS Keenan was the only person with a radio in our serial and I cannot say
what transmission was made regarding the reason for our attendance at that location,
it was only later whilst at the Leppings Lane entrance did I learn of the tragedy and
at this time supporters were trying to get into the ground in large numbers while at
the same time supporters ere leaving. Many of the     Liverpool   .supporters-leaving the
ground9 W6P6 shouting a.bus© sA otli6F oiiiC6X*s 3.nd. niysGXf
had happened inside the ground. Throughout the next ninety minutes or so, we stayed at
this location   and they were still leaving the ground, although not in as great a number
and eventually the abuse stopped. Sometime after 5pm we went to the traffic island a shori
distance away and stayed there as instructed, until we were called to the Hillsborough
Stadium for stand down at around 7.15prn* At no time during the tragedy did our serial
enter the ground until stand down.




PC 2^66
