                                                                                              MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and time raised                                   Number


Title   t-XMRo <77   7
(Include sourc<ranaany document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action ~ ^ € s fk o         ^rS ^v                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  £?b36>
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                      Indexer
 Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                  Q(o3(p
 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  O/M         SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                        Indexer
 Further action No(s)

                                   o « ; ^ o M snonor tr> enH nrw o th e r Document Master Number Form
           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L




           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197S (AS AMENDED)




                     GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE




                  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB,
                  HILLSBOROUGH SPORTS GROUND,
                  HILLSBOROUGH,
                  SHEFFIELD.
                  S6 1SW




                                             ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL
                                             DE PARTMENT,
                                             TOWN HALL,
                                             SHEFFIELD,
                                             SI 2HH.




SC2AAA/1
                                     PREFACE TO THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE

           1.0     The standards of safety to be achieved as laid down in this certificate
                  are based on recommendations contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports
                  Grounds (new edition 1986 published by H.M. Stationery Office)
                  applicable to designated sports grounds and the final recommendations
                  of Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
                  Disaster.

           2.0    OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

           2.1    It is an offence for the Holder or any responsible person tos-

                  (a)    Contravene any term or condition of this certificate,

                  (b)    Admit spectators to the sports ground at any time when a Safety
                         Certificate is not in force;

                  (c)    Admit spectators to the sports ground in contravention of a Court
                         Order.

                  The penalty is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding the
                  statutory maximum (£2,000) or, on conviction and indictment, a fine or
                  imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or both.

           2.2    It is an offence to:-

                  Fail to give notice of an alteration orextension tothe sports        ground
                  or obstruct an   authorised officer carrying out his duties under    the
                  act.

                  The penalty is, on summary conviction,    a fine not exceeding the
                  statutory maximum.

           3.0    POWERS OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION

                  In accordance with Section 11 of the Act a person authorised by

                   (a)   the local authority;

                   (b)   the Chief    Officer of Police;

                   (c)   The Secretary of State

                  may, on production if so required of his authority, enter a sports
                  ground at any reasonable time, and make such inspection of it and such
                  enquiries relating to it as he considers necessary for the purposes of
                  this act, and in particular may examine records of attendance at the
                  ground and records relating to the maintenance of safety at the ground,
                  and take copies of such records.

            4.0   ALTERATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

            4.1    In accordance with Section 8 of the Act, if while a General Safety
                   Certificate is in operation with respect to a sports ground, it is
                   proposed to alter or extend that sports ground or any of its
                   installations and the alteration or extension is likely to affect the




SC2AAA/2
                 safety of persons at the sports ground, the Holder of the certificate
                 shall, before the carrying out of the proposals is begun, give notice
                 of the proposals to the local authority.

       4.2       Sub-Section 1 above in   particular requires notice when it is proposed
                 to alter the entrances   to or exists from a sports ground or any part of
                 it including any means   of escape in case of fire or other emergency, or
                 the means of access to   any such entrances or exits.

           5.0   RIGHT OF APPEAL

                 The act makes provision for appeal against decisions of the local
                 authority or against the inclusion of any terms and conditions imposed
                 by the certificate.  The time limit within which appeals must be lodged
                 and the procedures to be followed are set out in the Safety of Sports
                 Grounds Regulations 1987.




SC2AAA/3
                              S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L




                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED).

                                      GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE



       Address of premises for                     Sheffield Wednesday Sports Ground,
       which this certificate is issued            Hillsborough,
                                                   Sheffield  S6 1SW

       Occupier of the premises and                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
       holder of the certificate

           Use of the premises in respect          Football M a t c h e s ; Rugby Matches
           of which this certificate is            (Union and League); Hockey; Marching
           issued.                                 Band Displays and entertainment
                                                   ancillary to any of the above.

                                                   (N.B. Pop Concerts; Religious
                                                   Conventions are specifically excluded.
                                                   A special Safety Certificate is
                                                   required for these events.)

           1.   This certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in respect of the
                premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by Order
                under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Miended) as
                a ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

           2.   The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
                hereby imposed.

           3.   The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the Sheffield
                City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety
                at the sports ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of
                which this certificate is issued.

           4.   The words used in the certificate and the schedules attached hereto have
                the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this certificate and
                Section 17 of the Act.

           5.   The schedules and plan attached hereto all form part of the certificate.

           6.   The certificates commences on H t K day of           one thousand nine
                hundred and ninty and will expire on 31st July,    1991 unless surrendered
                or revoked.




            Date ..........................         Signe
                                                            Head of Adb±tr3T3T?ation and
                                                            Legal Department on behalf and
                                                            duly authorised by the
                                                            Sheffield City Council.

SC2AAA/4
                                          s C H E D U L E     1


                               S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y    C O U N C I L


           Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council

           Word/Phrase                              Meaning

           The Act                                  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                    including any modification or
                                                    re-enactment thereof and any
                                                    subordinate legislation made
                                                    thereunder.

           Authorised Officer                       Any Police Officer, any Officer of the
                                                    South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
                                                    Authority, any Officer of the
                                                    Sheffield City Council who is
                                                    authorised in writing.

           The Certificate                          The written General Safety Certificate
                                                    issued by the Council under the Act to
                                                    the holder of which this *
                                                    interpretation document forms part.

           The Council                              The Sheffield City Council.

           The Guide                                The current edition of the "Guide to
                                                    Safety at Sports Grounds" published by
                                                    H.M. Government or any succeeding code
                                                    or guidance produced by H.M.
                                                    G ov ernment.

           The Holder                               The person to w ho m the General Safety
                                                    Certificate has been issued.

           Specified Activity                        Football matches; Rugby Matches
                                                     (Union and League); Hockey; Marching
                                                     Band Displays and entertainment
                                                     ancillary to any of the above.

                                                     (N.B. Pop Concerts, Religious
                                                     Conventions are specifically excluded.
                                                     A special Safety Certificate is
                                                     required for these
                                                     e v e n ts .)

            Spectator                                Has the meaning assigned to it by the
                                                     Act.

           The.Sports Ground                         The Sheffield Wednesday Sports
                                                     Ground.

            Safety Standards                         A safety steward is a steward who has
                                                     the responsibility specified in clause
                                                     5.3 of Schedule 2 to the Safety
                                                     Certificate.



SC2AAA/5
                                         S C H E D U L E    2

                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

           1.0   GENERAL SAFETY

           1.1   The Holder shall appoint,   in writing, at least one Safety Officer who
                 has full authority to:-

                 (a)   take responsibility   for safety at the ground,    and

                 (b)   implement and supervise safety measures.

                 A Safety Officer or his approved nominee shalls-

                 (a)   be in charge of the sports ground and the    H o l d e r ’s employees; and

                 (b)   be in attendance at the   sports ground and in direct personal
                        communication with a central control point during a specified
                        activity.

           1.2   The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary
                 precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
                 sports ground and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined
                 in Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties
                 under that Act and this certificate.

           1.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such
                 type, size and design as the Council may from time to time reasonably
                 require for reasons of public safety.

                 (a) The Holder shall ensure    that the signs or notices so required are
                      clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times;

                 (b)   The Holder shall, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
                       12.0 of Schedule 7, conduct a survey of the sports ground and
                       where in the opinion of the Holder the signing requires alteration
                       or amendment submit a scheme to the Council for approval detailing
                       the proposed amendments.

           1.3   The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials
                 that are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to
                 spectators.




SC2AAA/6
                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

           2.0   MEDICAL SERVICES

           2.1   (a)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the sports ground to the
                        satisfaction of the Council a suitably equiped First Aid Room and
                        shall arrange for attendance of such number of qualified First Aid
                        Attendants as the Council may require, but in any event there
                        shall be in attendance at least one First Aid Attendant for every
                        1,000 (or part thereof) spectators.     The Attendants duties shall
                        only relate to the administering of first aid.

                 (b)    The First Aid Room shall be capable of being lit by both the
                        general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
                        identified by means of signs.

                 (c)    The First Aid Room shall be designated a ’No Smoking   A r e a ’and   at
                        all times be kept clean and tidy.

                 (d)    The First Aid Room shall be clearly identified as a first aid
                        room, its location publicised and made known to staff and
                        stewards.    '

                 (e)    The Holder shall ensure that the equipment and medical supplies
                        specified in Schedule 6 are available for use at all times during
                        a specified activity.

                 (f)    The Holder shall employ at least one medical practitioner (in
                        addition to any medical practitioner employed to treat players) to
                        be present at each specified activity and available to deal with
                        any medical exigency at the sports ground.  He/she shall'be
                        trained and competent in advance first aid.  He/she shall be
                        present at the sports ground at least one hour before kick-off and
                        must remain until half-an-hour after the end of the specified
                        activity.  The medical practitioner must be immediately
                        contactable and his/her whereabouts known to the Police Control
                        Room.

                  (g)    (i)    The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                Ambulance Service for the attendance of at least one fully
                                equipped ambulance at a specified activity where between
                                5,000 and 15,000 spectators are expected to attend.

                         (ii)   Where more than 15,000 spectators are expected to attend the
                                specified activity, the Holder shall arrange with the South
                                Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service for a second fully
                                equipped Ambulance and where appropriate at the instigation
                                of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service the
                                provision of a major incident equipment vehicle.

                         (iii) The holder shall after consulting with the South Yorkshire
                               Metropolitan Ambulance Service; the South Yorkshire Police
                               and the South Yorkshire Fire Service designate a specific
                               parking place for Ambulance(s) at the ground during a
                               specified activity.  This area shall be marked out and
                               signposted accordingly and shall at all times remain
                               unobstructed.




SC2AAA/7
           2.2. In the event of a spectator being injured in the sports ground, the
                Holder shall submit to the Council a full written report in accordance
                with the Reporting of Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence
                Regulations, 1986 regulating in the circumstances of the injury.   The
                Holder shall supply such additional information as the Council may
                require.

           2.3   In the event of a fatality occurring at the ground the Holder shall as
                 soon as possible and in any event within 24 hours inform the Council
                 and provide a written report in accordance with the Reporting of
                 Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence Regulations, 1986
                 regulations.




SC2AAA/8
         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

ALTERATIONS

(a)   Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act, the
      Holder shall not cause or permit the sports ground or any of its
      installations to be altered (which term shall exclude minor
      remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the
      sports ground) in any manner whatsoever without the prior written
      consent of the Council.

(b)   The Holder shall supply the Council w i th copies of such plans,
      specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably
      require to enable any application for such consent to be
      considered and shall comply with any conditions attached to that
      consent.

(c)   Where an application to alter any part of the sports ground may
      result in the amendment of the certificate the Holder shall submit
      with such an application a formal application for certificate
      amendment in accordance with the provisions of the 1975 Act (as
      amended) and any Regulations made thereunder.
                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       4.0   PLANS

             (a)     The Holder shall provide to the Council when so requested, such
                     plans and technical details as the Council may require, as
                     detailed by the Council and drawn up in accordance with the plans
                     regulations approved by the General Purposes Panel of the Council
                     at its meeting on 5th March, 1990.

             (b)     Where the Holder is required to submit a plan/s to the Council
                     under the terms of the Certificate.  Those plans must be drawn up
                     and submitted in accordance with the plans regulations detailed in
                     Schedule 8 attached.

             (c)     Where approved alterations have been made to the Stadium the
                     Holder shall arrange to supply a new set of plans of the Stadium
                     (in accordance with the plans regulations) incorporating the
                     details Of the alterations.  Such plans must be submitted to the
                     Council in line with the requirements specified in the plans
                     regulations detailed in Schedule 8 attached and be accompanied
                     with an application to amend the Certificate (unless an      t
                     application for certificate amendment was submitted with the
                     original application for alteration).                     ^




SC2AAA/10
               (h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
                     packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest
                     Police Officer or the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.   In the
                     event of no Police Officers being present for a specicified
                     Activity Police Oficer shall be substituted by Authorised Officers
                     of the Council).

               (i)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by a
                     Police Officer, the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.  (In the
                     event of no Police Officers being present for a specified activity
                     Police Officer shall be substituted by Authorised Officer of the
                     Council).

               (j)   Remain at their allocated locations as instructed unless
                     Authorised or instructed to do otherwise by a Police Officer, the
                     Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.    (In the event of no Police
                     Officers being present for a specified activity Police Officer
                     shall be substituted by Authorised Officer of the Council).

               (k)   Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is likely
                     to pose a threat to spectator safety e.g. a damaged crush barrier.

               (1)   Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on
                     the initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do
                     so by the Safety Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or a Police
                     Officer.  (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                     specified activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                     Authorised Officer of the Council).

        5.4     Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the
               duties of Stewards shall be held at least once every three mo'nths.   A
               written record of the exercises shall be kept.

        5.5.   All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary
               evacuation and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by
               Stewards in accordance with Schedule 4.   The other duties detailed in
               Schedule 4 shall be carried out by Safety Stewards.

        5.6    The Holder shall arrange with the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
               Ambulance Service for the training of all Safety Stewards specified
               in Schedules 3 and 4 attached in First Aid procedure.




SC2AAA/12
               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

6.0   POLICE

6.1   The Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the
      South Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on
      the occasion of a specified activity at the sports ground for the
      purposes.of maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst
      spectators, and the services provided (if any) shall be determined by
      the Chief Constable and he and his Officers shall be allowed full
      access to all parts of the sports ground.

6.2   The Holder shall, where possible, notify in writing, the Chief
      Constable of South Yorkshire Police at least 28 days before any
      specified activity takes place.

6.3   The Holder shall be responsible for limiting the number of spectators
      entering each self-contained pen or area in accordance with the
      capacity figures detailed in Schedule 5.

6.4   The Holder shall arrange for a computerised system to record the number
      of persons passing through each turnstile.

6.5   The Holder shall arrange to inform the Police Control Room when a
      particular pen or area is approaching capacity.  The Holder will be
      responsible for closing off further access to a pen or area when its
      max imum capacity is about to be reached.

6.6   Before each specified activity the Holder shall arrange to liaise with
      the South Yorkshire Police on the following matters;

      (a)    The anticipated number of spectators expected;

      (b)    The method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;

      (c)    Provision of information in relation to potential crowd control
             problems.

      (d)    The number and location of turnstiles to be made available to each
             crowd group.

      (e)    An estimation of the time it will take each crowd group to pass
             through the turnstiles.

      (f)    Where tickets are to be used, that the information on those
             tickets corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting
             spectators to the ground.

       (g)   To consider whether the specified Activity is to be open only to
             spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the Specified
             Activity and to specify the date and time of commencement of the
             Specified Activity.

6.7   The Holder shall comply with any request from the Police Ground
      Commander to postpone the commencement of the specified activity.
        6.8   The Holder shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief
              Constable of the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective
              responsibilities of the Club and the Police for crowd safety and
              control.  The agreement shall specify responsibilities for the filling
              of all terraced areas of the sports ground and the monitoring of
              spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.  A copy of the
              agreement shall be lodged with the Council; any alteration or variation
              of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance and the Council
              notified in writing of the alteration/variation.

        6.9   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the
              Council in consultation with the South Yorkshire Police

              (a)   A Police Control Room; and

              (b)   A Police Detention Room.

        6.10 The Holder shall provide and maintain to the reasonable satisfaction of
             the Council in consultation with the South Yorkshire Police a system of
             closed circuit television at the Sports Ground.

        6.11 The Holder shall (in close consultation with the South Yorkshire
             Police) undertake a survey of the closed circuit television system in
             operation at the Sports Ground.  The Holder shall arrange to forward to
             the Council a written report outlining the survey and its conclusions
             by 31st October, 1990.  In compiling the written report the Holder
             shall have due regard to any technical information that may be
             available from the Home Office.  The Holder shall consult with the Home
             Office on this matter before submission of the report.




SCZAAA/14
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        7.0   FIRE SAFETY

        7.1   The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address system which
              shall be audible in all parts of the sports ground to the satisfaction
              of the Council.

        7.2   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
              satisfaction of the Council.

        7.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting
              equipment in such locations as the Council may from time to time
              specify.

        7.4   The Holder shall not permit the storage in the sports ground of any
              flamable, explosive, toxic or corrosive liquid or compressed substance
              (except fire extinguishing and drinks dispensing apparatus) without
              first obtaining a relevant licence before applying for any licence the
              holder shall apply to the Council for permission to permit the stoarage
              of such sustances on the premises.

        7.5   The Holder shall at all times maintain the sports ground in a clean
              condition and shall not permit any accumulations of rubbish or any
              other materials whether combustible or not.

        7.6   The Holder shall arrange with the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil
              Defence Authority for the training of all Safety Stewards as
              specified in Schedules 3 and 4 attached in the operation
              of fire fighting equipment; and general fire prevention procedures.




SC2AAA/15
                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        5.0   STEWARDS

        5.1   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity
              of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are
              specified in Schedule 3.

        5.2   The Holder shall ensure that the Chief Safety Steward and other Safety
              Stewards are:-

              (a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties   *




              (b)   properly trained and instructed;

              (c)   readily identifiable by dress;

              (d)   provided with written instructions as to their tasks/dutie s ;

              (e)   aged between 18 and 55 years or such age as is considered
                    appropriate by the Council in individual c ircumstances.

        5.3   The written instructions given to the Chief Safety Steward and other
              Safety Stewards must include the following tasks and duties.
              Safety Stewards must:-

              (a)   Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward
                    prevent overcrowding by ensuring that the crowd limits in various
                    parts of the sports ground are complied with.

              (b)   Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing ferices and
                    other structures (e.g. flood light pylons) and from standing on
                    seats.   Where by virtue of the scale of the incident Stewards are
                    unable to prevent this, they must immediately report the matter to
                    the nearest Police Officer or the Chief Steward or the Safety
                    Officer.   (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                    specified Activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                    Authorised Officer of the Co u ncil).

              (c)   Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

              (d)   Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among the
                    spectators which may affect spectator safety, reporting their
                    findings to the Police Officer, Chief Steward or the Safety
                    Officer.  (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                    specified activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                    Authorised Officer of the Council).

              (e)   Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the fire
                    fighting equipment at the sports ground.

              (f)   Know the location of the First Aid Room and any first aid
                    equipment kept elsewhere.

              (g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert
                    staff that an emergency has arisen.




SC2AAA/11
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

          8.0   LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS (FIRE SAFETY)

          8.1   The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the sports ground to which
                spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to
                enable such persons to enter or leave the sports ground safely.

          8.2   The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
                emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the
                general lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the
                stadium safely.

                The emergency lighting shall

                (a)   be powered by a source independent of the mains electricity
                      supply, and

                (b)   come into operation immediately on the failure of the mains
                      lighting, and

                (c)   remain in operation for at least three consecutive hours when
                      activated.

          8.3   The electrical installation for the sports ground shall be constructed
                and maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition.  No alteration
                without the prior written consent of the Council which significantly
                affects the installation shall take place.

          8.4   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
                supervised by a competent electrician who shall investigate, rectify
                (if possible) and report to the Safety Officer any defects which arise
                in the installation.




' SC2AAA/16
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        9.0   PRESS AND TELEVISION

        9.1    All press and television personnel shall be capable of immediate
              identification.  Those members of the press and television personnel
              who have access to the public and playing areas shall be identifiable
              by means of distinctive dress (coloured tabards) wi t h the word PRESS in
              bold letters written on the back of the tabard.

        9.2   The Holder shall ensure that the equipment brought into and used by
              photographers, television and sound personnel shall not cause an
              obstruction o r hazard or interfere with the public address and closed
              circuit television systems in operation at the Sports Ground.

        9.3   The Holder shall ensure that only those structures and locations which
              have been approved by the Council are used for photographic, television
              and sound equipment, except where it is a hand held camera or
              microphone not connected to any cables.

        9.4   The Holder shall ensure that all persons associated with such equipment
              undertake to comply with any instruction given to them, in the interest
              of safety and good order, by a Safety Steward the Safety Officer or a
              Police Officer.  (In the event that no Police O f f i c e r ’s being present
              for a Specified Activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
              Authorised Officer of the Co u nc i l) .




SC2AAA/17
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        10.0 ENTRANCES EXITS AND GANGWAYS

        10.1 The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
             the sports ground are maintained in good working order at all times.
             Particular attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in
             spectator ingress and egress routes and also to any pitch perimeter
             gates. The Holder shall not cause or permit any exit doors or gates to
             be altered, in type, design or method of operation without the prior
             written consent of the Council.

        10.2 The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the sports ground
             shall at all times be kept unobstructed whilst spectators are within
             the Stadium for a Specified Activity.

        10.3 All floor   surfaces and steps throughout the sports ground which are
             available   for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces
             and shall   be kept unobstructed, unrestricted and free from trip
             hazards.    Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.

        10.4 The entrances to and exits from the sports ground and the means of
             access to those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan
             which forms part of the certificate.

        10.5 The Holder shall ensure that all gangways on standing terraces  are
             painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not; nosing
             to gangway steps in seated areas are to be painted in a conspicuous
             colour.

        10.6 The Holder shall ensure that during the performance of a specified
             activity, spectators are not permitted to stand in a gangway for the
             purpose of viewing the specified activity.




SC2AAA/18
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        11.0 BARRIERS

        11.1 The Holder shall maintain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Council
             such number of crowd control barriers as are thought necessary to
             ensure the safety of spectators on standing terraces within the sports
             ground.

             (N.B.  In accordance with Final Recommendation 23 of the Final
             Taylor Report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster:

             "The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed
             immediately (if this has not already been done following the Interim
             Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
             Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.  If it does not, the assessment of the -
             maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance
             with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact".

             If the barrier layout does not comply with the Green Guide criteria the
             capacity figure for that standing area will be amended appropriately
             taking full account of the* Final Recommendations of Lord Justice
             T ay lor).
                                        0
        11.2 The Holder shall provide crowd control barriers in accordance with the
             plans attached (Schedule 9) all barriers shall be constructed to the
             satisfaction of the Council.

        11.3 All barriers shall be constructed in accordance w it h the provisions of
             Chapter 9 of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) or
             any revised or amended addition of the Guide.

        11.4 All barriers shall be painted in a distinctive colour.

        11.5 All barriers shall be numbered and shall prominently bear the
             appropriate barrier number.




SC2AAA/19
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       12. CAPACITY

       12.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part^of
             the stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in
             Schedule 5 .




SC2AAA/20
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        13.0 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

        13.1 Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be
             kept such records shall be produced on demand to an Authorised
             Officer.

        13.2 The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
             safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and inspections or
             provide proposals for work with a prescribed timetable as may be
             specified in the notice.  The Holder shall comply with any reasonable
             requirement or condition specified in such a notice.

        13.3 If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the
             normal use of the sports ground or any inspection or test carried out
             under the terms of this certificate, the Holder shall immediately
             notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.

        13.4 The Holder shall arrange for the test and inspections listed in
             Schedule 7 to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to
             be supplied to the Council in accordance with the terms of the
             Schedule.  Where reports are required to be supplied to the Council,
             they shall be supplied as soon as possible on completion of the
             inspection/tests.

        13.5 Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made
             thereunder, the Holder shall maintain written records showing;-

             (a)   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports
                    ground for each specified activity; and

             (b)   The names and addresses of all the Stewards employed by the
                    Holder;

             (c)   The names of all the Stewards on duty at each specified activity
                    and details of their d u t i es ; and

             (d)   The details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for
                    Stewards in accordance with Conditions 5.4 and 7.6.  The records
                    shall show which Stewards attended each exercise and the content
                    of those exercises.




SC2AAA/21
                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        14.0 EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

        14.1 The Safety Officer or his approved nominee shall be responsible for the
             evacuation of the ground or any part thereof at any time during a
             specified activity.  Nevertheless, he shall comply with any
             requirements of the Police and Fire Service or an authorised Officer in
             the event of Police Officers not being present for the Specified
             Activity to evacuate all or any part of the ground promptly.

        14.2 In the event of a fire or any suspicion of a fire,   the emergency
             services shall be summoned.

        14.3 The Holder shall prepare in accordance with Chapter 2 of the Guide to
             Safety of Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) a written contingency plan
             detailing the action to be taken in the event of various emergency
             situations (e.g.  fire, bomb scare, structural defect, possible crowd
             trouble; coping with exceptionally large numbers of spectators arriving
             at the ground etc.).  A copy of this plan/s shall be lodged with the
             South Yorkshire Police; South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
             Authority; South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Services and the
                Council.

        14.4 The Holder shall ensure that all Safety Stewards are fully aware of the"
             action they must take in the event of an emergency.




SC2AAA/22   „
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        15.0 SAFETY MANAGEMENT

        15.1 The Holder shall in compliance with Chapter 2 of the "Guide to
             Safety at Sports Grounds" the Green Guide prepare a written safety
             management programme for the sports stadium.  The programme shall
             encompass all areas of ground, spectator and staff safety.   The
             programme shall specify particularly training procedures for
             Safety Stewards and staff, maintenance schedules, inspection and
             test records.  A copy of this document shall be deposited with the
             Council.

             (N.B. The Director of Health and Consumer Services should be
             approached to aid preparation of this do c u m e n t ) .




SC2AAA/23
                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        16.0 MISCELLANEOUS

        16.1 The Council reserves the right to exclude from the ground any
             vehicle and/or trailer.

        16.2 The Council may from time to time issue written guidance to
             Holders on safety matters.  The Holder must pay due regard to any
             such guidance.




SC2AAA/24
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       17.0 CERTIFICATE EXPIRY

        17.1 This Certificate shall, unless previously surrendered cancelled or
             revoked remain in force until 31st July, 1991 (the date of
             expiry).

        17.2 An Applicant for the renewal of the certificate

             (a)   shall give not less than 3 months notice of his intention to
                    make such an application (or such shorter period of notice
                    as the Council permit);

             (b)   the application referred to in (a) above shall be in
                   accordance with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as
                   amended) and any regulations made under that Act.

        17.3 Where before the date of expiry of  this Certificate, an
             application has been made for its renewal it shall be deemed to
             remain in force notwithstanding that the expiry date has passed
             until withdrawal of the application or its determination by the
             Council.




SC2AAA/25
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS


        18.0 WEST   (LEPPINGS LANE) TERRACE NORTH WEST TERRACE

        18.1 That part of the Sports Ground known as the West or Leppings Lane
             Terrace and the North West Terrace Lower Section may not be used
             by spectators at any specified activity.

        18.2 That part of the Sports Ground known as the North West Terrace
             Upper Section may only be used by spectators on the express
             permission of the Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police, his
             nominated Deputy or his nominated Sports Ground Commander.




            t




SC2AAA/26
                                    GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

                               S C H E D U L E   3   (CONDITION 5.1)

           1.   The number of safety stewards (excluding the Chief Safety Steward) on
                duty at each specified activity shall not be less than:-  81




SC2AAB/1
                               S C H E D U L E   4   (CONDITION 5.5)

           1.   The safety stewards shall carry out the duties set out below*-

                Number of Safety Stewards               Duties

                                                        Manning Final Exit Gates

                14 (one per gate)                       All final exit gates

                Relief safety stewards must be provided.  At no time, whilst spectators
                are within the Ground, must a final exit gate be left unattended.

                                                        Control and direction
                                                        of spectators

                 5                                      Spion Kop - one per exit

                 1                                      Spion Kop stairway to Penistone
                                                        Road

                12                                      South Stand    - one per vomitory

                 3                                      South Stand (concourse)    - one
                                                         per stairway

                11                                      South Stand (lower seated    area)
                                                         one per vomitory plus one    for
                                                         emergency exit at Kop end    and
                                                         one for emergency exit at    West
                                                         Stand end

                 8                                      West Stand - one per vomitory
                                                         (six) plus one for each
                                                         emergency exit gate

                 2                                      West Stand (concourse)    - one
                                                         per stairway

                18                                      North Stand    - one per vomitory

                 3                                      North Stand (upper concourse) -
                                                        one each end plus one central

                 3                                      North Stand (lower concourse)  -
                                                         one each end plus one central

                 2                                      North Stand (disabled section)
                                                        - one at ramp and one at gate

                 3                                      Upper North West Terrace - one
                                                        each exit (when in use)




SC2AAB/2
                   Patrolling Sports Grounds and
                   Dealing with Emergencies, etc.

           2       South Stand

           2       North Stand (one at each level)

           I       West Stand

           1       West Stand external concourse

                   Manning Internal Gates

           I       Spion Kop/South Stand Corner

           I       South Stand/West Terrace Corner

           I       West Stand/North Stand C o m e r

                    Monitoring standing terraces to
                    deal with emergencies

               1   Sited in front of the viewing
                    terrace




SC2AAB/3
                              S C H E D U L E    5 (CONDITION 12.1)

       1.   The number of    spectators admitted to a specified activity shall   not
            exceed 37,323.

       2.   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports ground
             listed below shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown:-

            SPION KOP TERRACE                        - 15,399

            WEST TERRACE UPPER                       -   1,400

            WEST STAND                               -   3,840

            NORTH STAND                              -   9,199

            DISABLED ENCLOSURE (NORTH STAND)         -     120

            SOUTH STAND (UNCOVERED SEATS)            -   2,699

            SOUTH STAND - (COVERED SEATS)            -   4,666


             TOTAL GROUND CAPACITY                   - 37,323.




SC2AAB/4
                                          ADDENDUM TO SCHEDULE 5

              CAPACITY

        1.0   The capacity of the sports ground has been calculated with due
              reference to the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds and Recommendations
              (7-10) and (32 and 33) of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor into
              the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

        2.0   Recommendations 7 to 10 state:

              Maximum Capacities for Terraces.

              7.     Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are
                     self-contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the maximum
                     number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

                     A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained* notwithstanding
                     that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or
                     area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

              8.     Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance
                     with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide Figure")
                     subject to the following qualifications:-

                     (a)    the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and 222
                            of the Green Guide (when the terrace or viewing slope is in
                            good condition) should be 47 not 54);

                     (b)    the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 (when
                             the terrace or viewing slope materially derides from the
                             recommended) guidelines, so as to constitute a possible
                             hazard to individuals closely packed) should be 0 not 27;

                     (c)    in arriving at "the Green Guide Figure", proper and
                             realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
                             should reduce the permissible density including those
                             specified in paragraphs 220 to 224 inclusive of the Green
                             Guide.

               9.    Arrangements should be m a d e :-

                      (a)   to limit the number of spectators entering each
                             self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure
                             assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above either
                             electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by
                             counting or otherwise; and

                      (b)   to close off further access to such pen or area when its
                             maximum capacity is about to be reached.

               10.   The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass through a
                      turnstile should be 660 persons per hour, not 750 per hour as
                      stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide.  The maximum rate for
                      any particular turnstile must take full account of all
                      circumstances including those given as examples.




SC2AAB 15
       3.0       Recommendations 32 and 33

                 32.   Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow
                       measured (if this has not already been done following the Interim
                       Report).  Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure
                       that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the
                        rate anticipated.

                 33. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the
                      turnstiles serving itshould be such as to ensure that all the
                      spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass
                      through the turnstiles within one hour.      If that cannot be done,
                      the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly.
                      Since this Recommendation includes terms and conditions within the
                      scope of the original section 2 ( 2 ) (c)(1) of the Safety of Sports
                      Grounds Act 1975, it should be given effect in the Safety
                      Certificate (see Recommendation 24).

           4.0   Capacity Calculation

                 1.    Floor/Seating Area          - Figure supplied by Building
                                                     Surveyor.

                 2.    Emergency Egress            - Figure supplied by Fire Service,
                        and Ground Egress

                 3.    All capacities and in       - Figure supplied by the Club,
                        particular turnstile
                        flow rates.  Number
                        serving particular
                        Pen/Area.

                       (Flow Rate per
                       Turnstile 660 p.h)




SC2AAB/6
i

                                        S C H E D U L E   6     (CONDITION 2.1)

               1.     The minimum provision of first aid equipment to be available for use at
                      the sports stadium and contained within the First Aid Room (where
                      appropriate) shall be:-

               1.1.   FIRST AID ROOM (EQUIPMENT MATERIALS)

                      (!)    3 x standard examination couches with steps
                      (2)    12 x green sheets
                      (3)    3 x sets of stretcher poles
                      (4)     1 x scoop stretcher with carrying straps
                      (5)     2 x carrying chairs
                      (6)     2 x trolley stretchers
                      (7)     6 x cellular blankets
                      (8)     4 x pillows with plastic covers
                      (9)    Disposable paper sheets
                      (10)   3   x buckets with lids
                      (11)   3   x washing-up type bowls
                      (12)   1   x size F trolley mounted oxygen cylinder with variable delivery
                             and key.    (To be provided at the holders expense by the St. John
                             Ambulance Brigade)
                      (13)   1   x E.C.G. Monitor
                      (14)   1   x Sphygmomanometer and stethascope
                      (15)   1   x lockable cabinet with contents asspecified in 1.2below
                      (16)    6 x snatchbags with contents as specified in 1.3     below
                      (17)    1 x infusion/intubation case with contents as specified in 1.14.
                             below
                      (18)    1 x mobile ’d r es s i n g ’ trolley

               1.2    CONTENTS OF FIRST AID ROOM LOCKABLE CABINET

                      (1)    Triangular bandages - short life            10
                      (2)    Sterile dressings: B.P.C.
                                    extra large                           5
                                    large                                10
                                :   medium                               10
                                    small                                10
                      (3)    Eye pads                                     5
                      (4)    Adhesive tape                                 2   rolls
                      (5)    Lint (500g)                                   2   packets
                      (6)    Gauze                                         2   packets
                      (7)    Cotton wool                                   2   packets
                      (8)    Mezolin squares (cartons of 100)
                                    5cm x 5 cm                             1 carton
                                   10cm x 10cm                             1 carton
                      (9)    Bandages: B.P.C.
                                    1"                                   20
                                   2"                                    20
                                 3"                                      20
                      (10) First Aid Dressings    (Adhesive Plasters)    20 of each
                           Various sizes
                      (11) Medi-wipes                                      1 drum
                                                                          (contents 100)

                      (12) Disposable Sterile Containers                   2




    SC2AAB/7
       1.3   CONTENTS OF SNATCHBAG

                   No. 1 Dressings                          6
             (1)
                   No. 2 Dressings                          6
             (2)
                   No. 3 Dressings                          6
             (3)
                   20 x 10cm Waterproof Adhesive Dressing   4
             (4)
                   Large burns dressings                    4
             (5)
             (6)   Large scissors                           1
                   Pairs of disposable gloves               6
             (7)
             (8)   Petzel type caving lamp                  1
             (9)   Brook type airway (Professional Model)   1

       1.4   ■CONTENTS OF INFUSION/INTUBATION CASE

             (1)    Carrying case
             (2)    Laedal Resuscitation
             (3)    Laedal Adult Mask
             (4)    Laedal Child Mask
             (5)    Airway Size 1
             (6)    Airway Size 2
             (7)    Airway Size 3
             (8)    Laryngoscope + 4 H.P. Batteries
                     (Batteries to be replaced every
                    3 months)
              (9)   Laryngscope Blade Size 3
              (10) Laryngscope Blade Size 43
              (11) Laryngscope Spate Bulb
              (12) Endotracheal Tube (Cuffed) 6mm
              (13) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 7mm
              (14) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 8mm
              (15) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 9mm
              (16) Catheter Mount (antistatic)
              (17) Catheter Swivel Connector
              (18) Adaptor or Female
              (19) Lubricating Jelly
              (20) Syringes 10ml
              (21) Stethoscope
              (22) Sphygmomanometer
              (23) Needle Box
              (24) Scissors/Shears
               (25) Magill Forceps
               (26) Spencer Wells Forcepts
               (27) Aspirator
               (28) Catheter (Suction) 14fg
               (29) Catheter (Suction) 12fg
               (30) Yankaner Sucker
               (31) Tourniquet
               (32) Catheter Mount Connector                 1
               (33) Syringe Needles (19g)                    2
               (34) Syringe Needles (21g)                    6
               (35) Cannulae 16g                             5
               (36) Cannulae 18g                             5
               (37) Cannulae 20g                             4
               (39) Administration Set                       2
               (39) Hartmanns Fluid IVI 500mls               1
               (40) Haemaccel Fluid      IVI SOOmls          1
                (41) Pre-injection swabs                    10
                (42) Tape Adhesive/Hospital 20 metres        1
                (43) Tape Sleek 2.5cm                        1
                (44) Tape Sleek 5.0cm                        1

SC2AAB/8
                 (45) Vecafix                                      5
                 (46) Ann splint 18"-4"                            1
                 (47) Cotton Wool                                  1
                 (48) Gauze metre                                  1
                 (49) Trinagular bandages                          2
                 (50)  5.0cm Bandages - 5 metres                   2
                 (51)  7.5cm Bandages - 5 metres                   2
                 (52) Gauze Swabs                                  2
                 (53) Mucas Extractor (Infant)                     1
                 (54) Oxygen Mask                                  1
                 (55) Oxygen Tubing 3 metres                       1
                 (56) Gloves - Disposable                          2
                 (57) Antiseptic Solution                          2
                 (58) Waterproof Sheet                             1
                 (59)  Micropore Tape      2.5cm                   1
                 (60)  Patient Repeat Form Pad                     1
                 (61) Headlamp and Battery (Battery
                      replaced every 3 months)                     1
                 (62) Surgical Cloth                               1
                 (63) Security Stamp (and 2 keys)                  1

           1.5   Hypochlorite Disinfectant should also be provided effective against
                 HIV, Hepatitis B etc., for cleaning of blood and body fluids.
                 Recommended concentrations for use are:-

                        10,000   p.p.m. to deal with spillages;
                         1,000   p.p.m. for general washing purposes.




SC2AAB/9
                                 S C H E D U L E   7   (CONDITION 13.4)

                                   INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED

                                                                               WRITTEN
                                                                    WRITTEN    REPORT
      GENERAL                         INCIDENCE                     RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
      REQUIREMENTS                                                  REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                               COUNCIL

1.0   A competent person shall        At least once every 12        NO         YES
      inspect the structures          months.
      which form part of the
      soorts ground

2.0   A competent person shall
      carry out the following
      inspections:

2.1   Seating inspection              Every 4 months beginning      NO         YES
      (condition and security         1st November, 1990
      of all seats)

2.2   Steps, stairways, gangways                                    NO         YES
      (nosings, covering,
      condition of surface etc)

2.3   Standing Terraces                                             NO         YES
      (condition of surfaces,
      nosings etc)

2.4   Concourse areas                                               NO         YES
      (condition of surfaces)

2.5   Perimeter walls                                               NO         YES
      (condition)

2.6   Turnstiles (general                                           NO         YES
      condition, condition of
      surrounds, condition of
      mechanism, operation)

2.7    Doors and gates                        "           "          NO         YES
      (general condition,
      operation (particular
      attention to the
      operation and condition
      of panic bar/bolt devices))

2.8   Identify and inspect                    "           "          NO         YES
      any void beneath
      a stand access or egress
      route (condition,
      accumulation of debris,
      rubbish)

 2.9 Identify, sign and check all              "         "          NO          YES
     Storerooms (general
     condition, maintenance,
     Accumulation of rubbish etc.)

SC2AAB/10
                                                                           WRITTEN
                                                                WRITTEN    REPORT
      GENERAL                        INCIDENCE                  RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
      REQUIREMENTS                                              REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                           COUNCIL


2.10 West Stand reinforced          Every six months            NO         YES
     concrete columns.  Affix       beginning 1st November,
     and maintain tell-tales over   1990
     cracks in the corners of the
     cantilever landings to both
     stairway entrances to the West
     Stand. Provide results of any
     movement   survey columns and
     Stand for cracks.

3.0   A competent person shall       Before and after each
      carry out a general            specified activity.        YES        NO
      inspection of the Sports
      Ground to ensure
      compliance with the
      relevant Safety Certificate
      Conditions.       1

4.0   A competent person shall       At least once every
      examine the electrical         three years or such        NO          YES
      installation of the sports     lesser time if specified
      ground and provide a written   in the Inspection
      report in accordance with      Certificate.
      the current I.E.E.
      Regulations.

5.0   A competent person shall       At least once every 12
      test and inspect all fire      months.                    NO          YES
      appliances (including
      extinguishers, hydrants
      and water supplies).

6.0   The emergency lighting         At least once every 12     NO          YES
      and fire warning (including    months.
      the public address systems)
      shall be tested/inspected
      by a competent person.

7.0   The emergency lighting         Not less than 3 hours       YES        NO
      system shall be tested by      and not more than 6
      a competent person.            hours prior to a •
                                     specified activity
                                     taking p l a c e .




 SC2AAB/11
                                                                               WRITTEN
                                                                  WRITTEN      REPORT
      GENERAL                       INCIDENCE                     RECORD       R E Q ’D TO BE
      REQUIREMENTS                                                REQUIRED     SUPPLIED TO
                                                                               COUNCIL

8.0   All fire warning detection    Not less than 3 hours         YES              NO
      public address and other      and not more than 6
      communication systems         hours prior to a
      shall be tested by a          specified activity
      competent person.             taking "place.

9.0   All exit and entry doors,     Not more than 2A hours                   YES          NO
      gates,turnstiles throughout   prior to a specified
      the stadium shall be tested   activity taking p l a c e .
      by a competent person.

10.0 25 1 of the crush barriers     25 Z of each period of        NO               YES -
     and hand rails in the          12 m o n t h s . Once a                        Report to
     stadium shall be tested        barrier or hand rail is                        include
     by a competent person in       tested it shall not be                         details and
     accordance with the Guide.     tested again (unless                           results
     The Council shall be           specifically required
     notified in advance of the     by the Council) within
     dates for testing.             3% years after first
                                    testing, but shall be
                                    tested again within ^
                                    years of that date.

11.0 A competent person shall       At least once every           NO               YES
     conduct a survey of all        12 months (Initial)
     spectator information          Survey to be prepared
     signs within the Stadium       for 1st November, 1990)
     with a view to maintenance
     and improvement of signing
     at the Sports Ground.




SC2AA2/12
                                       SCHEDULE 8 (CONDITION 4.1)

        1.0         PLANS REGULATIONS

        1.1         Plans shall be drawn up by appropriately qualified persons
                    acceptable to the Council.

        1.2         Plans shall be executed or reproduced in a clear and intelligible
                    manner with suitable and durable materials.

        1.3         Plans, sections, elections and details shall be to scale.    The
                     scale(s) shall be indicated in all drawings.

        1.4         All plans shall bear a number and date.   A ny revisions to the
                     Plans shall be stated on the Plan and the date of each revision
                     shall be stated.

        1.5         Plans shall include:-

                    (a)    Drawings;'
                    (b)    Schedules;
                    (c)     Specifications;
                    (d)    Calculations;
                    (e)    Reports.

        1.6         The number of copies of Plans submitted to the Council shall be
                     three in respect of structural calculations and nine in any other
                     case.

        1.7         Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                     the key should be as specifried in British Standard 1635. •

        1.8.1       The Club shall provide such number and type of photographs as may
                     from time to time be reasonably required by the Council

        1.8.2       When a proposal is submitted to the Council in respect of a
                    proposed alteration to the stadium the Certificate holder shall
                    provide such number (sets) of photographs as may be required by
                     the Council to aid consideration of the proposal.

            2.0     APPROPRIATE SCALES

            2.1     Identification Plans - not less than 1:1250.

            2.2     General Arrangement Plans - not less than 1:500.

            2.3     Detail Pla n s:-

            2.3.1   Layout Plans of terraces - not less than 1:200

            2.3.2   Local areas of terraces/seated areas - not less than 1:100.

            2.3.3   General Arrangement of buildings/structures     - not less than 1:100.

            2.3.4   Details of new structures - not less than 1;25.

            2.3.5   Details of new structural connections - not less than 1:5.

                     (The Council reserve the right to require additional plans at a
                     scale to be determined should they consider it appropriate to do so.

SC2AAB/13
        3.°          PLANS TO BE ATTACHED TO SAFETY CERTIFICATE

        3.1          Identification Plan - a general identification plan of the
                     location of the ground in relation to the surrounding area must be
                     provided.

        3.2          General Arrangement Plan - this must indicate

        3.2.1        Full extent of the Sports Ground.

        3.2.2        Positions of all buildings.

        3.2.3        Positions of all means of ingress and egress.

        3.2.4        Names and positions of all adjacent roads and footpaths.

        3.2.5        Access routes for emergency vehicles.

        3.3          Detail Plans - these must be prepared to include the following
                      information on invidivual plans or a combination of information
                     may be incorporated in a single plan provided that the detail is
                      clear and relevant.                                  1

            3.3.1    Full extent of individual terraces areas/viewing slopes.

            3.3.2    Positions of crush barriers and supports.

            3.3.3    Numbering of crush barriers and sections of crush barriers

            3.3.4    Full extent of individual seated areas.

            3.3.5    Referencing of all seat rows and numbering of all seats.

            3.3.6    Referencing    of all gangways.

            3.3.7    Referencing    of all vomitories.

            3.3.8    Referencing    of all stairways.

            3.3.9    Referencing    or naming of all rooms.

            3.3.10   Referencing of all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the
                      Sports Ground (turnstiles must be numbered).

            3.3.11   Full extent and use of all rooms and void spaces.

            3.3.12   Position of all steps.

            3.3.13   Positions     of all balustrades, handrails and fences.

            3.3.14   Positions     of all doors,   gates and turnstiles throughout   the Sports
                     Ground.

            3.3.15   The swing     or direction of travel of all doors and gates.

            3.3.16   Statement     of the clear opening measurement of each door     and gate.

            3.3.17   Positions where headroom is less than 2.4. metres in any part of
                     the ground to which spectators have access.

SC2AAA/14
        3.3.18       Positions of First Aid Rooms and other first aid and emergency
                     equipment.

        3.3.19       Positions and descriptions of all exit and other route
                     identification signs.

        3.3.20       Positions of emergency lighting points.

        3.3.21       Positions of fire alarm sounders and call points.

        3.3.22       Postions and descriptions of all fire extinguishers and other fire
                     fighting appliances.

        3.3.23       Positions of safety stewards.

        3.3.24       Gradient of all ramps, viewing slopes and terraces areas.

        3.3.25       Positions of Police Control Room and Police Detention Room.

        3.3.26       Position and referencing of all catering, merchandising and
                     franchised outlets within the Sports Ground.

            3.3.27   Any other details which are specifically required by the Council.

            4.0      PLANS FOR PROPOSALS

            4.1      Identification Plans - these should indicate the position,    level
                     and extent of the proposal in relation to other existing
                     identifiable features of the Sports Ground.

            4.2      DETAILED PLANS

            4.2.1    Sufficiently detailed plans to satisfy appropriate statutory
                     legislative requirements; provisions of appropriate British/CEN
                     Standards, and appropriate statutory guidance documents.  Where
                     it is proposed that any such matter is not to be complied with, a
                     sepcific reference must be made including a statement of the
                     extent of such proposed non compliance.

            4.2.2    Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                     the key should be by reference to British Standard 1635.

            4.2.3    Plans must indicate that the proposal has been designed to be
                     suitable for its intended p u r p o s e .

            4.2.4    Plans must include any proposal to change any information included
                     in the plans for the purposes of anything in Schedule 2, paragraph
                     1. 2.

            4.2.5    Where conditions of usage or loading may vary, designs must be
                     carried out to suit maximum anticipated use and/or loading.

            4.2.6    Where any proposal has, or is likely to effect the spectator
                     capacity of the Sports Ground or part thereof, the estimated
                     spectator capacity (subsequent to the implementation of the
                     proposal) shall be stated.

            4.2.7    Such additional detail as the Council may require.




SC2AAB/15
        5.0    AMENDMENTS

        5.1.   Consequential upon the carrying out of any works which affect the
               details shown on any plans attached to the Safety Certificate, the
               holder shall prepare and submit to the Council such number of
                revised plans as the Council reasonably require.

        5.2    Amendments to plans for the purpose of 1.1 above must be produced
               within a reasonable period but not more than three months after
                the relevant works have been carried out.




SC2AAB/16
