                                                                                           MIR.15



                                                 Date and time raised                               Number
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM


Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)

                                                                               V   L & \     _
Receiver's instructions — urg ent action — Y qs/N o                                                              Receiver
                                                            A sju- ,CO-vh*'-

                                                                                                                 Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                4-V y
No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                                  ^<1
                                                                                                                 Indexer
 Indexed as indicated                                                                                            ^ f V,
 No(s) of actions raised
 Examined - further action to be taken




                 Slo(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
4.        s

      J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                          M EDICO LEGAL CENTRE
     . ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   Watery Street
       H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M                Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                   Telephone: 0742 726105
      WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                     Fax: 0742 726247
      PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                       KNOWSLEY HALL
      Colmore Circus Queensway                                     Prescot
      Birmingham B4 6NQ                                            Merseyside L34 4AF
      Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                          Telephone: 051-449 3871
      Fax: 021-233 3256                                            Fax: 051-449 2976
      NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                   Your Ref :
      Fowler Street
      Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                   Our Ref:     JMJ/VSC
      Telephone: 021-359 3332
      Fax: 021-359 6735
                                                                   Date:        15 August 1989




                  Birmingham




                  Dear Mr Sambrook

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                  I refer to your letter of 9 August 1989 which has been passed to me for
                  attention.

                  I have read your letter and as it relates to the findings of Lord Justice
                  Taylor I have passed it to the Secretary of the Inquiry at the Home
                  Office. No doubt he will bring your letter to the attention of Lord
                  Justice Taylor.

                  Can I take this opportunity of thanking you for your contribution.

                  Yours sincerely




                  Assistant Chief Constable
                  (Hillsborough Inquiry)




         PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                Birmingham
!
                                                   /nJ o T CfcCA.

*                                                           telephone
                                                                        9th. August 1 989*
                        Subject:- Hillsborough1I

Dear Chief Constable,
                      I read with a certain amount of annoyance of Lord Justice Taylor's
somewhat slur on the characters of the finest police for ere in the world,bar NONE I I am not
just a little annoyed at the Lord Justice's rem&rkksi.e.Mr Duckenfield's capacity to give
©rders and take decisions, seemed to c©llapse. He frozei
                                    I wonder if the Lord Justice has ever been in a position
such as Mr. Duckenfield found himself in at Hillsborough? Confonted by a yelling, abusive
drunken mob ©f yobos, intent t® get into the match irrespective under what conditions and
also determuned t© get in WITHOUT paying*. The police are accused of complacency. I do not
agree that our police force is complacent. In fact, I feel that our police force, in ALL
departments are ON THE BALL and carry out a very exacting and stSnuous job under extremely
difficult and soul breaking circumstances. It appears that the Lord Justice is hell bent ©n
blaming the police for the horrenous fracas that resulted in would be "free spectators"
absolutely selfishly being as lemmins in thier determination to see something for nothing,
and the general"Up yours Jack, I'M in" seems t@ have been the real true reason for the tragi
results*
        I wonder how the Lord Justice himself would have re-acted to such confrontation by
hordes ®f yelling, screaming, drunken animals and what would HE have done?? Many years ago,
there was a very young frightened teenager, facing for the first time, an enemy wh© was det­
ermined t® anniialate his comrades and himself. The enemy were better equipped, better fed,
extremely seasoned troops and absolutely fanatic and life t© the enemy, was cheap and reall;
of no great importance t® him. He only lived to serve his Emperor and die for his Emperor.
He had just completed six years of very sec&dRialy thrashing the Chinese and the Imperial
Guards were just animals. The yelling fanatic hordes of suicidal Japs advanced onto our
positions and though it was extremely hot, and frightening, WE "FROZE"1in awe and terror at
what we saw* BUT we didn't break. We stood our ground and fought back and was only forced to
withdraw due to lack of ammunition( And food, and water) and though we were just as determin­
ed to stay at our posts, we TOO were not just as experienced as our adversaries. BUT we lear
ned our lessons and eventually, it was US who chased the Japs. It was US si© vaingloriously
yelled defiance at the perpetrators ofBurma. It was US who DARED the enemy to try it again!
And we won. True, at great cost, but we won. And so,let the Lord Justice and Mr Hurd, put
themselves IN THi£FRONT LINE and face the common enemy, and let's see if THEY "freeze" when
thier leadership is called uponi Such people remind me of people who I have met since those
years in "Devil's Paradise" who have opined WHAT THEY would have done IP they had been there
and all I can say" Before the Lord Justice and Mr Hurd start putting police officers,
IRRESPECTIVE OP RANK,@n the pillory,DON'T give advice if you've never been there yourselves"
                       And finally, Sir, when those who would buck the law would just pause
t® remember that the police d® NOT enforce the law but are very extensively trained to
UPHOLD it,then perhaps this land will be more law abiding and (Though I myself have not the
slightest interest in football or any ball games) perhaps so called "spectators" who clAam
to g© t© see the match(but really are only going t© "let off steam" on some unsupecting:
genuine spectators ’who really enjoy the game) could be barred FOR LIFE at ANY ground, perhapi
"Football Hooliganism" will sink int© history t© such a depth that our grand children may
                          one day ask" What was "Football Hooliganism??"
                                        Yours sincerely*
      (And as the Ghurkas said when we left thier homelnd) May the sun never set upon yours
                                   and the happiness of all those who serve with you
                                     ©r all those who wait for their sons, husbands, and
                                           daughters t© return home safe from
                                                perhaps a harrowing "shift of duty I




                                                                                  Iff
                                                                              &
