                                                                     R156




JOHN TOWNEND



Police Inspector



'A' Division



29 March 1989

Initial request to raise manpower from 'A' Division for F A Cup Semi

Final.

31 March 1989
                   j> U u .
Full requirement gjsSl ten Police Constables raised frcm Division, full

details by message switch on morning of 1.4.89.

12-14 April 1989

Transportation arrangements for A Division Personnel.

Friday 14 April 1989

With Inspector Millett and Humphries, attend Officers pre-brief at

Hillsborough.   My responsibilities extended to Serials 34 and 35.

After full briefing by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield taken by

transit van by Superintendent Marshall and shown various areas of

responsibility for following day.   Our sectors were responsible for

receiving the Liverpool fans.

Serials 34 and 35 were responsible for parking coaches on Claywheels

Lane.

Sector 13 - 'India 13’ was call sign.

Saturday 15 April 1989

8.00am   Ccrrmenced duty arrangement of vehicles and staff for

         Hillsborough.

8.45am   Vehicles manned in Serial Order.

         3 motor cycle escorts available.
                                 -   2   -




8.50am    Convoy Departs DHQ.

9.30am    Arrive Hillsborough.

9.45am    All officers seated for full briefing.

10.00am   Briefing by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, Superintendent

          Murray, Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

10.45am   Eating provided, refreshment bag.

10.50am   Briefing Serials 34/35 regarding individual duties

          responsibilities.     To enter every bus instruct all

          passengers not to take any prohibited articles etc.           Briefed

          officers to carry out searches in appropriate cases.

11.15am   Both serials on duty on Claywheels Lane.

          Police Constable 3254 Cobb detailed to record all VRMs and

          Coach Operator details.

12.30pm   Steady stream of coaches.

1.45pm    Match Control instructed Claywheels Lane full - 52 Coaches.

          Parking to following in Halifax Road.

          The fans frcm the buses had been well behaved and the

          coaches seemed well organised on arrival.            There were a

          small number of fans (6-8) trying to obtain tickets frcm

          persons alighting from coaches - without success.           No

          seizures made.

          In view of coach drivers remaining with individual coaches,

          Serials directed by me to Claywheels Lane junction with

          Penistone Road North,          (near the Gate Pub)

2.25pm    Location packed with fans en route to ground. Lots carrying

          cans of beer, lager and various bottles of intoxicants.

          Officers directed to stop persons and make them either

           'drink up' or deposit at side of wall - 20 fans trying to

          buy tickets.
                                   3
                               -       -

                                                                             ClTC

2.45pm   Fans still en route ground, but pace of fans has quickened.

         Still going past in their hundreds.       Full cans of beer being

         thrown to wall side, unable to drink in time.       Attitude

         changing to impatience when checked.       Group of fans trying

         to buy tickets had now gone with the mass at this point.

         Fran this point to 3.00pm the fans were gradually dwindling

         in numbers, although late corners were now running full

         haste to ground.    Aware over radio of concern and build up

         at Leppings Lane turnstiles.

         Divisional Radio giving constant poor reception.

3.00pm   Direct Police Sergeant Lindop to take meal at Claywheels

         Lane.

         - same time attend with Police Sergeant Sherratt and his

         serial to 'The Gate' public house where there is a

         disturbance inside the pub.       Unable to gain admission due to

         door being locked and windows barred.       Licensee requires

         customers to leave, mixture of locals and Liverpool fans had

         been involved in fight, no ccnplaints of assault.       Evidence

         that a fairly extensive fight had taken place.       Broken

         glass, broken snooker cues etc.        In about ten minutes all

         persons had left premises.

3.10pm   Police Constable Goss returns frcm Claywheels Lane

         'Everybody to Ground'.        Now aware of serious disturbance

         inside ground and all officers required.       This information

         frcm Police Constable Goss (everyone deployed frcm

         Claywheels Lane).

3.25pm   To North end of Ground.

         Gates manned - many ambulances and fire service vehicles,

         unable to verify what had occurred other than serious

         trouble at Leppings Lane end.
30pm   Entered ground with Serial 34, saw ambulances and officers

       (Police Sergeant Cropley, Police Constable Foster 'A', with

       injured and possible dead persons - Gravity of situation

       starting to dawn'.)

       Superintendent Bates asked to form cordon with my officers

       stopping Notts Forest fans frcm Kop streaming back to look

       at injured and dead persons.

       Cordon constantly broken by persons wanting to go through

       to toilet and main access way.

35pm   Drapes placed over railings preventing view.

40pm   Taking three spectators from Kop on to pitch.      (Notts

       Ambulance Service Staff)   (Initial request denied because

       I had thought injuries had stemmed fran pitch invasion or

       mass fight ing).

       With Police Sergeant Sherratt and other officers assisting

       initially with injured persons on pitch.

       Later forming sterile area to allcw access for ambulance/

       fire service staff.

       Also segregating rival supporters.

       During this time involved in attempting to calm still

       drunken and hysterical fans.     Constant abuse.

       On three separate occasions released prisoners frcm

       officers after verifying arrests were for conduct.

       Circumstances totally against tying up manpower with

       prisoners.

       Helping to trace relations of injured persons on pitch

        (able to assist 2 couples, boyfriend/girlfriend, father and

       son).
                                  -   5   -




1




    4.10pm    Announcement of match abandonment.

              Taking serial back caat of North Entrance along Penistone

              Road to Claywheels Lane.

    4.30pm    Checking with coach drivers as to numbers of spectators

              missing.

              Advising organisers and drivers that if any persons retained

              we would arrange for them to return.

    Above made up 16.4.89

    17 April 1989 - Addendum

    It was difficult to ascertain exactly what was happening within the

    ground.   There was a lot of noise and confusion in the ground and

    Police Radio messages were indecipherable.

    I did not hear any announcements over the Public Address System at the

    ground.
