                                                                                          M I R .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised                             Num ber



T itle
(Include source and a n y d ocu m e nt num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                    Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                    CA


                                                                                                                    Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                           SIO
Examined r fu rth e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                    Indexer
 F u rth e r action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse o ther D ocum ent Master Number Form
                                                              19th April 1989

Mr. P. Wright
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
Sheffield.

Dear M r . Wright,

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

In connection with the above I feel I must put down my views as it seems the
police force have had certain critical comments directed unfairly in their
direction.

I should start by explaining that I am a life-long supporter with recent ex­
perience of most of the first division grounds in England.  On Saturday, 15th
April, as I live north of the Hillsborough ground I approached the ground from
the north. After parking north of Wadsley Station at approximately 2.00 p.m. I
witnessed the following:

1.   Large numbers of Liverpool supporters already seemingly having consumed
     and continuing to consume alcohol on the way to the Forest v. Liverpool
     fixture.

2.   Even by the rowdy standards of the Wembley Littlewoods Final the previous
     Sunday the crowd approaching from the north were ill-disciplined and often
     appeared to go out of their way to be provocative to the police.

3.   Considerable numbers of people were asking if anyone had any tickets to
     sell - well beyond the normal last minute ticket purchasers and certainly
     well above the level experienced last year for the same club's semi-final.

In my view all these minor pointers when added together contributed to an un­
usual atmosphere which did not help crowd control in the build-up to the kick-
off.   The police had a very difficult job to do in very constrained circum­
stances and my object in writing is to underline how I perceived that their
difficult task was made even more challening by the behaviour of the crowd to
the north of the Hillsborough ground.

I hope these observations might add in a small way to a more balanced view of
events than so far presented by much of the media.  If they are of any value to
you in your investigations please pass them on to the appropriate quarter.

Yours sincerely,
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                                        FURNIVAL HOUSE
A SSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                Furnival Gate
                                                                                          Sheffield S1 4QN
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M
                                                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                                   SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                                  Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                                           Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                                          Our Ref:      JM J /D M D
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                                           Date:         6 J u ly      1989




Dear

I have received your letter dated 19 April 1989 from South Yorkshire Police
concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
team.

If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station.  Alternatively you may
write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below:-

    Mr R M Whalley
    Secretary to the Inquiry
    50 Queens A n n e ’s Gate
    London  SW1H 9AT

Yours sincerely




J M Jones
Assistant Chief Constable




                                       Nechells Green Police Station
     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T .............................. .....................................
