Chief Sup^rintendan t Hero Id,     Division                             '*'**
                                                                    *F* D2Q
Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) EQs
                                                                    30 April 1981


               ;.SEH I-FIIJA L

  In accordance witir?your instructions, and dua to your fully ccmitted
  diary thin weak, I can report that I set with tha Club Secretary of
  Shaffiald V7-2cr.as.day>- Mr. E2ic England, prior to the catch vith Grins by
  on Tu-asday, 23 April 1031- »7e discussad our actions at the Soni-final
  and I informed hia that the Chief Cons tab Is would be reporting
  independently cur position to the Football Association. In his report
  to tha P.A. .Mr.-England .is going to include that fact.

 I have acquainted hjn with all our efforts to cove the ’Spurs fans-
 into the lass dansely packed cantral part of tha tarracing and of tha
 use of tha public address aystea, etc.

  Mr. England now tails r^a that daapita his earlier belief that the
 •referee, Clive Tho^aa, .was going to report adversely to the Football
  Association, in fact.he does not now know whether Thccas will do so or
  not. Certainly, the F.A.officials were present and saw what occurred
  themselves and will, I think, Understand the position vhen they receive
  the reports frcm tha Club and the Chief Constable.       -     .

 I have informed Kr. England that our consensus view is that the 10,ICO
 crowd figure specified in the Safety Certificate is hoo high. Under­
 standably, he fefutes this and defands tha position by stating that the
 former capacity, prior to tha iaplecantation of the Safety Of Sports
 Grounds-Actrat Hillsborough in Decasber 1973, was 11.100, and that on a
 nu3ber,_’of occasions in previous all-ticket matches the terracing has
 acco=r--odated that nvcber. Certainly, at tha 1920 Sari-final, when wa
 again had a capacity crowd of 50,174, we also had scsse hundreds of
 forged tickets, all for the Loppings Lane end, and apart froa ona very
 ninor crushing of spectators thare was no problem.

 Mr. England has bean acquainted with our view that the Leppinga Lane
 terracing should be sectioned 1virtically’ front to back to produce
 pans to enable sore accurata crowd control and pravant sideways nove-
 sant and he is. already actively^considaring this. Ha has also con­
 sidered using turnstiles 1-4 for cna part of tha tarracing and 5-5
 for anothar "part and controlling tha crowd entering through those turn­
 stiles by the. placing of safaty barriers in that open area between tha
 Lepping3 Lane turnstiles and tha bade of the Wast Stand/terracing. 'I
 agree with hin that for 3ost natchas that would possibly vork but have
 grave reservations as—to its efficacy for the potancially troublesone
 goii<23. Additionally, to iaplenent it he would have to find some way
 for spectators to enter tha 3est Stand without crossing the other
 corridors cf supporters.
                                                                          •*v



  Hr. England accepts the problem with the tickets and, quite properly, •
  says that i3 a natter over which he and tha Hillsborough Club ..
  officials had no control vhatever. 'Spurs played Coventry cn the Saturday
 before Wolves sold their ticket allocation on 'open sale'. .We do not
 know if Sosa stayed overnight or travelled, on the Sunday to -tha Wolves •
 -Club, but certainly.the 'Spurs Club knav full, well froa tha* tiaa P”- ;
 varda-that*substantial nvcrbers or their supportsra had purchased tickats
  fcr tha VIolvaa end._ They did not tall us or Sheffield Wednesday.
     •f
     /

'/
           2
/
           SC3JZCT:_.    -SEMI-FIIIAL '

          The Hlnut53 recorded-cy Sergeant ________are incorrect vhan we state
          that that sale by Kclverhanpton Wandersrs was Contrary to Football
          Association directions. There were no such directions, but an
          agree-ent between tha F.A., the participating clubs and Sheffield
          Wednes^av,as to the ticket allocation/ was quite clearly circuzvsnted.
          Hr. England is~reco— lending to the F.A. that in future they should
               ^ recticn3 to participating clubs that they will not act in thi3
          way and rrast retain- or return any unsold tickets and not put then on
          open sale as Wolves.had dons on this occasion.

          No other points of. any great importance were discussed but you should
          be aware that-I-have-conceded to Hr. England that with hindsight ve
          accept that our attempt to cove the 'Spurs fans frca the perimeter
          track to the 'Zop' during the U n i t e d period at half ti^ne was,.perhaps,
          ill advised. I have told Hr. England that no police officer encouraged
          fans to cl m b tha-fence and, despite his opinion, all w e dad was to
          assist those who did so and became stuck or injured in the process.

          I have also informed Hr. England of the Chief Constable's concern at
          the attitude of senior neabers of the Hillsborough Club to you and tha
          Chief Constable and of the±± apparent lack of co-operation and support.

          I reccsaend that a report, setting out the Police position in this
          case, now be compiled and forwarded under the Chief Constable’s
          signature for the infomation of the Football Association.




          Chief Superintendent



          N.B.   (1)      I also recommend•that a copy of the Chief Constable's -
                         report to the F.A. ba forvardad to tha South Yorkshire
                        'County Council in answer to the letter datad 22 April 1981
                         -from the Chief Executive (attached) .

                 (2) -Since dictating the foregoing I have received from Mr.
                     England a critical letter frcn a i-tr. |          ] a 'Spurs
                      supporter, who was denied access to the ground although ia
                     possession of a perfectly genuine ticket. Hr. England has
                     replied to Hr.             to tha effect: that he will forward
                     that gentleman's letter to me for cassaent and I have drafted
                     a letter of reply to him, which X have attached hereto and
                     which is ready for despatch, subject to your approval. You
                     vill see that I have been extremely frank in pointing out to
                          __________what Occurred because clearly he is nursing a
                    -justifiable sense of grievance. My only query is whether
                     you. wish that letter to be despatched before we have fe m a i l y
                     coromnicated with the F.A. or whether you would wish to reply
                     to hia along tha lines, "Your conaents have b e e n 'noted 'and
                     we will contact you again after the matters you raise, have..
                   — been.-investigated"?
        \ Cl I




        i ; xraxnxng - saiety prcce<iur>
        ( cl )   I'J -r i    o in   -i r. c: rr'nr--<- i

        ie }     use        on      pion Kop and Lepoinas Lane            is   i:
                                      i_o paCKxng and g*

             ;s s   > ground - turnstiles, Leooings Lane, in relation
        -o av/a-Y supporters (lack of available t arnstiles at major
        mar cries ) .

        Sale of programmes outside the ground.

        Increase security on entry in West Stand to prevent previously
        used tickets being used.

        i.o /aoj.v, carrier in West Stand to allow greater number of away
        syujporte.Ls at certain matches - this was promised last year
        when the alteration took place.

6.      Re-examine positioning of barriers on Leppings Lane terraces
        to 'iiliow easier accesr                    5 0    .



n
/ .
        J-u'1 :0 1 i 1^ j / Pe n i s i_one Road — feasibility o f . c o r r e c t mone'
        Lurnstiles to speed flow of home supporters.
o
O   .
        Common keys required for all locks in ground.
J-      Examination ana marking of fire points etc in ground.                       '
10 . Closed circuit television — evaluation
