                                                                                                MIR.15
                                          Sheffield Archives Ref:                j i f b Iif5
                                                                                                                  o>ii 'S
O THER DO CUM ENT FORM                             Date and time raised
                                                                                    £                    Number


Title
(Include source and any document numum n icievam/


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y           ^     j   ^         ‘ tA
                                                                                                                          Receiver

                ~?/f/ -I
                                              (J                                                                   S'"?3 3Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                  l5. I t f -
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                                   c-f-NV*3>
                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                   0 /M         SIO
Examined     further action to be taken




Further action No(s)

When satisfied ali actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
Telephone No.
                                               Hounslow
                                               Middlesex

                                               26th April 1989
Dear Sirs,

After Hillsborough I felt shock and horror.   I was a spectator
on the terraces at Ibrox in 1971 and in the Heysal stadium in
1985.   I felt the despair and watched with pride how Liverpool
F.C. and the people of Liverpool responded with dignity to the
disaster.

I visited Anfield on Friday 21st April and wept openly in the
arms of a cockney who travelled 200 miles to lay some flowers.
He said, "I needed to come here and do something".

I was offered a ticket to go to Chelsea on Saturday 22nd April
even though I felt uneasy about attending a football match so
soon after the tragedy, I decided to go.

I arrived and parked my car around 2.30 p.m. I walked to the
ground, passed Fulham Broadway underground station.       I was
walking towards coaches full of Leeds supporters. The thought
went through my mind, "Surely today, of all days, there will be
no trouble, surely the fans will react with dignity, surely they
will all respect the deaths of their fellow supporters."

Unfortunately, this was not to be the case. I was struck on the
head by a fan who was in the process of throwing a bottle at a
Leeds coach.   Glass shattered as I fell to the ground.       A
policeman picked me up, checked if I was o.k. took my name and
address, and went to help his mate who was arresting a fan.

I was stunned, shocked, and my brother in-law asked if I wanted
to go home. I did not want this incident to spoil his day as he
was a Chelsea supporter, so I decided to go in to the ground.

We took our seat in the stand without trouble and stood for a
minutes silence for the dead at Hillsborough. The whole minute
was punctuated by growls and counter growls from sections of both
sets of fans, but in the main the minutes silence was observed.

The game was in to the second half when I was struck on the head
by a Chelsea fan handing out cigarettes; I looked up not too
pleased as he said, "Sorry mate" and I looked away saying
nothing. I was then subjected to a torrent of abuse for showing
displeasure, and any conversation after that was futile.      It
resulted in me holding my peace, and my self control, or the
situation would have deteriorated.

                                                       Contd.
Saturday 25th April was a terrific opportunity to show that
Chelsea fans to a man could be thoughtful and respectful to their
own kind. I can only say, in my eyes they failed.

So where do we go from here.     I feel clubs' should look at
themselves and ask themselves to meet the following objectives

TO GET THEIR KOP/SHED SUPPORTERS IN THE CORRECT FRAME OF MIND,-
ONE HOUR BEFORE THE START OF HOME AND AWAY FIXTURES.

Clubs then need to answer the following questions at leasts

What action to clubs like Chelsea and Leeds take to achieve the
above?
What resources as a percentage of clubs revenue is spent on the
above?
What press, TV, or personal appearances axe undertaken to achieve
the above?

Who is involved in the above?

What is the ideal kick-off time to achieve the above.

How much time will be spent at club board meetings on the above?

If the above objective is met, then, and only then, will football
begin to recover from its current problems, to enable everyone
to have positive thoughts on the best game in the world, and to
prove that 95 people did not die in vain.




c.c.      Editor, Liverpool Evening Echo.
          Editor, Observer.
          Chairman, Chelsea Football Club
          Chairman, Football Association
          Chairman, Football Club, Leeds
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                    FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                             Furnival Gate
                                                      Sheffield S1 4QN
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEA M
                                                      Telephone: 0742 727599

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                               SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                              Telephone: 051-709 7190/7231
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025                 Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                      Our Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021 -3 59 3332                             Date:       21 June 1989




Hounslow


Dear Sir

RE HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989

I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included in your
letter will be of great interest to my investigation team.

It may be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the points that
you have m ad e.

Thank you very much for writing.

Yours faithfully




J Mervyn Jones MSc
Assistant Chief Constable
Hillsborough Inquiry Team




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
