l(p%
                                                                           Rl'oS
                          K -3      «-p_
                Geoffrey Williamson. PC.1779
                Main Street Police Station,Rotherham. (Warrants Office),

                Incident at Hillsborough Football Ground, 15. ^ . 8 9


At 5.20am Saturday 15 April 1 9 8 9 * I reported fcr duty at Main Street Police
Statiou, in respect of the football match which was due to be played at
Hillscorough Footo&ll Ground, Sheffield, between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest.

At 9am tftat day together with other Officers, we were transported to
-Hillsoorough Football Ground by coach, where we were later briefed by
Senior Officers regarding our duty that day, after the briefing together with
D.S. Tissington and other Officers I made my way to Halifax Road, and commenced
duties with Serial 3 8 . The duty consisted of Parking of all mini coaches
containing Liverpool supporters on a cul de sac off Halifax Road.

Whilst we were at that location only a few mini coaches came to our location,
the occupants of these were in a friendly mood, one of two of the coaches
were found, to contain a few cans of alcohol, but none of the occupants or
drivers were drunk.

Further up the road from our location was a shopping centre, one of these
shops oeing the Gateway supermarket, a number of mini coaches arriving early
and very late were found to be parking in the shopping precinct and the
occupants were entering the Gateway supermarket and puchasing alcoholic driuks.

A large number of fans walked down Halifax Road, past our serial, and whilst they
were passing us they were asking if there were any pubs open which would allow
the Liverpool supporters in, when they were told that most of them if not all of
the pubs in the area were closed, the younger men and youths were returning
up Halifax Road to the Gateway supermarket. Officers on horse back and on foot
and also mobiles were requested to attend that area on a numoer of occasions
to deal with the rowdy elimant.                                                        :

Halifax Road was very busy due to the number of fans attending the football
match, upto approximately 10 mintues before the kick olf, and quite a numoer of
fans had to oe spoken to due to their oehaviour and in respect of the alcohol          j
tney still had in their possession eve** at that time, some of them were carrying
four cans of beer/lager some were carrying eight cans, some just a single can,
wnxch they were drinki,„g and throw! ~r the empty cans anywhere. Otner fans were       i
ca. ryi_.g l a r g e "dastic _ottles contrininp alcohol, others were ^arryixsg bottles  :
of wine, It would appear that most of them were drinking as much as tney could and tii^
tney were not oothered what it was as lo^g as it was alcoholic.                        J
A lot of the fans were   in a good mood, so*..e of them were merry due to the
matwh which was due to   oe played, the younger element were the ones that were
ooistrous.

At approximately 3p~ together with the rest of wy serial, I made my way towards
r:ia.gra where we were due to have our meal before going onto the ground, whilst
on route a message was received by radio requesting all Officers to attend at
the ground due to problems inside the ground.

I was in possession of my personal radio, and I heard some one ask over the            I
radio for the game to be put back for 15 minutes due to the large number of            j
fans that were still outside the ground prior to kick off, I did not hear any
reply to this message. I also heard Officers asking for a gate or gates to be
opened as they believed that some one wouldbe injured or the fans may cause
trouble due to the fact that the;* could not get into the ground for the kick off.
                Geoffrey Williamson. PC.1779 (Page 2).

Together with other Officers from other serials we made our way along
Leppings Lane towards the location of the West Stand, whilst we were
going along Lepping Lane nesr to the ground a small number of fans were
wa      tov/aros us*

When we approached Lepping- Lane with its junction of Vere Road, Inspector
Charles informed match control by radio of how many Officers he had with
him and asked where we were to be directed to, we were directed to enter
the ground by the 'West Stand s.nd assist other Officers at that location.

When we first entered the ground we were met by a large number of Liverpool
supporters, who were angry and we were subjected to a lot of verbal abuse.
I made my way towards the tunnel which runs underneath the West Stand which
was found to be blocked by Liverpool supporters hanging about, some of them
seemed dazed, in order to get into the tunnel we had to get hold of the
supporters and shout at them to get out of the tunnel, even passing them
from one Officer to another.

Wien I got onto the terrace behind the goals     •8.W large number of bodies
on the floor, people were standing on them to get out of the way, some of
the fans were pulling the wire barriers down with their bare hands in order
that they could get out from the terrace onto the pitch, as the wire was
being torn out from the supports other spectaters were picking some of
the bodies off the floor and passing them through the gate or through the
openings in the fencing.

I assisted in helping with some of the bodies on the terrace and placing
them onto the playing area, Officers were trying to revive the fans as
were some of the other fans, there were also a large number of fans that
were ripping down the advertising boards which were being used to carry
the injured and the dead fans away from the goal mouth towards the other
end of the ground or to the gymnasiun.

Most of the Liverpool supporters in the top of the West stand in the seated
area were shouting abuse at the Officers at -that end of the ground, this
I believe out of anger and 'frustration.

I assisted in removing a number of spectatorsfrom the playing area near to
the West stand to the othjsi- end of the ground. I also helped carry a number
of people that were obviously dead to the gymnasium behind the worth Stand*
Whilst I was doing this a large number of fans that were carrying bodies
into the gymnasiun we.’e rushing about knocking people out of the way
irespective of what they were doing, trying to get to the gymnasiun as soon
as they could. I believe that this was with good intent as they were trying
to get medical treatment as fast as they could for there fellow fans.

Whilst I was in the gymnasiun and in the process of returning to the pitch,
I was asked by a Senior Officer that if I was not engaged would I stand by
one of the bodies laid inside the gymnasiun,

I went  to the body of Andrew Brookes, approx 25 years .of age o f ________
                             he was certified dead by Dr. Bull from the
Royal   allamshireHospital, the body was later identified by hisfriend
John Harris of                                                    There was
no identification on the body and very little property

The body was later transported to the Medico Legal -'entre and handed over
to DS. Nev/ton together v/ith the property. At 1.30am Sunday 16.4.89 I
finished duty.



                    o-?;
