                                                                  C*7&
STATEMENT OF MARTIN ROBERT FROGGATT. DETECTIVE CONSTABLE 328
                                                                            %
At 8.30 am on Saturday 15 April 1989, I commenced duty in uniform, at

Hackenthorpe Police Station.

At 9.15 am the same day, in company with other officers, I arrived at

Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, following which, a briefing was

conducted on the Semi-Final football match, Liverpool versus Nottingham Forest.

Following the briefing, in company with other Serial 10 officers and Police

Sergeant 1080 Hoyland, I attended turnstiles on Penistone Road, adjacent to the

East Stand (Kop), where, together with Police Constable    2097 Cousin, I

commenced duties, standing by turnstiles numbered 55 and 5 6 .

From 12 midday onwards, each turnstile was opened and Nottingham Forest

supporters were allowed to pass through into the ground, occupying the kop.

Whilst the supporters passed through the turnstiles, a brief search was carried

out of those people in possession of bags e t c , for prohibited articles in

relation to entry to the ground.

At approximately 3.10pm that afternoon, whilst still engaged on the turnstiles,

I was directed by Police Sergeant 1080 Hoyland, together with other Serial 10

officers, to attend within the ground towards the    Leppings Lane end, where an

incident was taking place.

The turnstiles were thenclosed at Penistone Road and I made my way onto the

pitch via the kop and South Stand, where I could see a large gathering of people

concentrated around the goal posts adjacent to the West Stand, occupied by

Liverpool fans.

Having run across the full length of the pitch towards the crowd, I could see

people trying to climb over the front securing fence of the middle pen of the

West Stand, assisted by Police officers from the pitch side.     It became apparent

 that due to what appeared to be over-crowding in the centre pen, fans were

being forced to the front of the pen and some were forcibly pushed against      the
front metal perimeter fencing, whilst officers were pulling some fans over the

fencing onto the pitch side to alleviate the crush.

I assisted by conveying these fans from the Police officers at the fencing onto

the pitch, where they were then placed into the recovery position, some of whom

appeared to have breathing difficulties.      These people were then left with other

Police officers.

After a short while, I then made my way over to the No. 2 Gate of the perimeter

fencing of the adjacent pen, where officers had already entered and had made

their way across to the centre pen.       I went into the pen and assisted these

officers to carry people from the centre enclosure, over the separating fence

along enclosure No. 2, and passed them out through Gate No. 2, to other Police

officers, they were then conveyed onto the pitch.

Once a number of people had been removed from the middle pen, it became apparent

that several people beneath the crowds were dead.

These people, in turn, were removed and taken onto the pitch via the No. 2 Gate.

Together with other officers, I then stood in a line across the centre of the

pitch to segregate rival fans and assist the emergency servies to operate more

freely.

During this time, an announcement was made to the effect that the match was

postponed and fans began to leave the ground, following which, together with

Serial 10 officers,    I made my way to the PenistoneRoad end andassisted      fans to

board and depart on    local transport.

Once all the Nottingham Forest supporters had departed, together with Serial 10

officers, I returned to the North Stand, where a further briefing was held and

we were then stood down.

After this, at 6 .30   pm that same day, Iwas conveyed    to Hackenthorpe Police

Station, where, at 7-00 pm, I concluded duty.
