          STATEMENT RE EVENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH , SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1989


 JOHN DAVID WEST,                                                       ^        ^
 P.C. 1183 E2 Sub-Division,                                                   ’ =//      5
 Woodseats Police Station,
 South Yorkshire Police.



 I reported for duty at Woodseats Police Station at 8.45am on Saturday 15.4.89, and
 travelled to Sheffield Wednesday's ground at Hillsborough, shortly afterwards. Once
 there I went to the North Stand for the match briefing, being assigned duty on Serial
 7, with Sergeants 752 Batty, 1203 Marples, and Inspector Calvert.
 The briefing took place at 10am, I had been at the Liverpool — Notts Forest semi-final
 the previous year, and allocated duty on the Spion Kop as this year; I noticed one thing
 said at this briefing — that we were not to pack or position supporters into the ground,
 but to leave this to the Stewards.
 After the briefing my Serial went to the Spion Kop, where after a further short briefing
 relevent to the Kop by Superintendent Greenwood, we took up our positions at the Northern
^fcnd of the Kop, near to an area allocated to any Liverpool supporters who may have tickets
 for the Kop, wfcich should be only for Notts Forest supporters. It was anticipated that
 there could be friction between the two factions.
 I remained at that point until 2.12pm, when with other officers I took part in the
 arrest of 4 Notts supporters for drunkenness, and took my prisoner,'                    ;o
 the Police Room beneath the North Stand, accompanied by P.C. 815 Moghul. After necessary
 procedures I went to the nearby gymnasium to complete my arrest report and Court file.
 Shortly before kick-off time, I became aware ot officers being gathered together to go
 to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where there was some form of trouble outside the
 ground. I saw that officers having meals were leaving them, and Serials were being
 quickly assembled to attend. Together with the officers from my serial taking part in
 the earlier arrests I was directed to return to the Kop, and we re-entered the Kop at
^^ie lower South end, next to the South Stand. I saw immediately that the match had
 started, that the Kop was very full, and looking over to the West Stand I s«w that the
 standing areas were very full indeed. At that point a Liverpool shot struck the Notts
 goal’ crossbar, I looked back to the Leppings Lane end, and saw that fans were on the
 perimeter track at the Liverpool end, and I thought that a pitch invasion was imminent.
 This fact was noticed by Notts fans around us, and their mood changed to anger at the
 Liverpool fans behaviour. After a short time the play stopped, and I saw a single
 male fan run down the pitch from the Liverpool end right up to the Notts penalty area,
 and shout and wave his fists at the Kop. He was chased back towards the Liverpool end
 by several officers and eventually tackled and floored by an officer in a yellow jacket,
 who I believe was a Nottinghamshire officer.
 We were directed by Inspector Calvert to the North end of the Kop, to protect the small
 segregated area containing about 200 to 300 Liverpool fans, anticipating trouble due to
 the Liverpool pitch invasion. We arrived at the segregated area with some difficulty,
  the Kop being very full, and formed a double cordon between the Notts and Liverpool
 supporters. I looked onto the pitch and saw that play had been suspended, with no players
 on the pitch, at the Leppings Lane end there were many fans now on the perimeter track
 and on the pitch.
 Since returning to the Kop, I had great difficulty due to crowd noise in hearing my
 personal radio, despite the use of an ear-piece, due to the immense crowd noise, every
 time an officer attempted to pass a message his microphone picked up the crowd noise
 drowned out his message. I did however pick up some conversation about opening gates,
 and permission being sought to do so, and being granted, the name of the officer giving
 permission was sought and identified as Superintendent Marshall.
 I was aware that there was some sort of incident at the Leppings Lane end, there had
 obviously been an invasion onto the pitch, but the attention of those doing this was not
 on the Notts fans, nor did there seem to be any violence or fighting going on. The centre
 of activity appeared to be behind the Liverpool goal, but I could not tell, due to the
 distance, nor from the radio what was happening.
 The Notts fans around us were increasingly angry at the suspension of play, and there was
^|uch jeering and cat-calling towards the Liverpool end; we had to warn some Notts fans
 making aggressive remarks toawards the Liverpool fans behind us.
 There were now increasing numbers of officers heading towards the Liverpool end, and I
 saw some Liverpool fans come down the pitch towards the Notts fans, and have to be
 restrained or directed back by officers at our end.
 I believe that somewhere at this point I heard via my radio that people were trapped at
 the Leppings Lane end, and the officer, who had a Southern accent urgently requested that
 bolt-croppers or cutting equipment be sent for. It was at this point that I realised that
 the incident was serious, and that people must be injured.
 The scene on the pitch was increasingly chaotic, with Liverpool fans trying to reach the
 Notts end with apparently aggressive intentions. I could see that injured people were
 being laid out on the pitch at the Liverpool end, some of these were carried down to our
 end of the pitch on stretchers, and St. John's staff, Police officers and others were
^ y i n g to revive them without success. I saw one fan, clad only in underpants given up
 as dead, with others being worked on nearby, none appeared to be responding.
 The Forest fans had all this time continued their jeering, even cheering when a body was
 carried down towards us, and we were inundated with requests for infomation as to when or
 if the match would restart.
 I saw an ambulance enter the pitch, siren sounding, increasing numbers of bodies and
 casualties are being carried down the pitch on stretchers, advertisement boards and
 eaen between several fans, most of them are not moving. I saw one officer carry a
 motionless child out in his arms. Looking towards the West Stand people are being passed
 over the heads of the crowd in the standing area, others are being pulled up into the
 seated area. Down at the foot of the Kop officers are having to restrain angry Liverpool
 fans, a large cordon of officers hasnow formed across the centre of the pitch to prevent
 any further aggression, after a while Police dogs are spaced out across the front of the

 Kop.


 ,__________ \&st*
The Nottingham fans had now generally gone quieter, but we are still inundated with
requests for information, there had been no public address message since the beginning
of the match.
From our position on the Northern wing of the Kop I could clearly see the numbers of
casualties being carried out, as the pitch exit passes immediately below that wing, this
was also obvious to the Liverpool fans with us, and many w«re extremely upset, with women
crying. Inspector Calvert arranges for some to be escorted througn the Notts supporters,
but it becomes obvious that the Notts fans are not any threat, having realised that a
serious incident has taken place.
There has been no message over the public address system as yet, I hear a radio message
asking for the public to be informed that the match is abandoned, the caller is informed
by the Control Room, I believe this was Chief Superintendent Nesbit, that this will be
done only when all casualties have been evacuated.
The first message passed over the public address is unintelligible, I am told this is
Kenny Dalgleish, the Liverpool manager. Shortly afterwards an officer passes along the
^ p n t of the Kop, speaking to the crowd through a loud-hailer, I was unable to tell what
he said.
Eventually an announcement is made that the match is abandoned, and the fans are requested
to leave the ground, the Notts fans leave the Kop in an orderly manner, we follow them out
and assist with traffic in Penistame Road.
I am directed by Inspector Burns to take a nearby Transit, and go to the Leppings Lane
end to remove bodies found after the crowd have left, I drive around the South Stand with
P.C. 2748 Abrahams, but find that ambulances have just left with the bodies, we return to
our Serial in Penistone Road.
We are stood dowm and go to the North Stand for a de-briefing; after this we are allocated
duties around the gymnasium perimeter which is being used as a temporary mortuary, it is
only at this time that we fully realise the extent of the tragedy.
My serial carry out security duties around the gymnasium area, controlling access to the
s£)a beneath the North Stand; at one point we are obliged to position a Police vehicle
across the view from the rear gardens of houses on Penistone Road in order to prevent
photographers taking pictures of bodies being unloaded from ambulances into the gymnasium.
At one point I was forced to eject two reporters who had infiltrated a group of relatives
walking towards the gymnasium to make identifications.
My serial remained at the ground performing various duties induing assisting with the
relatives of the dead, loading and unloading of ambulances, until all the bodies had been
removed. We were then relieved, and I went off duty at 6 am at Woodseats Police Station.
I have recalled since the incident being told^whilst on the Kop^by several Nottingham fans,
that they had heard, not first-hand,that entry to the ground could be gained by paying at
Gat<       In view of the hearsay element of this information, I did not take any details of
the fans passing this to m e .
