                                                                                           QOR393




JANET ELIZABETH GILMOUR

POLICE CONSTABLE 3176

’B ' GROUP UNIFORM

'Cl' ROTHERHAM



I am a Police Constable              in the South Yorkshire               Police,       presently

stationed at Main Street, Rotherham.

At   8.30   a.m.    on    Saturday    15   April     1989,   I     commenced      duty   in     full

uniform     at     Main    Street    Police     Station      and     from    there       we     were

transported to Hillsborough to the FA Cup Semi-Final Liverpool FC -v-

Nottingham Forest.

I formed part        of Serial      41 under    the direct         supervision of Sergeant

Dixon   and      Inspector     Broomhead,      and    following      the    briefing       at    the

ground, we made our way into Halifax Road, near to its junction with

Southey     Green    Road,   where    we   were      to   patrol    and meet      the    incoming

Liverpool coaches and fans.

By 11.30 a.m. that day, Liverpool fans had already begun to arrive in

private     cars,    the majority of whom showed good humour and little

aggression towards the Police.                However both the Public House at the

junction of the above two roads and the Threshers Off Licence were

open and as more fans began to arrive, many entered the Public House

or bought cans of alcohol at the Threshers which they proceeded to

drink, either outside the pub or in the immediate area.

On walking down towards Gateways Supermarket on Kilner Way,                                   I saw

approximately        100-150     football      fans       sitting    on     the    grass      verge

outside the Gateways Supermarket.                  Many had cans of beer and bottles

of cider in their possession and on speaking to several fans, they
had obviously been drinking alcohol and although intoxicated,             they

were in good spirits and humour.

By 1.30 p.m. very few coaches had arrived at Halifax Road, although

many fans were still arriving by private means.

The Public House at the junction closed its doors at one point as

there were    too many fans inside        the premises.     The Threshers also

closed their doors         allowing only 3-4    football fans in at a time.

This caused queing and approximately 50-100 football fans waited in

this queue in an effort to obtain alcohol from this shop.

By 2.00 p.m.        the football coaches began to arrive and although the

fans were noisy and some were mildly intoxicated, the majority were

good humoured and in high spirits.            However, many fans did not make

their way directly to the ground but congregated around the small

shopping area on Halifax Road near to its junction with Southey Green

Road.

It was evident that many fans were au fait with the area and very

much aware that the ground was no more than a ten minute walk from

where they had been dropped off by the coaches.

By 2.30 p.m. coaches were still arriving and there were many hundreds

of fans still making their way down to the ground.

At approximately 2.50 p.m. my Serial and I proceeded to make our way

back to the ground, even at this time fans were still making their

way to the ground, many of them running.

Whilst making       our way   to the ground,     I could hear a sudden roar

coming from the crowd inside the ground and I presumed that one of

the   two   teams    had   scored   a goal.    Almost   simultaneously we were

informed that our presence was required inside the ground, although

it wasn't clear at this time as to the reason.
                                                                                                            1

                                                -    3   -




    We   arrived     at       the    stadium    at       approximately       3.10    p.m.     and    were
                          %


    immediately deployed to watch the Nottingham Forest fans at the Spion

    Kop end of the playing surface perimeter.                          Once inside the ground, I

    could see that numerous supporters had spilled onto the pitch at the

    Leppings Lane end, and I presumed that the Liverpool supporters were

    fighting.       The Nottingham supporters at this time were getting very

    agitated       and    restless       as     like         as   they    were      unaware    of     the

    circumstances of the tragedy and believed the fans were fighting.

    At this time I could see Police Officers and fans at the Leppings

♦   Lane end tearing down the wooden hoarding around the pitch perimeter

    and using it as make-shift stretchers.

    At this stage, we were uncertain as to what had occurred.

    As time went on I could see fans and Police Officers giving mouth to

    mouth resuscitation and heart massage to people lying all over the

    playing     pitch.          It    was     only       after     a   lengthy   period       that    the

    realisation of the tragedy which was unfolding, struck both myself

    and the Notts fans, and even then only because dead bodies were being

    left at the Notts end of the pitch.

    We still       did not      know exactly what had occurred,                     but     information

    about    the    events       kept   filtering            through     from Liverpool       fans    and

    Police Officers carrying the injured and dead from the Leppings Lane

    end.

    Many within the Notts crowd came forward to offer their assistance in

    dealing with the injured.

    Once the game had been cancelled, the Notts fans made their way out

    of the ground in a very orderly manner and our Serial was deployed

    back to our original positions on Halifax Road.

    Many    Liverpool         supporters      approached          us   trying to find out about

    relatives and we gave what help we could.
The fans were quiet and        subdued as they made their way back   to the

coaches.     However,   some   were hostile towards us swearing at   us and

blaming us    for the events which occurred.         As we listened to the

report coming over the fans transistor radios, the full scale of the

events started to unfold.

Finally at approximately       6.00 p.m. we resumed to Claywheels Lane for

a meal and after that we       went off duty at 7-15 p.m.

                                      r ~ K ~ \ __________________
