'      Vfli i
     Statement of DONALD HARRIS.
    AGE AND DATE OF BIRTH     Over 21 Years
    Occupation Police Constable 2626
    Address   County Police Office, Rawmarsh




    I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, stationed at Rawmarsh


    At 8.00 a.m. on Saturday 15th April 1989, I conmenced duty at Rawmarsh Police Station,
    along with a number of other officers who were to attend Hillsbrough Football Ground
    to Police the F.A. Cup semi final tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.




       arrival at the football ground I attended the pre-match briefing and was informed
    that my serial, serial 43 was to be positioned on Halifax Road to supervise the arrival
    of coaches and to ensure the correct parking of private vehicles, the coaches to be perked
    Halifax Road facing away from the ground and private vehicles to be parked inside
    minor estate roads adjacent to Halifax Road.


    Our serial was in position at 11.30 a.m. by which time, coaches had started to arrive
    along with a number of private cars.


    At 2.00 p.m. that date, I was approached by P.S. 2332 Doyle, the Sergeant in charge of
    serial 39 who were also on duty in Halifax Road.      I   learned from him that a request had
    been made for officers to go to Kilner Way, where a mini bus had arrived contained about
^J-0 persons who were apparently the worse for drink and the officers feared that there was
      possibility of trouble being caused by those persons.


    Together with P.S. Doyle and other officers including P.C's2515 Smith, P.C. 2940
                     3icj                             ,                               ,
    House and P.C.          Mapoon, I summoned the assistance of passing motorists and we went
    to that location where we joined Superintendent Marshall and Chief Inspector Povey and
    after speaking to those officers we began searching the occupants of the mini bus as
    they got out of the vehicle.


    They then started moving off walking along the access road at the industrial estate at
    Kilner Way, as if making their way towards the ground. As we walked along Kilner Way
    towards Halifax Road to return to our respective positions, I saw a very large crowd of
    supporters lying on the grass verges at both sides of the junction.       They were wearing
    red and white scarves and many spoke with liverpudlian accents.       I saw at that time
that all appeared to be drinking from cans of beer and lager which they had obviously
purchased at the nearby Gateway Supermarket and surrounding stores or had brought with
them in polythene bags.    Most of those fans appeared in high spirits but were behaving
in a friendly manner at the time.    There were a number of them shouting across the
road towards friends passing by.    They were however drinking heavily at that time and
appeared to be consuming one can after the other.


 There were other Police Officers in the area at that time and as a result at the
instructions of P-S. Doyle, I then returned to Halifax Road to where the rest of serial 43
were still working.




About 3.05p.m. that date we were instructed to start making our way down halifax Road, and
to go to the Police Garage at Claywheels Lane where the whole of our serial was to be
given a hot meal.     We all began walking down Halifax Road together and as we were
passing Fletchers Bakery still walking down Halifax Road, I saw that the bakery clock
was showing 15.14 hours on the 24hour clock.     We contined down Halifax Road and on
reaching Claywheels Lane, turned right into that road.     We walked along the road and
were about 100 yards from the garage, when an Inspector came running toards us.


He iimtedi tely told us that there was trouble    at the ground and fighting on the pitch,
and were told to go straight down to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where our
assistance was required.     Together we all turned around and began walking back towards the
ground but were quickly pickly up in a Police Van on Claywheels Lane and were conveyed to
the ground.


On arriving at the ground, we all got out of the van, there were large groups of people
oputside the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     They were very aggressive towards the
Police and were shouting, "It's your fucking fault, you've done this by opening the
fucking gates."       I saw a number of Police Officers standing   outside the ground
between the Leppings Lane and South Stands and they were in a shocked and distressed
 state.   Some of the officers were knealing down and were attending to the bodies of fans
 that had been brought out of the ground and had been laid outside the gound.


 Seme of those bodies had been completely covered, other were being attended by ambulance
 service staff




 We then went into the Leppings Lane stand, directly behind the goal&
 Together with other officers I then made ray way UiQi'ds the playing area behind the
goals.   I saw a number of young fans lying on the terracing and other fans and Police
Officers were already lifting the dead and injured fans from the terracing onto the
perimeter track.   I then assisted in the removal of persons and gerally assisted other

colleagues.


We returned to Rawmarsh at 6.30p.m. and retired from duty 7.30 p.m. that date




                                                                                          j
                                                                                          I
