DC 515 TONY CAWKWELL El

At 8.15am on Saturday the 15th of April 1989 I paraded for duty at
Hackenthorpe Police Station in full uniform for duty in connection
with the F.A. Cup semi final to be played between Liverpool F.C. &
Nottingham Forest F.C. at Hillsborough fottball ground later that
date.      I travelled to Hillsborough and was present at the North
Stand where a briefing took place, commencing at approximately
10.00am 15.4.89.      I was attached to serial 6 with the following
officers. P.S. 729 Norburn. DC 1828 Metcalfe. PC 28 Drewitt.
PC 2818 Marshall. PC 861 Wadsworth. PC 3217 Wadsworth. PC 3162
Pears. PC 1159 Long, and PC 169 Fillingham.        Inspector Harvey was
the officer in charge. Chief Inspector Beal was second in command
and the officer responsible for teh serial was Supt Greenwood.         After
the briefing I consumed a packed lunch.
ThJfcduties of serial 6 was to man barriers to be erected at the
of the South stand at entrance E adjacent to the car park and barriers
 from turnstiles A-G at the Leppings Lane end.       the area between the two
 barriers was to remain sterile.      Liverpool supporters were not to be
 permitted entry.     The only persons allowed entry were to be
 authorised persons and persons with tickets for entrance E of the
 South Stand, ie Nottingham Forest fans.
 At approximately 11.00 am I took up position at the barriers situated
 at entrance E to the South Stand.        The following officers were also
 in position at those barriers. DC 1828 Metcalfe. PC 2818 Marshall.
 PC 1159 Long.     & PC 169 Fillingham.    From approximately 2pm there were
 numerous Liverpool supporters who had to be re-directed from that
 location to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, vias Penistone Road.
 mJ   R   of the crowd appeared to be in good humour with the exception of a
 few who were annoyed at having to walk quite a long distance to Lepp' g
 Lane.      At about 2.40pm I became aware of a large build up of fans taking
 place at the Leppings Lane turnstile area.        It was at that time that 6
 mounted officers were let through our barrier to attend at that area.
 From our position we were able to see a small proportion of the crow
 that had built up.      Whislt this was happening a large number of
 Liverpool fans were also being directed away the South stand area to
 the Leppings Lane turnstiles via Penistone Road.        A large number
 fans were without tickets and on numerous occasions I was asked by
 those fans to escort them through the turnstiles.
 A H these requests were denied and the fans were told to leave th
 area.      A steady flow of Nottingham Forest supporters were still entering
 the ground after 3pm.
At around 3.06pm a call went out to     the effect there was numerous
Liverpool fans on the playing area and together with other officers I
went into the ground via the gates next to turnstile E, through a small
standing area and onto the pitch.     Once on the playing area I saw that
there were other officers in attendance behind the Leppings Lane goal.
A large number of fans were clinibing over the security fence and also
climbing up   into the West stand from the terrace.    There were numerous
fans on the   pitch at that stage, although play was still in progress.
The central   terrace area was packed solid with   fans although there
appeared to   be ample room for fans in the pens   either side.    I went to
the fences and realised that due to the amount of people in the centre
pen that fans were being crushed against the front fencing.        At this
stage I assisted fans trying to climb over the fencing      and onto the
plj^^ing area.    I then went into the left   hand side pen to assist other
fans.   As I entered the pen I looked into the centre pen and saw
numerous people of both sexes lying on the terrace steps.         These people
were unconcious most of which appeared to be dead.       I stayed on the
terraces but after a short time was called onto the field to form a
cordon across the playing area preventing fans fighting and Liverpool
fans running across the pitch to the spion kop.       Many of the Liverpool
fans were abusive and calling officers Murdering Bastards.
When the crowds had left t returned to the North Stand where I saw
DS Norburn.      I had a short conversation with that officer and he wrote
down a brief resume of what had happened during the incident.
I retired from duty at 7.30pm.
