                                                                                                 M IR .IS
         r ^              I SheffieldArchiyes
 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                                                                        £>SSj
Title      h>£kj           -w

 (Include source and any document

Receiver's instructions   urgent action - Yes/M^ 7                             / ^ 9                        — cJ T f'c /-
                                                                                                                                  Receiver
                                                     u /lu = > C t / f e J & f }   tfi   /k ^ e g /e ^ ^    /c y
               7
                   Q&x.im I                                                                                                        rrr?           --

Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                          Indexer        ••;
                                                                                                                                             •

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                             ;^
Statement reader's instructions
                            ions                                           /tuu&                                            Statement R



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                            Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                       O/M        SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                           Indexer       |

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Fo
         o   o




v#-oar            Q
                 l l l r ^   -»
  1              HILLSBOROUGH - SATURDAY 15th APRIL, 1989


     Being a supporter of Liver{>o?Tl Fojjtbal^ C l u b , and also an
experienced ’Registered Nurse', I gave as much help as I could
in the area behind the Leppings Lane Stand on a fine Saturday
afternoon in April, when all I had gone to Sheffield for, like
many others, was to vatch two fine teams play football.

     Below is an account of events as I saw them from the time
I left home, to the arrival of the eme r g e n c y services to tend
the injured, and remove the dead.


10.30 a.m.
      I left Birkenhead,     Merseyside, with       two friends to     drive

to Sheffield. We travelled via          the M53 - M56 and M62, following

the signs marked     'Footbal Traffic*.       Following the designated

route which took me through busy shopping areas outside Manchester,

through numerous road works and eventually into the Derbyshire

Peak District.        At one time the traffic jam   was so bad it took

me 45 mins. to      travel 3 miles.



      On the outskirts of Sheffield I witnessed coaches and vans

being pulled into the roadside by Police Officers, who,         I presume,

were looking for alcohol.        As I proceeded further along the road

 I again witnessed    Police Officers standing at the kerb      side every

 few yards stopping private vehicles.         It was at this time I

myself was stopped, asked my destination, and was told to proceed
                                                                 • •


 down the road until I reached yet another group of Police Officers,

 who would direct me to a parking area.         This area was a road,

 very, very steep in a residential area off the area the locals

 call the    'Flounch*.



       On arriving at the ground at 2.15 p.m.       it was very evident

 the organisation of the previous year was sadly lacking.              People

 were milling around the gates        trying to get into the ground,     their
progress through the turnstiles being hampered by Police Officers

searching handbags outside the turnstile and, handbags and male

supporters being searched just inside the turnstiles.           Once in

the ground we proceeded to our seats to witness the dreadful

events of that fateful afternoon unfold.



     At first,   like many people around me,     I did not realise

the enormity of the situation.     I just thought the occurrences

below me were due to over crowding on a normal scale, and would

soon be sorted out.      I watched Police Officers shouting at the

fans to move back,    people who had managed to climb over grabbed

by the Pol-ice as if being arrested.        On realising what was          \
happening I found myself shouting,     like many people around me,

in a futile attempt at making ourselves heard,       to the Referee,

the shouts being to    ’stop the match'.



     I stood routed to the spot unable to comprehend fully what was

going on around me, people    by this time were standing on their

seats in front of me obliterating my view, voices were being

raised in distress and anger.      I moved to the gangway, and at this
                                                                • '

point saw a man running with a child in his arms       , who was either

unconscious or dead.      A female Police Officer was dragging a

male St. Johns Ambulance man over to another person lying on the

ground,   Police were standing around,     some helping,   some standing

on the base of the railings pleading with people to move back, other

Police doing nothing.



     Realising that as much help as possible was going to be needed

I started to make my way down the gangway,       only to find my way
obstructed by other fans, distressed at the scenes they were

witnessing,    others pulling people up from the standing area.



        On reaching the landing the cafeteria is based on,    I encountered

a man lying on the floor with a Police Officer in attendance.

Having introduced myself as a nurse I checked       the man, he was

exhausted but alive, and a doctor had seen him,       the doctor

being a Liverpool fan.      The Policeman promised to stay with him

so I proceeded,    found a steward, again explained I was a nurse

and offered assistance.      He did not seem to know what to say or

do at first,    but suggested I go down and find a Police Officer.

I went down another flight of stairs and encountered another

group of perhaps three or four supporters, hot and exhausted

but mobile.      I eventually arrived at ground level and stood in horror

at the scene -before my eyes.     Bodies lying all over the place with

coats over their faces, men lying on the floor being attended by

fellow supporters, and male and female Police Officers.

I approached yet another Police Officer explained my profession and

asked who was in charge.      I never received a reply to this question,

as I was obviously overheard by another Police Officer tending

to a man, who was struggling to breathe lying on the floor behind

me,    he was shouting at me to come and help.     As he was shouting at

me to help,    the female Police Officer with him shouted that she was

a nurse as well, and that the man was alright,       injured but alright.



        At this time I moved away telling myself   that there was

nothing I could do to help these men lying very still with navy

blue extremities sol took another look at my surroundings.          By

this    time more injured but living men had been brought out, and had
                          -   4   -




been placed on the floor in sl^tin£ positions around the wall.

I checked all of them, some had possible rib injuries, some

very shocked and exhausted,       some just very hot and exhausted.

By this time another Liverpool fan had appeared with buckets

of drinking water,   and plastic disposable cups,      he c o u l d n ’t

give any professional help so was making himself useful in any

way he could.   He went around the injured with w a t e r , and many

words of comfort.     Another Liverpool supporter       ran up to me

saying he was a qualified     ’First A i d e r ’, what could he do ?

I directed him to the exhausted fans and he stayed with them

until they were removed to Hospital.


                                                            _____          t
  I carried on, checked again on a young man called                  who

was lying on the floor exhausted, and shocked, and encouraged

the fan who was a stranger to him,       but stayed with him,

encouraging him to breathe and reassuring him until he was

eventually walked    to an ambulance.



    Whilst all this was going on it was becoming more and more

apparent that firstly nobody among the Police or Stewards

had taken charge of the situation,       secondly the emergency

services had not arrived.



     I continued going around the injured supporting injured

limbs using theirs, and m a k . football scarves.          At some point

a Police Officer cane up to me and suggested that all people

should be moved to an area outside large blue roll back gates,

so that the ambulances could get to them,        it was at this time

 I realised help had finally arrived.        I managed to get one
                              - 5 -


youngster on his feet, and assisted-him-outside the gates,

the dead had already been moved to this area by the Police,

having been directed to do so by a man I took to be a Doctor,

who had arrived from one of the local Hospitals.           He was

telling the Police    that he wanted the injured to be placed in

categories,    the badly injured to go in the first ambulances,

and not the ones with minor injuries, which at first seemed to

be the case.      I was later to discover,   the following morning,

that the Doctor concerned was a fellow fan who had arrived.on

the scene a lot earlier than I, had summed up the total lack

of leadership,    and had taken over himself.         Again.   I was

approached by a lady in a red trouse'suit,       she produded a card
                                                                          \
from her pocket,    she was a qualified   ’First A i d e r ’ - a local

lady who had seen the scenes on T.V. and had arrived to help.



    I carried on. made some three or four attempts to get help

to a man propped against the wall just outside the large

entrance to the standing area,    who had an obvious painful neck

injury.      I eventually enlisted the help of a tall Policewoman,

showed her were the man was.      She went away and very soon came back

with blankets and more supporters, and with all this combined help

we managed to get this man onto the blankets,       and onto a

stretcher,    an Ambulance appeared with the latter just at the right

moment.



    Having by this time got most of the injured outside the

gates,    badly injured to the right and minor injuries in order

of importance to the left.     The sight of the dead lying alongside

one wall in this area, head to toe, and the living leaning or

lying against the opposite wall,      separated by a human shield        of

Police personnel,    is a sight I will never forget.       The arrival
of ambulances arid crash teams from the local hospitals was by

this time getting stronger,      the baCTliy In jured had been removed,

all that was left to do was continue to support injured limbs

with scarves,    reassure some of the injured,       youngsters who

gave their names as          ,   15 yrs of age, worried how he

was going to get home, a young Policeman stayed with him saying

’we will get you home sonny, d o n ’t w o r r y ’.    Another young lad

about l4yrs,           I think, a young Policewoman with him holding

his injured foot reassuring him all the time.



       The local nurses took over,   handed out blankets, a young

Asian doctor,    local I think, was by this time going around the

lads with minor injuries, carrying a brief case and stethoscope.

I realised that by this time there was little left for me to

do so I wandered back into the area behind the stand, intending

to go back to my friends, but was stopped by yet another

distressed fan, who I knew, uninjured physically but mentally,

very distressed - he had been to Belgium and witnessed the

Heysel Disaster.       He was eventually comforted by       myself and the

same young Policewoman who had helped me with the spinal injuries

man,    and sent on   his way his purpose in life at the time was

to go and ring his Mum.       On his departure the Policewoman

herself broke down briefly, and was rescued by one of her

colleages .



       To sum up this lengthy account my overall opinion was that

of a dreadful situation were the people who should have taken

control of it were good when they were eventually organised,

but previous to this appeared to be running around like
'headless chickens' and,   if there was or is a Disaster Plan

at this stadium,   then I would suggest the officials   there

told somebody else what that Plan is.



    I do not know what time I left the stadium.    I did not

arrive home until 9.30 p.m.




THURSDAY 4th MAY

    I have to-night been over to Anfield Football Club to
purchase my ticket for the r e p l a y . My theory being that
life has to go on, and if you fall of a horse the best
thing to do is get back on again !

    The scenes at Anfield to-night  were remarkable, hundreds
and hundreds of people pouring into one gate at the Anfield
Road end. the road outside jammed with cars.    These people
Were the same people who visited Hillsborough, they lined
up in many orderly queues, snaking around the car park,
directed by Stewards. I saw only two Police Officers in
attendance.    Why !? Why !? Could the Hillsborough Police
have consulted or taken a leaf out of the Liverpool Police s
notebook.and behaved the same.

    A middle-aged couple in front of me stated they had been
at Hillsborough, arriving at 2 p.m. and had been searched
four times trying to get to their seats.   Why !
