                                                                                             MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised                                    N um ber
                                                                                                                     O-D'dc
                                                        <•
T itle i c y i             w\                  Bgi6                          ((/ CL                       ^      i\m m )
                                                                                                                         11 r\Q
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)                                                                 <\ 1101
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o           \o   D             b,    ( c \ c \ / c JJ.
                                                         t                                                                Receiver

                                               Doi


D o cu m ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                      £
No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions                                                  ftjbU/- \q & £ >

                                                                                                                          Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                          Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Do cu m ent Master N um ber Form
                                    Vincent Hale & Co.
                                          Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                         Nash House         Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                           140 Upperthorpe      Consultant:
Home                                        Sheffield        Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (Hons.)
Fax    325644                               S6 3NF




        Our ref: VH/DB                                      6th June,      1990
        Your ref: MJF/VSC

        Dear Sir,

        Hillsborough Disaster - Superintendent Roger Marshall

        1.          Superintendent Marshall and I have now carefully considered
                     the complaints made by Mr Trevor Hicks, Mr Leslie Jones and
                     Mrs Joan McBrien.

        2.          As you are aware, the issues have already been dealt with at
                     a Judicial Enquiry which lasted 31 days, taking the oral
                     evidence of 174 witnesses.  So far as the police in general
                     are concerned, a conclusion was reached that their failure
                     to control the crowd was the major cause of the disaster.

        3.          The senior officers were castigated for being defensive and
                     evasive in their evidence to the Enquiry.

        4.          Consequently, any enquiry into senior police officers
                     involvement in this matter begins with an assumption of
                     guilt, which they have to displace.

        5.          I must therefore make it clear at the outset that
                     Superintendent Marshall will not be content merely to answer
                     further questions tending to highlight the admitted human
                     and mechanical failures of communication which may have
                     contributed in some degree to the overall disaster.

        6.          If the bias is to be shifted, it will be necessary to bring
                     in positive evidence to show that all the alternative
                    theories put forward by various critics could not have been
                    put into effect on that day and that Superintendent
                    Marshall was faced with an impossible situation,
                     substantially different from 1988 for example.   Because of
                    the almost insuperable prejudice against the police caused
                    by a hasty interim report it will also be necessary to show
                    that the interim report was seriously flawed because most of
                    the available evidence concerning the behaviour of a
                    substantial number of fans outside the ground was suppressed
                    or ignored and not given proper prominence at the Enquiry.




                                               Page - 1
7.    The report indicates that 3,776 statements were taken.   It
      must be doubted whether the judge read all those statements.
      The considerable pressure on him to produce an interim
      report as quickly as possible, makes it likely that he only
      saw what was put before him.  My information is that a
      considerable body of evidence which would have shown the
      difference between the 1988 crowd and the 1989 crowd was
      suppressed.  That difference is vital to any 'hindsight'
      view of what the police ought to have done to control the
      1989 crowd and as to how effective any use of force or
      coercion would have been.

8.    It seems likely that if all available evidence had been
       placed before the judge, he would have taken a different
       view, even if only in the emphasis he gave to the various
       factors.  He did take a very different view in the final
       report - see Page 6, para 34 to Page 9 para 50.  It only
       remains for me to add that 'Hooliganism' takes many forms
       and that a belief that the Liverpool fans had been cheated
       in the ticket allocation coupled with an intention not to
       accept the position but to travel to the ground and attempt
       to gain entrance in one way or another is a form of
       hooliganism which could have the same consequences as a more
       easily recognized display.

9.    Most importantly, the senior police officers would not have
       felt that deep sense of injustice which they must have felt
       when the evidence was being distorted before their very eyes
       - no doubt in the laudable aim of not causing further
       distress to the relatives of the dead.

10.   As it was, not only was external evidence suppressed but the
      officers themselves, Superintendent Marshall in particular,
      were prevented from answering questions as soon as it
      appeared that they wished to call the behaviour of the fans
      into question.  It was obviously thought that the police
      were trying to excuse themselves - the interim report says
      as much.  If the evidence had been before the Enquiry, the
      judge (and incidentally the complainants) would have better
      understood what the police officers had endured and how it
      must have affected their decisions.  The officers' concern
      would not have been mistaken for guilty defensiveness or
      evasion, at least so far as Superintendent Marshall is
      concerned.

11.   I must therefore ask, in accordance with the
      well-established principle in cases in which natural justice
      governs procedure, that all the evidence be disclosed - not
      merely that part which favours the prosecutor's
      (complainant's) case.  I could obtain the evidence by the
      simple expedient of placing an advertisement in the local
      newspaper asking the people   who   volunteered statements to
      come forward but that would, of course, involve a
      duplication of time, effort   and   expense which ought to be
      avoided when the statements   are   already available.  Itwould
      also delay any final disposal of this matter by months if
      not years.



                               Page - 2
12.   I am anxious not to take that step for the further reason
      that it would undoubtedly be interpreted as an attack on the
      dead.  Simple logic ought to convince the complainants that
      their children who had obviously entered the ground early to
      be at the front, were not guilty of whatever is alleged
      against those who came late and who caused the unstoppable
      crush which was the actual cause of the deaths.
      Unfortunately, simple logic has deserted this matter and a
      great deal of bitterness has been instilled in the police as
      well as the relatives by this confusion of the behaviour of
      the innocent fans who died with that of the fans whose
      actions killed them, including, regrettably, some of the
      fans with excess alcohol who had arrived late and pushed
      their way to the front, where they died.

13.   I wish to make this distinction very clear.  There have been
      so many 'leaks' to the Press in recent times that it is more
      than likely that it will be made public that the findings of
      the enquiry will be challenged in some respects.  I
      therefore wish to place on record that the complainants'
      children and most of those who died are by the very
      circumstances of their deaths excluded from the charges of
      late and irresponsible arrival at the game which was a major
      factor of difference from previous games and which was the
      primary cause of the deaths.  It will however be
      unavoidable, given the seriousness of the charges against
      Superintendent Marshall, that if this enquiry proceeds, the
      truth concerning the fans mentioned at the end of the
      previous paragraph will come out - and may rub off onto
      other, innocent fans.

14.   It is not necessary for my purposes to show that any
      substantial part of the crowd outside the ground was very
      much the worse for drink.  The ordinary person's refusal
      to 'apply the brakes' when danger looms is well evidenced by
      motorway crashes, where drink is rarely a factor.  Here
      again, however, the truth cannot be ignored in such a
      serious matter and you must know that there is overwhelming
      evidence of serious abuse of alcohol by significant numbers
      of those who caused the crush.

15.   Similarly, one man may be humorous and considerate but two
      or more similar men, lovable though they may be
      individually, may act very differently together when
      challenged by authority.       Good humour with 'drink taken' (to
      quote the Judge's description of at least a substantial part
      of the crowd) turns very easily to violent aggression.       In
      addition to those who had seriously abused alcohol, there
      was a very significant number who fell into the category
      described by the judge.       Any experienced police officer
      knows that that category is more difficult to deal with than
      the out-and-out d r u n k s .




                                 Page - 3
16.   In view of what has already been published as a totally
      unrealistic picture of gentle and well-behaved fans, who
      would have responded to a simple barrier at some distance
      from the ground, it would be foolhardy in the extreme to try
      to deal with the disciplinary allegations without presenting
      the real picture.  It is necessary to counter the almost
      total refusal to recognize the impossibility of some 70
      men in the turnstile area controlling 5,000 men who did not
      wish to be controlled.  That unrealistic view can be
      explained by the intense emotion which surrounded the
      death of so many people and the very human desire not to
      cast the slightest reflection on the dead.  There was also a
      perceived necessity for special pleading, against all
      experience, that English fans could be trusted to return to
      European football and therefore needed to be exonerated from
      all blame for Hillsborough.

17.   Incidents world-wide as well as in this country show that
      there is a particularly aggressive attitude on the part of a
      larger proportion of football fans than the fans of any
      other sport or musical gathering.  Violence and tragedy are
      more likely among football supporters than in any other
      sphere, except political gatherings.  There is much
      experience, on the continent and in the United Kingdom, of
      attempting to police crowds (usually football or political)
      without consensus.  It leads inevitably to the use of
      tear-gas, riot shields, rubber bullets and the like.  There
      is much evidence to suggest that any attempt to hold up or
      divert the crowd at Hillsborough, by whatever means, could
      have led to scenes like the London poll-tax riots,
      in addition to the deaths.

18.   We are obviously in a position to call evidence from
      experienced police officers, not directly involved in this
      matter, that if arresting every unruly person were the
      answer (which, as shown above, it isn't) an allocation of
      70 men is hopelessly inadequate.  You yourself will be
      familiar with the dilemma that every arrest which is made
      takes at least one officer away, more likely two or three,
      and that this self-perpetuating spiral of diminution of
      forces makes the Enquiry's over-simple recommendations
      impractical.  If the whole force of available men had been
      diverted to the Liverpool fans, which, of course, was
      impractical - and could have been criticised as
      pre-judging their behaviour - other areas would have been
      unpoliced and the danger of riot would have been increased.

19.   Recommendations 45 and 47 - The police should 'prevent., any
      over-crowding ..and ..take appropriate steps to remedy it'
      and 'ticketless fans should not be allowed to enter ..'
      are virtually impossible of attainment without the
      co-operation of the crowd.  They were certainly not
      attainable at the time without the benefit of the 61
      recommendations which apply to other parties involved.




                               Page - 4
20.      The same impossibility applies to the suggestions in the
         disciplinary notices, which state what the complainants
         allege ought to have been done as if it were a simple matter
         to achieve.  It is worth repeating the other dilemma - that
         increasing the number of police officers can also lead to
         greater confrontation and public disorder.

21   .   If these complaints do proceed, I fear that further distress
         will be caused for the very reason that the general public
         (at the very least those who live in the vicinity of the
         Hillsborough ground) is mostly sympathetic to the view that
         football fans are more prone to violence than others - and
         they may not differentiate between the innocent who were
         killed and those who survived or died in circumstances
         which confirm their guilt.

22   .   It is difficult to see how these internal disciplinary
         proceedings, which have substantial protection from
         disclosure in the civil proceedings, can advance the cause
         of those interested in future safety.  Apart from the
         Enquiry itself, there is still the inquest to come and the
         civil proceedings, which will concentrate the minds of
         anyone who has to organize a similar event in future.
         Superintendent Marshall will never forget that day and, if
         he has anything to do with it, will strain every nerve to
         ensure that nothing like this happens again.  The Police
         Force and the public need his experience in organizing
         future events, but will be unable to utilize him whilst
         these charges remain hanging over him.

23.      In the final report, blame is allocated widely, and very
         evenly spread, but no-one else appears to be 'on trial'
         except in civil proceedings which are already assured of
         success against someone because the behaviour of
         third-parties who cannot be identified and who are uninsured
         will not affect the complainants' cases.

24.      It is strange that the police are singled out by the
         complainants when out of 76 specific recommendations for the
         future, only 15 apply directly to the police and virtually
         all the recommendations are stated more in hope than in
         expectation that their implementation will cure the problem.

25.      The complainants initiated these complaints after reading
         the interim report, which is understandable.  They did not
         attend the match (or if they did, they were with the orderly
         majority inside, not with the disorderly minority outside)
         and did not have first-hand knowledge of what it was like
         for a 'thin blue line' of police officers confronted by an
         unruly, to say the least, crowd of many thousands.   If all
         the evidence had been placed before the Enquiry, the
         complainants themselves would have had proper material on
         which to base their own view.




                                  Page - 5
As it is they were motivated by the interim report and by an
insensitive Press - not by the final report - and they might
take a different view if they had access to all the
evidence.  As an alternative to a full-scale enquiry into
the behaviour of the minority of fans who caused these
deaths, you might like to consider showing the complainants
samples of the evidence which was not made public at the
enquiry.
When they have considered any additional evidence which you
feel able to let them see, we would like them to read the
final report carefully and take a fresh decision as to
whether Superintendent Marshall is deserving of their
continued attention in these disciplinary proceedings.

If the complainants continue to insist that one or two
individuals (police officers) out of the dozens, at least,
of persons in various capacities between w hom the final
report shares the blame, should be punished in addition to
the punishment they have already endured by being present
and having even the smallest contribution towards these
deaths on their consciences, Superintendent Marshall
understand their feelings.   When their dead, and totally
innocent relatives have been confused in the Press with the
sort of football hooligans that everyone deplores, it must
have hurt the complainants very much.

However, he cannot go so far as letting himself be
convicted, whilst others go free, and he hopes the
complainants will not take it personally if he does not
accept their complaints but fights with all his might to
preserve his previous exemplary character and his
self-respect.

 Superintendent Marshall suffered a period of intense
 vilification at the outset because he was accused of
 opening the gates and virtually causing the tragedy
 single-handed.   As is now known, his part was to request the
 gates to be opened as a safety measure.   This was a request
 taken only after the most careful consideration of the
 alternatives and under intense pressure from colleagues who
 were at the forefront of the crush.   It went against
 everything that the police were trying to achieve in
 preventing ticketless persons from gaining entry and he was
 most reluctant to give in to them.   Eventually, he saw a
 young boy being passed over the heads of the crowd,
 apparently unconscious, or dead for all he knew, and he
 could delay no longer.   He made his request, which was
 entirely the proper course for him to take.   His action in
 that respect has now been completely vindicated by the
  Enquiry.  All the evidence concerning the opening of the
 gates was available, on video, to show the true position an
 he was personally assured by the Judge and by counsel that
  it was appreciated that he had no choice in the
  circumstances, or many more deaths would have occurred
  outside the gates.




                           Page - 6
31.    If he has to continue to defend his actions, I am confident
       that he will be able to show that those who suggest that
       other courses would have provided a solution to the
       problem are just as misguided as those who suggested leaving
       the gates closed for the dead to pile up against them.

32.   The complainants might like to consider whether they are at
      present at their maximum position, with full public and
      private sympathy.  There could certainly be a backlash, if
      not against the complainants themselves, who happen to
      represent totally innocent victims, against some of the
      other dead fans who were not free from blame.

33.   If they wish to proceed, I am sorry that without wishing to
       appear too critical of their present complaints, I must ask
       them to be more specific.  As presently worded, the
       complaints are too vague to be answered, except the one
       concerning the gate, which Superintendent Marshall can
       answer by reference to the findings of the Enquiry, as well
       as the additional evidence which he will bring forward.

34.   Respectfully, what is required is something as specific as,
      "You should not have requested the opening of the gates", to
      which a specific answer can be given.

35.   If, for example, it is suggested that a barrier or barriers
       should have been erected at certain points, please specify
       at which points and of what m a t e r i a l , size and strength the
       barrier should have been constructed to withstand the
       pressure.  Please also indicate what steps should have been
       taken to monitor alternative routs to the ground, taking
       into account every possible way around the proposed
       barriers, with a plan and detailed indications of the number
       of men, with what equipment, that would be required to man
       each barrier and each alternative route.

36.   It would be useful if the complainants could be shown the
      comparative videos of crowd build-up at the 1988 match as
      well as the 1989 match and if they could indicate what
      evidence they suggest the police had in advance to forecast
      the difference.

37.   Obviously, without knowing precisely how the complainants
       suggest that a different plan would have guaranteed success,
       it is not possible to answer the complaints, except in the
      general terms of this letter or by bringing forward all the
      available evidence, over a period of some weeks, at the
      proposed interview session.

38.   I must reserve the right, on seeing the complainants
      detailed proposals, to request further clarification if the
      proposals are still generalized.   I am sorry to be so
      demanding but it must be remembered that Superintendent
      Marshall is faced with possible manslaughter charges in
      respect of 95 deaths.   It should perhaps not be necessary to
      apologize for any proper and legal steps which are
      considered necessary for his defence.



                                  Page - 7
39.    Lord Justice Taylor rightly observed that the policing of
       football matches has become a military operation.  The fact
       that this country, which has so far failed to succeed in
       this military operation, also failed to respond perfectly
       to every military situation in the last world-war and that
       we lost many encounters against superior strength is well
       documented.  However, by concentrating on beating the enemy
       instead of wasting our time and effort in fighting each
       other, we eventually succeeded.

40.     In respect of Hillsborough, the Judge inevitably found that
        all those who had responsibility for public safety failed in
        almost every case to achieve a standard of perfection which
        'might' - and I stress 'might' - have avoided the tragedy.
        I am bound to observe that the final report, which was not
        subject to the same pressure of time, is much more objective
        and even-handed than the interim report which unfairly
        singled out the police.  It seems that mature reflection has
        revealed the obvious - that the police alone could not have
        put into effect all the recommendations which have now been
        made.  It has taken 95 deaths and a - N i n t h 1 - public
        enquiry to make the football clubs, the Football League and
        local authorities recognize that overall numbers and the
        standard of accommodation - to name but two factors which
        are totally outside police control - need substantial
        revision.

41.     A very significant feature, which must occur to anyone
        prepared to be impartial and objective, is that the various
        other agencies who are criticised in the final report had
        months or years in which to consider their position, and
        still got it wrong.  Superintendent Marshall had a matter of
        minutes, in the most extraordinary and traumatic
        circumstances, to make his decisions.  I am sure I need not
        say more on this point - it is so obvious,

42.     Superintendent Marshall is not prepared to join in a
        'fishing expedition' confined to bolstering the allegation
        that the police alone were responsible for what occurred and
        that the fans outside the ground played no culpable part,
        but he is prepared to co-operate in ascertaining, for the
        benefit of those who have to control crowds at future
        events, which of the complainants proposals are practical -
        at what probable cost in money and co-operation from the
        other agencies involved - and which are merely uninformed
        c riticism which is incapable of practical implementation and
        which can only serve to make matters worse.

Yours f a i th f ul ly
VINCENT HALE

Detective Chief Superintendent M . J . F o s t e r ,
West Midlands Police,
Hillsborough Enquiry Team,
Nechells Green Police Station,
Fowler Street,
BIRMINGHAM
B7 5DA


                                      Page - 8
