       .

               .




  I5   I
■si6       ■
                  states:-


1.   I am employed as a Control Assistant for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   I joined SYMAS on              1985.


4.   I was not on duty on 15th April.          I had arrived back from
     shopping with my fiance, David Jones, who also works for
     SYMAS, shortly after 1500.    We put the television on and saw
     scenes on Grandstand from a football ground.          The pictures
     went off and came back a few minutes later and it was only
     then that   we realised      that   the    pictures    were    from
     Hillsborough.


5.   David asked me to telephone SYMAS Control and I did so to
     tell them that he was on his way and I asked if they wanted
     me to come in as well.   They said that they did.


6.   We arrived at Control at about 1530 and I went straight to
     work.   The telephones were ringing constantly.       By the time
     we had arrived the incident room had already been set up and
     Mr Clarke and             were in there.                      was on
     the emergency control board and                     on the normal
     outpatients board.
7.   I do not recall receiving any calls to do with the incident
     other than press calls.   A separate telephone was set up to
     deal with press calls shortly after I came in.   I also dealt
     with a number of "routine" 999 calls.


Dated this   %    day of          1989.
DATE OF BIRTH_____________
STANDARDS AND EFFICIENCY OFFICER
DONCASTER AREA (SYMAS)

1.   I have been with the service since 1971.    Initially I was on
     ambulance duty at Corporation Street, Sheffield.    I obtained
     the Miller certificate in 1973 and then moved to Longley
     Station as an ambulance man.      In 1978 I was promoted to
     Leading Ambulance man at Parkway ambulance station.   At that
     time I attended a course at Keighley and obtained the
     ambulance aid instructors certificate.     This enables me to
     teach ambulance personnel.


2.   In 1984 I was promoted to station officer at Longley
     Station.     I was there for three years and in 1987 I was
     promoted to the present post based at Symas H.Q.           in
     Rotherham.     I am also registered for teaching staff first
     aid under the Health and Safety at Work Scheme.


3.   My duties at present mainly involve liaising between the
     Ambulance Service and hospitals and the district.


4.   At present I work 0900 to 1700 Monday to Friday.


5.   In July 1986                  now deputy chief at Hampshire, P
     Higgins and I attended Hillsborough liaising with the ground
     staff to evaluate the ground.       At that time we had the
Bradford incident in mind. The purpose was to prepare a plan
for a Major Incident at the ground.       Representatives of the
police and fire service also attended.          We were introduced
to the club secretary who left us with the groundsman who
showed us round.


Whilst going round the ground we decided that the gymnasium
building was best suited for a casualty holding area as it
had good vehicle access from Penistone Road.        Also it was a
sufficiently large building to double as a makeshift
mortuary.     Another advantage was that the Herries Road Bus
Depot could be used as a holding area for ambulances.


Following      the   tour   we   were   taken   to see the Club
physiotherapist,                 in his room.    At that point I
believe that the Police and Fire Service representatives
left.                   Mr Higgins and I spoke to
about Ambulance Service cover,                      told
that we could provide Ambulance Service resources for the
ground, but that this would involve a charge.                 said
that the Club would not wish to pay a fee and that they were
happy with their current arrangements with the St. John's
Ambulance Brigade which attended their matches and which
gave first aid training to the Club's personnel at the
beginning of each season.        I|e said that whenever the Club
had needed the ambulance service they had relied upon making
a 999 call.
8   .                      told          that, if we could not actually
        provide an ambulance at the ground we would like to have two
        officers inside the ground in the interests of crowd safety.
        He said that if an ambulance was required they would be able
        to contact Control to arrange for an ambulance more quickly
        than the Club could do so.


9.                        suggested that the Club should provide us with
        two tickets in order that we could put liaison officers in
        the ground so that we could get resources to the ground as
        quickly as possible if the need arose.                said that
        if                   wrote to the Club then he could arrange for
        two tickets to be provided.


10.     We discussed where these complimentary seats should be.
                offered us two seats at the back of the trainers box
        at pitch level but we asked for seats in the stand from
        where we could see more and communications would be better.


11.     Following the meeting Station Officer Higgins and I received
        two season tickets.        The tickets were in row T, seats 152
        and 153.        Season tickets do not cover cup matches and when
        the first cup match came along I contacted the club who
        pro v i d e d   complimentary     tickets;    since   then   two
        complimentary tickets have been left for collection for all
        cup games with the exception of the F.A. Cup semi finals.
12.   In 1987 I was transferred to SYMAS headquarters.    Paul Eason
      replaced me as Station Officer at Longley and he took over
      joint responsibility for Hillsborough with Mr Higgins.


13.   Following the meeting in July 1986 Mr Higgins and I
      completed the Hillsborough Plan which included points
      discussed at the meeting as well as routes to and from the
      hospitals based on access, traffic flow and the priority
      hospital.     Priority was Northern General followed by Royal
      Hallamshire.


14.   In the week leading up to the Hillsborough incident I worked
      the normal Monday to Friday.   On Saturday the 15th I was off
      duty and returned home at about 1650.     On arrival my phone
      was ringing and I answered it and spoke to
      control     assistant.     She asked me to go to Rotherham
      District General to liaise with the casualty department as
      they   were    expecting   taking   casualties     there   from
      Hillsborough.


15.   I immediately changed in to uniform and left.        I went to
      Rotherham ambulance station to a staff car in order to make
      radio contact with control.    I proceeded straight across to
      Rotherham District Hospital.     On arrival at casualty I saw
      a police car and parked alongside in order to liaise with
      the officers inside.
4




    16.   I called control on emergency channel to confirm my arrival.
          I asked what channel they wanted me on and they said to
          remain on channel two.     I introduced myself to the police
          officer inside the police car and       I then went in to
          casualty and introduced myself to the Sister in charge.      She
          seemed a little surprised saying they had been told they
          would not be receiving any Hillsborough casualties.


    17.   I proceeded down to reception and tried to contact Control
          by phone, but I was unable to get through.       I decided that
          the switchboard must be busy and did not try any further.


    18.   I then returned to my car and turned up the radio and
          maintained contact with control and with the two police
          officers.     After a few minutes another police car arrived
          and the officer introduced himself as P C
          continued to stay with the SYMAS vehicle and the police car
          remained.


    19.   After a while I went into casualty and found that P C
                      had a telephone extension and had a link with
          police casualty. At that time it did not appear that any
          casualties would be brought to Rotherham General after      all.
          I radioed control to tell that P.C.              had established
          a phone link and that they could contact me on extension
          316.   I then returned to the office with P.C.
2 0 . At    1926 P.C                received a call from
                 who is a fellow Standards and Efficiency Officer who
         was located at the Hallamshire Hospital.
         The message was for us to stand down as we would not be
         receiving any casualties.


21 . P.C.                informed the hospital staff and I then
         returned the Car to Rotherham station.            On arrival   I
         telephoned Control and spoke to the Control Superintendent
         and informed him that we had been told to stand down.


22   .   I proceeded down to Control.      I had no further involvement
         with the incident itself and left for home at approximately
         2050.


Dated this             day of   ^              1989.
                             was born        |.   I am a part
time ambulanceman with no qualifications as such, but I have
attended a three week course in first aid training.      I am
also involved in part time catering.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was at the Hillsborough
football ground.      I was there in my capacity of part time
caterer.     I was employed in the Nottingham Forest Executive
box as a wine waiter.


I completed these duties at about 1450 and then I went into
South Stand, to watch the match.    I did not have a seat, but
stood near one of the entrances.


The game kicked off but it had not been in progress long
when I became aware of something happening in the West Stand
at the Leppings Lane end.    I saw people come over the top of
the fencing as if to invade the pitch.


It soon became apparent that it was not a pitch invasion
because I saw people with what appeared to be injured arms,
and others limping.


I saw the St.John's Ambulance Brigade attending and I made
my way down through the players tunnel to see if I could
help them.
7.    I walked across the pitch towards the West Stand.   As I got
      closer to it I could see what appeared to be bodies lying on
      the pitch.     My attention was drawn to a young St.John's
      ambulance woman who was attending a small boy who appeared
      to have stopped breathing.     She was giving mouth to mouth
      resuscitation and I began chest massage.


8.    We were able to get the boy breathing again and then put him
      in the recovery position.    We stayed with him for a short
      time to ensure that he continued to breath.     We left    him
      with a St.John's boy, with instructions to call us if the
      patient stopped breathing again.


9.    Another patient was lying nearby and was not breathing.     We
      tried to resuscitate him but that was not successful.


10.   We moved to another patient andwere joined by a man who said
      he was a doctor.     He took over the chest massage and I ran
      back through the players tunnel to telephone control.     I was
      shown a telephone and dialed 999.      I was put through to
      ambulance control at Rotherham.


11.   I spoke to someone in control, I told them who I was and
      where I was.       I described to them that it was a major
      incident and that I had seen possibly forty people dead.
      Control told me that they were already aware that it was a
      Major Incident.
12.   Up to then I had only seen a Red Cross ambulance.         I ran
      back out onto the pitch to the West Stand.


13.   The situation was chaos; - casualties were lying all over
      the place.      The police, St.Johns and many members of the
      public were doing their best to give what help they could,
      to the injured people.


14.   I tried to help whoever I could.      I remember a doctor and I
      were trying to revive a young girl, but without success.
      We left her to go to another casualty but the young girl's
      father was very distressed and requested that we go back to
      to his daughter.       Unfortunately there was nothing we could
      do for her.


15.   We were made aware of the fact that the fire service had
      opened up a route near the South Stand close the police
      control point to enable stretchers to be carried outr.
16.   Iassisted a young man with apparent chest injuries onto a
      St.John's stretcher and was joined by some injured fans.
      Together we carried the stretcher into the South Stand and
      past the police control point.     We were directed this way by
      a fireman, who seemed to be in charge.
17.   We went      outside    where   I noticed   other   patients   on
      stretchers.    I also noticed that close to Leppings Lane a
      number of ambulances were collecting even more casualties.
18.   It was obvious to me that we had to get our stretchers down
      to Leppings Lane so I mobilised everyone           I could and
      carried all the stretchers down to the ambulances close
      Leppings Lane.


19.   I paseed one casualty to a Leading Ambulanceman and then I
      tended a line of casualties who were along a wall of the
      inside perimeter of the ground.       There were patients also
      along the other fence along side the river, who were being
      tended to by ambulance men.


20.   I was intending to go back to the west stand when I noticed
      an ambulance driven by                       He saw me and asked
      what I was doing.      I told him and he suggested we team up
      and transport sitting patients to hospital.


21.   We collected a number of sitting patients and then drove out
      onto Penistone Road.    We had four nurses on board as well as
      13 patients.


22.   We proceeded to Royal Hallamshire hospital where we left the
      nurses and casualties.      With a police escort we travelled
      without problem back to the ground.


23.   We then drove back to Leppings Lane,    on     the instruction of
      control after we had reported "green".           We travelled as
      quickly as we could but did not have blue light or horns.
24   .   We drove into the ground off Leppings Lane and I noticed
         alongside the fence by the river that a morgue of sorts had
         been established.    Police officers were with the bodies and
         a tarpaulin cover had been erected to screen the bodies.


25.                      went to assess the situation and I tried to
         contact control by radio.     I could not get through.       I
         could hear control but I do not think they could hear me.


26.              same back and I told him I could not get through to
         Control.     There were no more casualties for us to transport
         from the Leppings Lane end of the ground so we drove round
         to Penistone Road.


27.      Ambulances were parked on the dual carriageway on Penistone
         Road.     We parked behind these vehicles and went into the
         ground.     We were then informed that we were to stand by at
         Herries Road bus depot.


28.      I asked an officer if I was needed any further.    He   said no
         so I walked back over to the South Stand where I joined my
         brother in the stand.


29.      The St John's Ambulance Brigade worked very hard    as did the
         police, the fire service and the ambulance service.
Dated the   dav of   1989
                       states:-

1.   My date of birth is

2.   I am employed as a Control Officer for South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service.   I have had 29 years experience
with the Ambulance Service, originally with Sheffield Corporation
and since 1974 with SYMAS, following the creation of the
Metropolitan Districts.     I was promoted to Control Officer in
1975 and continue in that role, working from the SYMAS Central
Control in Heather Close, Rotherham.

3. My duties involve the monitoring of all emergency work and
the deployment of vehicles. I am also involved in the deployment
of ambulances on non-urgent cases such as out-patient work. I am
responsible for instructing ambulance crews when they are mobile
and I communicate with them from the radio control. I work on a
shift pattern according to a 12 week rota and I am responsible
for the whole of South Yorkshire.

4. On Saturday the 15th April 1989 I was scheduled to work the
afternoon shift from 1400 hours to 2200 hours. This was a normal
shift in the 12 week rota.

5.   I came on duty at 1400, at which time the situation was
normal for a Saturday afternoon.     There were no special
arrangements affecting my duties because of the semi-final at
Hillsborough.

6.   The first message from the football ground was received
shortly after 1500 from Mr Higgins. I think he was using a pocket
set.   He simply said the ground was restless and asked for an
additional vehicle to stand by near the ground.     I understood
from this that there might be a possibility of crowd trouble, but
I knew that the service already had a vehicle at the ground with
a further vehicle standing by at Middlewood only a quarter of a
mile from the ground.   This information all contained on the
control board in front of me and at the beginning of my duty I
had phoned all the stations to check that the expected crews had
turned in.

7. Shortly afterwards Mr.Higgins called again and asked for the
ambulance standing by at Middlewood to attend the football ground
urgently.   I instructed my control assistant to despatch this
vehicle and he telephoned Middlewood station to pass on the
instruction. Normally an ambulance can be mobile within about 3
minutes and once mobilised the crew always radio in to confirm.
The Middlewood Ambulance Crew confirmed in the normal way.     By
this time I had received a request from Mr.Higgins to ask the
ambulance to go to the gymnasium.      I personally did not know
where the gymnasium was located, but I relayed the instruction to
the ambulance crew and they did not question it. The instruction
did not seem contradictory to me since I have not been to the
ground for a number of years and so far as I was aware the gym
could perfectly well have been at the Leppings Lane end.

8.   At about 1506 the Superintendent in control, Mr Clarke,
sitting in the telephone console at the side of me, received a
call from the Police.   He said to me that they had requested a
fleet of vehicles.   The Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, Mr
Hopkins, was also in the control room.    He also heard Mr Clarke
telling me the police message he had received.       We were all
surprised that the Police did not give further details and Mr
Hopkins asked me to contact Mr.Eason for more information.

9.   I believe I radioed Mr.Higgins again and asked him to
investigate at the ground.

10. I recall a second phone call came from the Police which was
taken by one of the assistants on duty.       I overheard the
conversation in the background but the message was not repeated
to me.   I think it was on similar lines to the first call to
Mr.Clarke.

11.   Whenever a request for an ambulance is received by any of
the assistances on duty, the assistant receiving the call fills
out a form AS1 (Ambulance Service 1) and hands it to me to
action. No form was passed to me as a result of the second call
from the Police and I therefore assumed it must have been merely
an informative message and not a request for attendance.      All
calls are recorded in a written log and are also taped. It will
therefore be possible to check the timing of these various calls.

12.   Following   my request for information, Mr.Eason reported
back within a couple of minutes. He said word to the effect that
"people have been crushed, there may be fatalities". It was
obvious that a large number of ambulances were required and it
was clearly a major incident. The automatic reaction to this is
to deploy as many vehicles as possible and to follow the
Emergency Disaster Procedure which is laid down for such
contingencies.  We treated the Hillsborough problem as a major
incident without knowing how many injured were involved.

13. I have received training for an emergency disaster procedure
through mock-up exercises and in the form of a written check
list.   The last exercise I participated in was about 12 to 18
months ago. I did not have the check list by me on Saturday 15th
April because it is a standard procedure and I know it by heart.
A copy is kept in the Superintendents office for any member of
staff to look at. I did not leave the radio at that time as my
job was to stay at my post.

14.   On receiving Mr.Higgins' message I immediately began
mobilising vehicles from the ambulance stations at Parkway,
Batemoor, Middlewood, Maltby and Rotherham. All stations were
instructed:- "Respond red to an incident at Sheffield Wednesday
Football Ground, gymnasium entrance".  The instruction "respond
red" indicates an emergency.

15.   I believe I first got in touch with a Parkway Ambulance
which was on its way back to the station.   The driver did not
know where the gym entrance was and asked for clarification.  I
therefore radioed Mr.Higgins' to confirm the location of the
Gymnasium entrance and he replied "the last entrance on
Pennistone Road out of town". I relayed this information to the
driver of the Parkway vehicle and included it in all later
messages.

16.   The number of ambulances available differs from shift to
shift.   I did not know how many were being despatched from the
various stations, but I specifically retained 3 vehicles in
Sheffield to cover the normal domestic work and instructed all
other available vehicles to be dispatched.      Later others were
ordered to stand by as they returned to their stations.

17. By about 1515 I was in a position to take an overview of
the situation and established that I had sent five ambulances to
the gymnasium. I was also aware that Control O f f i c e r h a d
despatched a further five vehicles which had been on out-patient
work. He confirmed this to me verbally as he works in the same
room.   In other words, one ambulance had been despatched from
emergency duty from each station.         Further vehicles were
despatched as soon as they returned from domestic calls.         I
believe about nine emergency vehicles, not including vehicles
from out-patient duty, eventually attended from the South
Yorkshire area. For purposes of comparison, there are only about
15 ambulances available on a full shift and I had retained one in
each station to handle domestic calls in the ordinary course of
duty.


                                     4
18. Towards 1530 further vehicles returned to Barnsley and
Hoyland stations and I despatched these vehicles to the football
ground automatically, without receiving any further request from
Alpha 4.

19. At about this time it became obvious that it would no longer
be possible to control all these vehicles from my radio.    I was
still required to handle domestic calls and the normal channels
were overloaded. I said to Mr Clarke that we had better operate
on ERC. ERC is the Emergency Reserve Channel. Control does not
automatically switch to this channel on notification of a major
incident but only when it becomes necessary because of the number
of vehicles involved.    Mr Clarke replied that he would take
                 one of the control assistants, to the incident
room to help and they would control the operation from there.
The incident room is permanently set up for this type of
emergency and fully equipped.      From this time on vehicles
attending Hillsborough were controlled by Mr Clarke and
      from the incident room and the operation was taken out of
my hands.

20. Nevertheless ambulances were still calling on my channel, so
I gave a general call to all mobiles at once, telling them to go
to ERC. This was at about 15.30 and I made two further similar
calls within 5 minutes to ensure all crews were informed.     The
message I gave was as follows:       "To any mobiles attending
incident Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground would they change to
ERC channel - message end". I did not expect to receive replies
to this as the crews would immediately know to change channels.

21. I then continued my normal duties, organising the Ambulance
Service in connection with emergency calls which had no relation
to the Hillsborough incident.    I continued to use the ordinary
emergency channel, which is called channel 33.     Even on this
channel I continued to receive some calls in relation to
Hillsborough. They were mostly from Ambulance crews returning to
stations from domestic duties or volunteers reporting in.     As
soon as the emergency plan came into operation the control
assistants working under me began contacting off-duty staff and
notifying hospitals and many of these people reported in on
channel 33 in the first instance.    I continued to receive this
type of call until about 1615 and gave all callers the same
message to change to ERC channel for instructions.

22.   After 16.15 I had no further involvement except for an
occasional message from Officers on the scene who used channel 33
because they could not get through on ERC.       I passed on all
messages via other members of staff verbally through the hatch
into the incident room.

23. The deployment of personnel is not part of my duties save in
so far as concerns the relaying of instructions to mobile
ambulance teams.   However I remember that when I despatched the
Hoyland vehicle it was at Barnsley District General Hospital and
the driver took a medical team with him to the ground.

24.   I continued my normal duties until 2200 hours, and during
the whole of the shift my only involvement with the Hillsborough
incident was in feeding ambulances into the ground, as I have
described above.   I did not play any part in getting ambulances
away from the ground to the various hospitals as by this time
control had been taken over by the Major Incident Room. Also I
had no personal contact with ambulances coming in from other
regions, since they would have radioed in on ERC.    This is the
nationwide channel which is universally available in cases of
grave emergency.    I was not involved in requesting assistance
from these other areas.     My chief concern throughout the
afternoon was maintaining normal services for emergencies
occurring unrelated to the match.   I had no idea as to what was
happening at the ground and was so busy with my ordinary work
that I had no information of the number of fatalities until I had
time to enquire at around 1700

25.   I concluded by shift at the normal time of 22.00 and went
home.



Dated this         dav of                    1989

Signed




                                    7
                     aged 26 will say:-

1.   I was born on

2.   I am a qualified Ambulance man. I obtained the Miller
Certificate following attendance at the compulsory residential
course, completed the probationary year and I was made up as
qualified in October 1987

3.   I had no previous medical experience prior to joining the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

4.   I joined the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
in February 1985.   1            Maltby and Wath Station on days
until October 198#, when I moved to Rotherham where I have worked
since providing emergency Ambulance cover.

5. On Friday 14th and Saturday 15th April 1989 I was working the
evening shift from 1800 hours to 0200 hours the following
morning.

6. The first knowledge I had of the Hillsborough incident was a
telephone call at approximately 1545.      My sister-in-law had
telephoned and whilst she was speaking to me there was a report
about the Hillsborough incident on her television. She told me
that there had been a report of many injuries and some deaths at
the football ground.   I immediately rang the control room at
Rotherham and although I cannot remember who I spoke to I was
told assistance was needed. I was instructed to report to my own
station as soon as possible.   Rotherham station is just a short
distance away from the control room on Moorgate Road. I believe
this conversation took place at about 1600 and I quickly tidied
away the tools I had been using, washed, made arrangements for
care of my young son and drove to the station.      I arrived at
approximately 1640 and reported to control by telephone.   I was
told by control to wait at my station.
7. At 1700              Arrived at the station.   He reported his
arrival to control and we provided cover for the Rotherham area
until 1800 when       Left and              joined me as my crew
member.  My shift began at 1800 and was uneventful.     I watched
television and I saw on the screen the reported events of the
tragedy at Hillsborough football ground.

8. At 0200 on Sunday the 16th my shift ended and      and I were
asked If we would be prepared to report to Hillsborough football
ground and help move the bodies. I cannot recall who at control
made this request.

9. At 2.20 a.m. we drove our vehicle to Hillsborough,
drove and we approached the ground from Herrles Road turning
right at Penistone Road and left Into Hillsborough gaining access
through an entrance between terraced houses. We pulled up behind
the North Stand In the area of the Gym and were met by Station
Officer Paul Eason. I asked Paul Eason what he wanted       and I
to do.   He told both of us that we should remove our cots and
place them at the door to the Gym.    This was the door furthest
away from the North Stand and was used as the exit door from the
temporary mortuary.   We removed the cots from the vehicle and
took them to the Gym door. Station Officer Paul Eason told us to
stand by as required.

10. There were other crews in the ground and they were there to
do the same job as       m d I.   I noticed that the Police were
controlling the access and exit from the ground. We returned to
our vehicle and Station Officer Eason walked up to the vehicle
and told both of us to report to the Gym.     The system was that
two bodies were loaded into cots, the third body was loaded onto
the vehicle, in between the two cots on the floor of the vehicle.
Each body was accompanied by a Police Officer.
11.   Station Officer Eason and Station Officer
were organising and coordinating the evacuation of bodies from
the temporary mortuary.   The Police responsibl
transported them from the makeshift mortuary Into the cots and
loaded them onto the vehicle.     The Police, as far as I were
aware, were responsible for coordinating the evacuation of the
bodies with Station Officer Paul Eason who checked each body into
the Ambulance and recorded the Police Constables number before
the vehicle left the ground for the Medico Legal Centre.      The
bodies were driven to the Medico Legal Centre and we made five
trips carrying 15 bodies in approximately three and a half hours.



12.   We were stood down at 0610 on 16th April.      The order to
stand down came from control. using channel 2.     Our Ambulance
call sign was Rogar 503 and the Ambulance number 442. We used
channel 2 throughout the night to communicate with control and we
experienced no problems.

Dated this    <jay Qf April 1989.

Signec                   P.<?r.<?.**.7 ^
                 states:
     I was born on                               I am a Qualified
     Ambulancewoman with SYMAS.    I joined SYMAS in October, 1983
     as a cadet, and remained a cadet for two years.       After the
     two year period I was seconded to Hoyland Station in
     Barnsley where I remained for approximately 18 months.       At
     this point in time I was still unqualified and my main tasks
     involved moving geriatric patients and ordinary out­
     patients.     Thereafter I moved to Middlewood Station in
     Sheffield and proceeded to become a Qualified Ambulancewoman
     in or about September,   1987.     At the beginning of this
     year,   I was transferred to Longley Station where I have
     remained.
2.   Whilst a cadet, I did a lot of in depth theory in anatomy, I
     was taught basic ambulance aid and resuscitation.        I took
     an ambulance driving course and obtained the Gold Award in
     the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme.       After ceasing as a
     cadet, in order to gain experience I travelled at all times
     with a Qualified Ambulance person.      During this period, I
     became involved in accident and emergency treatment, but at
     all times with the assistance of a Qualified Ambulance
     person.
3.   I was on duty on Saturday 15th April, 1989, and my hours
                 \ S O O ± o OZOOOJM.
     were to be 0600- .-1409.       I worked the same shift on Friday
     14th April, 1989.     I was at home on the afternoon of the
     incident,    and first became aware of the situation at
     approximately 1645 when I turned on the local radio to find
out the football score.     As I became aware of the Incident,
I Immediately put my uniform together and travelled down to
Longley as quickly as possible In my own car, a distance of
approximately 5 miles.       I arrived at Longley station at
approximately 1715.
One of my colleagues,                      who had also heard
about the incident, arrived some five minutes after myself.
Upon arrival,     I informed Control that the 1800 shift was
available to go out on the road.     I was informed by Control
that we were not required down at Hillsborough, although a
few minutes later at approximately 1745, I received a call
from Control informing us to go down to Northern General
Hospital, intensive care unit, which was approximately one
mile away.   I drove the ambulance directly to the hospital,
and when we arrived at the hospital we had to pass by the
Accident and Emergency Department, at which point we were
asked whether we had arrived to transfer a patient to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital for a scan.     We replied yes, and
were then informed that we were to take a patient from the
resuscitation room.       We proceeded to this room and loaded
the casualty on to a cot, and put the patient into the back
of the ambulance with a team of two doctors and a nurse.
We drove on emergency to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, a
distance of approximately 4/5 miles. I drove to the Scan
Department, and                    and I unloaded the patient,
with the medical team behind.      The casualty was on a heart
monitor and was receiving oxygen therapy.      The patient was
taken straight in to the Scan Department, where we handed
the patient over together with whatever notes we had in our
possession.               and I then went back to the ambulance,
radioed Control and were requested to go back directly to
Northern General Hospital, again to the Intensive Care Unit
in order to transfer another patient to the Scan Department
at Royal Hallamshire Hospital.       We proceeded straight back
to Northern General Hospital         to pick up this second
casualty, again with a medical team in attendance.          This
patient was also on a heart monitor and was receiving oxygen
therapy.      I drove immediately back to the Royal Hallamshire
Hospital, Scan Department, unloaded the patient from the
ambulance with the help of                       and handed the
patient over to the medical team in the hospital.         On our
return to our ambulance vehicle we again radioed Control who
again requested us to go back to Northern General Hospital,
Intensive Car Unit, in order to take a third patient to the
Scan Department at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.            We
carried out exactly the same process as before.
After      transferring    the third patient     to the Royal
Hallamshire Hospital, on return to our ambulance, we radioed
Control and were requested to return to Longley Station,
which we duly did.        On our return we cleaned some of the
ambulance vehicles and re-fuelled some vehicles.
During the course of the night, we received a call from
Control requesting us to help with the removal of bodies
from the gymnasium at Hillsborough.           We agreed to work
overtime at the end of our shift.
At approximately 0145 we received another call from Control
basically to confirm that we were ready to go down to
Hillsborough.       We left Longley at this time and drove
straight to Hillsborough,    approaching down Herries Road
South and on to Penistone Road.     We liaised with one of our
ambulance officers at the gates, marked A on the attached
plan.   The officer we met was Paul Eason, who is my Station
Officer.    Mr Eason asked               and I to turn the
ambulance around and open up the rear doors in front of the
exit to the gymnasium, in order to allow bodies to be loaded
onto the vehicle.       Paul Eason explained the system of
identification of the bodies, and once identified the bodies
we taken in threes into the ambulances - two bodies were
laid on the cots and the third body was laid on the floor in
between the cots.      All bodies were inside body bags.     I
assisted with the loading of some of the bodies.     each body
was accompanied by an individual policeman, which meant that
there were three policeman in the back of the ambulance with
the fatalities.
We drove straight to the Medico Legal Centre, where we
waited outside until the ambulance in front of us had off
loaded their bodies into the Centre.      I then reversed the
ambulance into the Centre.      I helped off load the bodies
onto waiting trolleys whereupon the individual police
officers took over for the purposes of undressing bodies
9.             and I then got back into our ambulance and as we
     knew approximately how many bodies required removal from the
     gymnasium, we drove straight back to Hillsborough without
     contacting Control, and upon our return we carried out
     exactly the same process as before.      I am not sure whether
     we carried nine or twelve bodies down to the Medico Legal
     Centre from the gymnasium, but I do recall that the last
     three bodies we removed were unidentified at that point in
     time.     After off loading the last three bodies at the
     Medico Legal Centre, I drove back to Hillsborough, and when
     we arrived we were informed by a police officer that no more
     bodies required transportation down to the Medico Legal
     Centre.               and I then drove back to Longley Station
     refuelled the vehicle and washed the same,      took off both
     cots in order for them to be cleaned and then signed off at
     approximately 0630.


Dated this     day o f H ou-|     1989.
I                      faas   born on           I am a Leading
Ambulance man, and am employed by SYMAS.    I have worked form
them for 13 years.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was off duty and since I am a
keen   football   supporter    I had    the chance   to   go    to
Hillsborough Sheffield to see the cup semi-final between
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.


I went to the turnstiles at the Spion Kop end of the ground,
that would be at about 1445.    At the time I went in without
difficulty;   there were no queues where I was,       although
further along towards Sheffield people were waiting to go
in.


I entered by the turnstile 77/88, and inside was orderly.        I
went into the kop and having been told that there was plenty
of room at the front, I made my way down to a part, slightly
off centre and about a third of the way back from the front.


The match began on time and as far as I could see there was
no sign of trouble anywhere.


The match had not been in progress long, when play stopped.
Soon after that the players began to leave the field.          From
where I was I could see at the opposite end of the pitch
people were beginning to congregate on the playing field.
\




    7.   A lot of police were attending and then I saw an ambulance
         just on the pitch; I saw it go towards the other end.         On
         seeing the ambulance on the pitch I felt that there might be
         some trouble and, because of my training that I might be
         able to help.   I therefore went to one of the gates and told
         a policeman there who I was.


    8.   He said I might be some use at the other end because people
         had been injured.     I went through the gate and trotted
         across the pitch.


    9.   About one third of the way down the pitch I came across a
         casualty lying on the ground, being tended to by some one.
         The patient had stopped breathing and I gave him the kiss of
         life.   A doctor came and looked at the man.    The doctor said
         he was dead.


    10. I then went to the crowd and for the next hour or so I gave
         first aid treatment to numerous patients.      I helped to treat
         injuries such as shoulder and chest injuries, also several
         that had hyperventilation.


    11. I also helped to organise people who wanted to help but did
         not know what to do, eg taking them off the pitch to where
         the ambulances were waiting.
12.   Slowly but surely the pitch cleared as the casualties were
      being moved away.   The situation eased and things became
      calm.   The last casualty I helped was a Liverpool man who
      was in shock.   I took him under the stand and left him with
      the police and other helpers.


13.   I would like to say that all the Liverpool supporters I came
      into contact with and all the police 1 met were doing all
      that they could to help.


14.   The police put a line of men across the pitch and I would
      like to say this was a very good thing, it prevented crowds
      of people coming across and treading on us and the injured
      we were treating.


Dated the         t day of    £>   '   '      1989
ROGER MORLEY   born on                     states:-


1.   I am the Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services) for
South Yorkshire     Metropolitan      Ambulance       Service,    whose
headquarters are situate at Heather Close of Moorgate Road,
Rotherham.


2.   I joined the West Riding County Ambulance Service at Maltby
on the 14th August 1967 and have completed 21 years service.           I
attended the West Riding Training Course in 1968 and attained the
standard Miller qualification.     Since 1968 I have attended many
supervisory training and Management: courses including Block
                                    <^vA
release and Residential courses            the Trent Regional Health
Authority First    Line Supervisors Course which is held at
Markfield in Leicestershire.


3.   I have over 21 years experience of the Ambulance service and
for 8 years I was an Ambulanceman and one year as Leading
Ambulanceman at Maltby.        I then became aLiaison Officer and
transfered to Rotherham, from 1976 to 1977 when I was appointed
                     \°«n
Control Officer. In 1988, I was appointed Superintendent Officer
responsible for standards and efficiency and on 1st March 1988 I
was appointed Control Room Superintendent. On the 1st January
1989 I was appointed Assistant Divisional Officer                Support
Services.


4.   I was a duty Officer during the weekend 14th to 17th April
i




1989 and my duty commenced at 1700 on the 14th.   From that time I
was on call should the Ambulance headquarters need to contact a
Senior Officer that weekend.      I was not contacted on Friday
evening or early Saturday morning and I had arranged to attend
the H.Q. on Saturday morning to meet a British Telecommunication
Engineer, who was installing a telephone in my office.      I was
conscious of the Cup Semi-final and of the problems which the
movement of vehicles in the North Sheffield area might cause for
Ambulances caught up in any congestion as a result of the match
at Hillsborough.    I had been in Headquarters dealt with the
British Telecommunication Engineer and I was leaving the office
at 1130 hours just as Alan Hopkins the Deputy Chief was arriving.
I had earlier arranged to meet Alan at a bridge which overlooked
the Ml motorway for the purpose of evaluating the amount of
traffic and any problems which may be caused by congestion in and
around the area of Hillsborough, and to assess potential problem
areas for the movement of Ambulances in that same area.   I spoke
to Alan Hopkins in the ontrohoo^to the Ambulance Station and
arranged to meet him at about 1300.

                                          V
5.   I returned to the Ambulance station at approximately 1320 and
Alan Hopkins was not there.   I went to the control room and asked
where he was.   I was told Alan had gone out and I had a good idea
where he would be.     I climbed into David Jones', Range Rover,
which I had permission to use on Saturday the lJj£th April.      I
drove the Range Rover to the Ml and saw that Alan Hopkins was

                                      2
parked in his Escort on the bridge which overlooks the motorway
at the junction of Rotherway and Parkway.       I drove to where Alan
Hopkins was parked and I parked behind him, left the Range Rover
and spoke to him.     The time was now about 1330 or 1345 and he
commented to me that things were very quiet.       We remained on the
bridge over the Ml for a short time I then told Alan Hopkins that
I was going to drive into Sheffield.       He drove away and I drove
onto the Ml, travelled North and left the Motorway at junction 35
following the A269 into Chapletown.        I drove into Sheffield via
High Green and Ecclesfield calling at the Northern General
Hospital to check on the casualty department where I saw one of
our vehicles but otherwise the department was very q u i e t s I left
the hospital grounds and drove down Herries Road ■Sou'tBV^ As I
               t oy
approached the -and I saw two Police vehicles outside the
Devonshire Arms^ Public house.      Fans were being directed down
Herries Road Sou%*£ towards the Sheffield Wednesday Hillsborough
ground.   The time was now approximately 1400 or 1415 and I
decided not to drive down Herries Road knowing that I might run
into problems because of the numbers of people attending the
football match.     I knew there would be two Station Officers,
Eason and Higgins inside the Hillsborough ground and my presence
at the ground was not absolutely necessary as they were capable
of overseeing the Ambulance in attendance. It was their job as
Liaison Officers to co-ordinate any problems outside the ground
with the Police inside it.   I was responsible as Duty Officer for
the whole County and I had to remain mobile and available to

                                       3
react to any situation which may arise and require my presence
and I drove into the City centre and noticed that a lot of Police
were on duty.     I then drove down Sheffield Parkway and made my
way home.


6.   At 1445 or 1450 I told my wife that I would return David's
Range Rover because I believed that at about that time in the
afternoon the vast majority of fans would be inJJie Hillsborough
ground.     I left home to drive to the station   at   approximately
1450.     The drive from home to the oration
                                     3tat-ief usually takes about 10
minutes.     I was in Moorgate Road when    Station Officer Eason a
Station Officer Higgins, was radioed by control who were asking
why the Police wanted a fleet of Ambulances at Leppings Lane.        I
could only hear control on the radio in the Range Rover. I could
not hear the reply.     The time was about 1505   and I was only a
few hundred yards away from the Ambulance-gtatlon-r    I pulled into
the Headquarters drive and was about to alight from the vehicle
when Alan Hopkins raced towards me and indicated he would drive
and I should move into the passenger seat and at the same time
saying to me "We've got some trouble at Hillsborough,             I'll
drive".     I do not remember exactly what Alan Hopkins said to me
in the Range Rover whilst driving           at speed    towards   the
Hillsborough Football ground,      although I distinctly remember
operating the siren and two tone horn whilst Alan concentrated on
driving at speed via Sheffield Parkway,       the City Centre and
Penistone Road to the football ground.     I operated the radio and
Alan told me to get onto control and tell control to clear all
available vehicles, in case there was a need to call Ambulances
to the scene.     He wanted all available Ambulances to be clear of
any existing commitments and to be ready to respond and those
vehicles were to tell control as soon as they should become
green.   Green is the code used to stand all available Ambulances
ready to respond to a request for assistance.       I heard control
broadcast the message to all Symas ambulances     on the emergency
        a.
channel -irt


7.   All the ambulances are controlled by radio from the ambulance
          lcT   the control station^ telephoned the other ambulance
stations to call upon any ambulances parked up but available and
on call although not mobile.


8.   I was aware that Alan Hopkins had been in the control room
when telephone messages had been received although I cannot
remember him telling me specifically what had been said, he
obviously knew more about the situation we were approaching than
I did and I recall there may have been     mention that there was a
crowd control problem at Hillsborough ground.


9.   During the last few hundred yards of the journey as we
approached the ground at speed Alan Hopkins said to me "Why are
the ambulances going to Leppings Lane, Leppings Lane is not the
collection point.     They should have been going to the First Aid
room at the gymnasium".


10.   We arrived at Hillsborough at 1523   and followed two fire
service vehicles along Penistone Road, one was the Fire services
incident control vehicle and the other a tender.        I remember
commenting on the fact that the Fire service had their incident
control vehicle on Penistone Road and that it did not turn into
the ground but continued on and passed the entrance to the
Gymnasium presumably to attend the Leppings Lane end.   However we
turned into the ground and concertina gates were opened to allow
us in.   I think the journey time was probably as little as 10
minutes but may have been 12 minutes and on arrival I noticed a
large number of Police Officers who were waiting in the area to
the west of the north stand and at least six Police Officers were
mounted on horse back waiting very close to the vehicular access
point onto the pitch.   Alan and I alighted from the Range Rover.
Alan left me by the Range Rover and he went to speak to a Senior
Police Officer   and following a short exchange with that officer
he ran down the vehicular access slope and onto the pitch.    Alan
had told me to stay with the vehicle and as he had disappeared
onto the pitch I radioed control to confirm we had arrived at the
Hillsborough ground.    I spoke to Duty controller            and
instructed him to pass on the message that I required as many
vehicles as possible to be made available for Hillsborough. Alan
Hopkins told me to get as many vehicles to the ground as quickly
as possible and I made a further call to control requesting as
many vehicles as were able to attend immediately.


11.   I recall that an ambulance was parked in the entrance to the
ground off Penistone Road with its rear doors wide open       with no
cots and no staff and no one in attendance for several minutes.
The whole area of the entrance off Penistone Road was bedlam at
the time and there was an announcement on the Range Rovers radio
that the Hillsborough incident was a major incident and all
vehicles were to change to channel 1.      As the message was drawing
to a close Alan Hopkins returned and told me to " get that -the
Majax vehicle here” and I immediately relayed that message by
                            the Duty Control Officer at the Ambulance
station.      I acknowledged the message from control of a major
incident and requested the Majax vehicle.        I was told that the
Majax vehicle was already on its way to the incident as a
previous request had been responded to.          I recall that I was
ispeaicing   to- Station Officer        ^at that time«^           was
the duty officer for the late shift from 1530 to 2400.        I again
requested as many vehicles as could possibly be called upon to
assist at Hillsborough to be directed to the ground immediately.
I told control there were many casualties and many fatalities. I
could see the casualties being brought past me and in front of me
on hoardings and at this time I was trying to ascertain how many
vehicles might be needed to cope with the number of casualties at
the ground.       I saw one of our vehicles coming off the pitch
having great difficulty getting a clear exit through the narrow
vehicular access way and the Ambulance managed with difficulty to
clear the obstacles and leave the ground.


12.   I was conscious of the fact that one ambulance had had
difficulties leaving the ground via the Penistone Road entrance
and I considered this could become a problem.    The area was in
total chaos, people were running off the pitch looking into
ambulances which were arriving, filling them up with casualties,
some of whom were seriously injured and needed to be cleared from
the ground immediately and some who were not so seriously injured
who could probably be dealt with at the ground or wait to be
cleared. Priority was given to the more seriously and critically
injured.   There were a lot of police in the area but no one
appeared to be in control of coordinating the efforts of the
police force, the fire service or the ambulance service and I
decided I would organise my own priorities for clearing the
seriously and critically injured. I also attempted to introduce a
system for incoming and outgoing ambulances which would allow
them to clear the area quickly without congesting the access/exit
off and onto Penistone Road.


13.   I left the Range Rover to visit the North stand area First
Aid room which was the collection point for the casualties to try
and evaluate the true extent of the incident.


14.   The spectators,   some of whom were distraught        were
physically manhandling me and around me there was fighting
between the supporters whilst vehicles were moving in and out of
the ground.      I could see a lot of people moving to the north
stand carrying injured and dead people.


15.   Although I cannot recall the time I remember meeting Station
Officer Paul Eason and Station Officer Higgins in the north
stand/ Penistone Road area and Paul Eason told me that there were
a lot of fatalities at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.


16.   I was still trying to establish a casualty holding point in
the north stand/Penistone area.    I was particularly concerned
about the vehicles arriving and leaving from the Penistone Road
access/exit.     I was also concerned about the distribution of
equipment and my job was made extremely difficult because I was
inundated with requests to help people, give advice, hand out
equipment, direct able qualified volunteers to those areas where
assistance was needed most, whilst trying to keep the ambulance
flow as even and unhindered as possible.


17.   Although I cannot recall the time         I remember being
approached by two men who told me that they were qualified
doctors and volunteered their assistance.      I sent them to the
north stand gymnasium where I knew they could help casualties or
certify    the   dead.    I was   also    approached   by   several
Nottinghamshire Ambulance service men who asked if they could
offer assistance and I sent those people to the North Stand
sports hall too.     My priority with the volunteers was to direct
them to give assistance to the living casualties and whilst I was
doing this I was constantly pulled, jostled and man-handled by
distraught people.


18.    I tried to establish a routine and assess the severity of
the injured in order so that when an ambulance arrived I could
give priority to loading the more serious injuries and evacuating
them first.    I recall a St. John's Ambulance lady Superintendent
asked me to get an Ambulance immediately for a man who she said
was dying.    I recall I was able to load that particular casualty
onto an ambulance and evacuate him quickly.


19.   I was constantly aware that I needed to establish my own
priorities    for dealing with the overwhelming requests for
assistance whilst marshalling the evacuation of casualties and
the movements of the Ambulances in a very confined area populated
by the police, fire service, the injured the grief stricken and
unsympathetic opposing fans.    The police were working extremely
hard and if I had a problem a policeman in the area intervened
and allowed me to get on with the job in hand and the police
comforted and dealt sympathetically with the many distressed
people in my immediate area.


20.   I was always conscious that ambulances were being stripped
of their equipment as soon as the crews had left to attend to the
injured.


21.   The ambulances which I assisted in loading often left the
Penistone Road area carrying as many as seven casualties at a
time and this was done to evacuate as many casualties as possible
in the shortest available time to get them to the hospital which
could provide the treatment needed without delay and in the
circumstances I had no option, I needed to get the many injured
specialist treatment and the only way to clear the large number
of casualties was to utilise every available square foot of
ambulance space.


22.   I remember being asked by distraught fans to get an
ambulance onto the pitch because two doctors were resuscitating a
casualty.   The access for the ambulances onto the pitch was
pitifully inadequate.     The access was narrow and the angle of
approach difficult with obstructions on either side which,
compounded by the number of fans in the area, made access to the
pitch extremely difficult and hazardous.    The ambulances needed
to use their sirens and two tone horns simply to get from the
arrival area onto the pitch and it was not a safe area for fans
or the ambulances.      At this time I was also liaising with the
police and fire services men who were on the scene^    Although I
had little contact with the St. John's Ambulance Brigade, I gave
what advice I could in the circumstances to the police and fire
services and I did not, apart from contact with the one St.
John's Ambulance Officer, speak to members of their brigade;-
they were themselves very busy.


23.   I was probably engaged in marshalling the casualties and
Ambulances and organising the distribution of equipment and
evacuation of injured whilst liaising with all services and
giving advice as required for possibly one and a half hours.


24.   I went to find Alan Hopkins because although I cannot recall
who, someone had given me a message to go and assist him.        I
recall at this time I was unable to contact control on channel 1
and I remember that I made a comment to radio control shortly
after I had received the order to transfer to channel 1 that I
could not get that channel.   The only noise I could hear on the
channel was a faint crackling and the disjointed voice of
Superintendent Clarke whose voice is quite distinctive because he
is a "cockney".   I recall other Officers were making calls from
the Range Rover which was used as a mobile communication centre
to maintain radio contact with control and use was also made of
its mobile phone to make telephone contact.


25.   I met Alan Hopkins together we proceeded into the gymnasium,
which was being used as a temporary mortuary.        There was a
shortage of body bags.
26.   I was sent by Alan Hopkins to make a physical count of the
bodies which had been received by the Northern General Hospital
and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.


27.   I drove in an Escort motor car to the Northed General
Hospital and I remember arriving there at about 1700         because
there had been accident involving a Police motorcyle outside the
Hospital.   I met a Police woman inside the Hospital and was told
there had been 118 casualties, 11 of which were fatalities.        I
left the Northern General and drove to the Royal Hallamshire.      I
was told by staff that there had been 80 casualties and it was
thought there was one fatality although there was some confusion
and they told me there may in fact be two fatalities.        When I
arrived at the Royal Hallamshire I remember there were a lot of
people waiting at the Hospital to accept casualties             and
fatalities.    This is the procedure as laid down in the major
incident plan and there was obviously confusion about the bodies
from the Hillsborough Football ground.


28.   Whilst in the Hospital I met a Police Inspector          from
Sheffield and the General Manager of the Hospital David Baldwin
who told me how many casualties the Hospital had and said that
the Hospital was geared up and ready to accept the bodies.     David
Baldwin's assistant, who was also present, told him that all the
bodies were going to the Medico Legal Centre.   This confused me
because my understanding is that the Medico Legal Centre can only
take 45 bodies and I left the hospital, returned to the car and
attempted to speak to radio control using channel 2.         I could not
speak to them, there was^a problem with the radio and although
 \    w fl-S              i   SJWv->3<
they could speak to me I could not speak to them.


29.        I used the Vodaphone and spoke to Superintendent- Smith.       I
informed him that I had made the physical               body check and
requested him to relay the information to Alan Hopkins.              I also
requested confirmation of the bodies which were going to the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital.              I reported the problem with the
radio to him and I made my return journey to Hillsborough.


30.       At 18.00 I used the radio again in the Escort motor car and
made contact with control without difficulty.           I spoke to
               and reported that I had had difficulties with the radio,
which appeared to have abated.


31.       I arrived at Hillsborough and I was informed by David Jones
that Alan Hopkins did not want to move the Range Rover as it was
still being used as a communication centre as it had been during
the afternoon.


32.        The operations from the Range Rover had been moved to the          v
rear of the gymnasium behind the North Stand, y The Range Rover
was being used to pass many messages and particularly for people
wanting to let their families know they would not be returning

                                             14
home and they would be working or that they had been delayed due
to the incident at Hillsborough.


33.   David Jones then called a meeting of the staff and I recall
that all live casualties had been cleared from the ground before
17.00.      Most of them had gone when I left the ground to carry
out the physical body count at the Hospitals.


                                                                  *00
34.      [ think I arrived back at Hillsborough at about 18.00— e*
18.30 and, on my— arrival most -of -the equipment;--of— the Ambulance
.■service had--been exhausted


35.   On my return     I went to the North Stand gymnasium and Alan
Hopkins briefed me about the situation and procedure             for
transferring bodies to the Medico Legal Centre.


36.   Ambulances were to be sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
to collect the bodies which had been delivered there and they
were to be returned to the gymnasium for identification purposes.
The bodies which had been sent to the Northern General were also
to be collected and returned to the gymnasium.      The bodies were
to be cleaned up, laid out, photographed and each body was to be
accompanied by a Police Officer.    The bodies were laid out on one
side of the gymnasium and the photographs were to be erected on
the opposite side.     The relatives of the deceased were to be
shown the photographs and if they recognised the photograph they

                                      15




                                                                        (
were   to be shown the body        for the purposes of formally
identifying the deceased.    For the purpose of bringing the bodies
out from behind the screened off part of the gymnasium, the
ambulance service provided cots.


37.    All the ambulance vehicles were called into Penistone Road
gymnasium area and David Jones briefed the ambulance crews on the
procedure for the removal of the bodies following positive
identification and those crews which he selected for the duty
remained on stand by.


38.    I accompanied Alan Hopkins following the briefing of the
ambulance crews and we went back to the temporary mortuary and I
was appalled to see photographers in the gardens of the terraced
houses fronting Penistone Road and backing on to the gymnasium
trying to take photographs of the bodies being moved into the
temporary mortuary.         Police   intervened    and   mo v e d   the
photographers on.    The photographers were causing distress to all
present.


39.    I recall that it was probably around 2000 and the light was
beginning to fade.      The police had not yet rigged up temporary
lighting for the area to the east of the North Stand and I «a=
                    asked to move the Range Rover into a position to
provide temporary lighting.        The Range Rover was moved and
illuminated the area to the rear of the gym as requested by the

                                       16
■*




     Police.     This was to assist and help the relatives who had to
     enter the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium for the purpose of
     identifying the dead.    The Range Rover stayed in that position
     for probably three quarters of an hour before the Police arrived
     with their temporary lighting system.


     40.   At about 2045   Alan Hopkins briefed me with the Coroner and
     I was instructed to stay and oversee the proceedings following
     identification of the deceased.    I stayed there with two crews
     whose names I cannot recall and one relief crew plus two Station
     Officers.


     41.   The procedure for moving the bodies was:             following
     identification, the body would be moved in a body bag to the back
     door of the gymnasium, loaded into an ambulance and when there
     were three bodies in the ambulance that ambulance would leave to
     deposit     the dead at the Medico      Legal    Centre   %-fao— Royal
     Hallamshire or the- Northern-Geaogal Hoopita-i


     42.   I instructed           to co-ordinate operations inside the
     gymnasium and liaise with me outside the gymnasium and to
     organise the Police to co-ordinate the movement of the bodies
     from the gymnasium to the ambulances.      I gave instructions to
                 to contact control centre on the hour and every half
     hour to update control on progress.     I put Station Officer Eason
     in charge of loading the bodies and each body was recorded on a

                                           17
list and a number was attached to     that body by Eason,
or--I   together with the deceased name and the number of the
Officer who accompanied the body and the number of the vehicle
which moved It.


43.     Two or three bodies were Identified almost Immediately
following the establishment of this procedure and the operation
continued throughout the night.    This was a traumatic experience
for the staff and I organised staff welfare as best as I could in
the circumstances.


44.     All the bodies had been identified and moved from the
gymnasium to the Medico legal centre by approximately 0525      on
16th April.    Following completion of that procedure the equipment
of the Ambulance service which was still present at the scene was
loaded into Ambulances and a radio message was sent to control
confirming the incident closed at 0530.


45.     I had worked for some fourteen and one quarter hours on the
major incident. Although I had been on call from 1700 on Friday
the 14th.     I was not called out during Friday night or early
Saturday morning and following the incident on Saturday afternoon
through to Sunday morning I returned home, slept for a short
while and returned to the etation-tfr check equipment, liaise with
staff and deal with the press.



                                      18
               born        am 39 years old.    I am a control
assistant with SYMAS stationed in the Rotherham control
unit.    I have been employed in the same work for almost 9
years.


I usually work shifts, but Saturday 15th April 1989 was my
day off.    I was at home at about 1545 when I received a
telephone call from Rotherham control.      The call was from
              She informed me that there had been a major
incident, and could I go to control at Rotherham at once.


My husband drove me to the control room:- I arrived at 1600.
When I arrived I noticed that a number of control room staff
who were off duty had come in:- they were all busy but
everything seemed to be calm and orderly.


In the control room I saw a telephone that was not being
used, next to control officer            He told me to sit by
that telephone.


            bold me as much as he knew of the incident and I
then took calls on the telephone.    During the next hour I
took many calls, mainly from press but some were from
medical staff who were unable to contact the hospitals.


These calls from medical staff came to us because they were
unable to contact the hospitals themselves, and they wished
      to know if they were required to go to work.


7.    I arranged for               to go to Barnsley General as a
         liaison officer.   I also tried to contact        to go to
      Rotherham District General but when there was no reply I
      contacted             L and sent him to Rotherham District
      General to act as liaison officer.


8.    I also took calls from the Northern General hospital,
      requesting transfer of a total of three patients to the
      Hallamshire for C.T.Scans.                  took care of the
      requests and they were completed.


9.    I took calls from off duty ambulance personnel who were
      offering to come in and help.        I took their telephone
      numbers and asked them to standby.    They would be contacted
      if required.


10.   During the afternoon I took a call from police force control
      telling us no more ambulances were required at Hillsborough,
      I passed the message on to both controls.


11.   It was 2100 when I left and even though it had been a very
      busy afternoon I felt from my experience that the work had
      been carried out efficiently and without fuss.
                * -K
Dated the   8          day of   1989
Albert Page states:-


Personal History
1.   I was born on


2.   I am the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer with the South
     Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS).   SYMAS is
     a part of Trent Regional Health Authority and provides
     ambulance services for the whole of South Yorkshire, an area
     which covers the District Health Authorities of Sheffield,
     Rotherham, Doncaster and Barnsley.


3.   The SYMAS headquarters and control are at Heather Close in
     Rotherham.


4.   I am a Justice of the Peace and a Fellow of the^Ambulance
     Service Institute and a member of the Association of Chief
     Ambulance Officers.


5.   I joined the ambulance service as a cadet in Liverpool in
     1966   and spent    18 months   as   a cadet.   I became   an
     ambulanceman in 1968 and between then and 1974 I worked on
     general out-patient duties, emergency duties, which included
     shift work.      During that time I became a qualified in-
     service instructor and spent time at the Liverpool training
     school and was seconded to the regional training school for
     short periods.     In 1974 I was promoted to the position of
sub-officer in charge of the headquarters station on a shift
basis, and my duties primarily involved administration and
responsibility for control.   In October 1974 I was promoted
to Station Officer over three stations in Liverpool.   I was
promoted to Superintendent in January 1975 and was put in
charge of the St. Helen's Station which was a large sub-unit
and was totally self-contained.    This was a station of 40
men, it included its own control unit plus workshops and
stores.   In February 1987 I transferred to SYMAS and was
appointed Assistant Divisional Officer (Operations)       in
charge of six ambulance stations in Doncaster and Rotherham.
I became Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer for
SYMAS in 1978 and was appointed Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer for SYMAS in 1982.


Since 1986 I have been an instructor at the National Health
Service training establishment in Harrogate on courses for
senior ambulance officer development.


I am a member of the Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
Working Party To Review Control Procedures For Ambulance
Services, which has just re-written and issued the control
procedures for ambulance services nationally.


From 1979 to 1986 I was an Executive member of the Institute
of the Certified Ambulance Personnel.
9.    In the new national training notes for ambulance personnel
      issued by the NHSTA there is a section written by me on the
      ambulance service response to civil disorder incidents.
      This was as a result of the SYMAS involvement in civil
      disturbances at Orgreave.     We had purcbaeflH protective
      equipment and specialised vehicles (then J i converted Land
      Rovers) prior to Orgreave and were therefore in a position
      to deal immediately with that incident when it arose.


Organisation of SYMAS
10.   The ambulance service is split into two main divisions, the
      operational division and the control division.


11.   On the operational side most ambulancemen in SYMAS now start
      as cadets when they are 17 and spend two years training in
      all fields of the ambulance service, emergency services and
      NHS.   They have no responsibility for the patients other
      than in observing their treatment.


12.   The next stage is the basic grade ambulanceman, some of whom
      will not have been cadets.     They normally begin on part-
      time work within the PDT services transporting the elderly
      before moving on to full time transporting of general
      outpatients.


13. The next grade is that of qualified ambulancemen.     They are
      trained in all aspects of the ambulance service including
      dealing with emergencies.        They do six weeks training and
      two weeks driving training after twelve months of general
      experience.     The national guidelines are for the training to
      be repeated every five years but in SYMAS the ambulancemen
      receive repeated training between each attendance on
      national courses.       The next grade is that of leading
      ambulanceman, who takes responsibility for a shift on an
      ambulance station in the absence of a station officer.


14.   Station Officers are in charge of an ambulance station and
      are responsible for the vehicles, manpower, and operational
      resources of that station.           The next rank is that of
      Superintendent      (Operations).      We have two in SYMAS,
      Superintendent Dale who is responsible for Sheffield and
      Rotherham, and Superintendent Horner who is responsible for
      Barnsley and Doncaster.         They co-ordinate manpower and
      vehicle resources, monitor wages and salaries,       and advise
      the Support Services Officer of any difficulties relating to
      finance.     They report to the Assistant Chief (Operations) in
      relation to operational matters.


15.   The   Assistant     Chief    Metropolitan Ambulance     Officer
      (Operations) is Mr Jones who is responsible for every aspect
      of operational cover.       He reports to Mr Hopkins, my deputy.


16.   On the control side the lowest rank is that of Control
      Assistant.     The Control Assistants have no ambulance service
      experience In operations.    They receive telephone calls from
      the general public, hospitals, ambulance stations and the
      police and fire services and they work In shifts.      They do
      not deal with patients themselves but pass the calls onto
      the Control Officers who make the decision on the action to
      be taken.


17.   The Control Officers decide on the deployment of ambulances
      in response to information passed to them by the Control
      Assistants.    During the working week day there are four on
      duty.    One dealing with accidents and emergencies,      one
      dealing with out-patients in each off the areas of Sheffield
      and Rotherham, and the other dealing with out-patients for
      Doncaster/Barnsley.   After 1700 only the Control Officer on
      accident and emergency remains on duty with control
      assistants and Superintendents and the situation is the same
      for the whole of Sunday.    On Saturdays there are two Control
      Officers on duty during the day.


18.   The control room is supervised by a Control Superintendent.
      There is always a Superintendent on duty and they work on a
      shift basis.    On the afternoon of Saturday 15th April the
      Control Superintendent on duty was Mr Clarke.


19.   The Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Control
      and Communications) has overall responsibility for Control.
      This    is Mr A.   Smith.   He is responsible for control,
      planning,        registration (the pre-booking of general out­
      patients),        ambulance liaison posts,       and standards and
      efficiency officers.         The standards and efficiency officers
      are of superintendent rank and their job is to monitor the
      st a n d a r d    of   services   to   individual    hospitals,    the
      investigation of complaints about services provided,                and
      liaison with the hospitals.


20.   Mr Smith is accountable to Mr Hopkins.


21.   In addition to the personnel mentioned above there are also
      the following officers:-


      1.     The Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer (Training), who
             is responsible for arranging all aspects of training
             all SYMAS personnel.       This is Mr Wade.


      2.     The       Assistant Chief Ambulance        Officer    (Support
             Services).       He is primarily responsible for advising
             upon       and procuring    computor     and communications
             equipment, and giving budgetary advice.           This is Mr
             Truman.


      3.     The Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services).
             This      is Mr Morley.         He   is responsible   for   the
             investigation of complaints,             certain disciplinary
             matters, strategic and operational planning,               joint
             planning with hospitals and emergency services, and he
             plays a supporting role to Mr Truman.


      4.     Myself.     I have overall responsibility for all aspects
             of the ambulance service in SYMAS.


Paramedics
22.   Thirty three of the SYMAS ambulancemen and women are
      paramedics.      Ten of them having qualified as paramedics only
      recently.        Paramedics are also referred to as "extended
      trained".     In 1985 we began our own paramedics training in
      SYMAS.    There had been a national paramedics training scheme
      for some time but it was slow in getting off the ground, and
      1 was anxious for some of my staff to receive extended
      training and 1 knew that there were a number of ambulancemen
      and women who wished to receive such training.           We began our
      own paramedics training in 1985 and the national scheme was
      started in the following year.              Those people who had done
      the SYMAS paramedic course simply had to pass an exam rather
      than attend a national course.                 The SYMAS paramedics
      training goes beyond that required by national guidelines
      and SYMAS has been certified to do its own paramedics
      training by        the   Na t i o n a l   Health   Service   T raining
      Authority.


23.   The most important aspects of paramedics training are
      intubation, infusion, defibrillation, cardiac monitoring,
      and drug administration.       At the end of that course
      paramedics take an exam and every twelve months thereafter
      they must prove to a consultant anaethatist and ambulance
      officer that they are proficient in each of the aspects of
      paramedic training.   An ambulanceman who has not received
      extended training is not permitted to deal with the matters
      referred to in the preceding paragraph.       There is strict
      control over the work done by paramedics.    They should only
      put their extended training into practice when it is
      absolutely necessary and as a last resort.    They must do a
      case summary for each patient they treat and provide a copy
      of the case summary to the accident and emergency department
      of the hospital to which the patient is taken,        and to
      ambulance headquarters.   Thes^ case summaries are later
      reviewed by consultants and oupr own training department.


Vehicles
24.   SYMAS has the following vehicles:-


      1.   (How many? )Front line vehicles.        These are fully
           equipped emergency ambulances.   They carry essential
           rescue equipment, special stretchers, oxygen, entonox
           (a pain killing gas), splints, immobilisers,    and (if
           there is a paramedic on the ambulance) a defibrillator,
           infusion kit, a paramedics kit and cardiac monitoring
           machine.
(How many?)     Sitting case vehicles.         These   are
essentially mini buses which are normally used for
transporting the elderly, and general outpatients who
can walk with the assistance of one person.     They carry
little in the way of equipment,       but they do have a
first aid kit, blankets and a carrying chair.


We have one major incident vehicle (emergency tender).
This is essentially a mobile stores and communications
centre.    A schedule showing the equipment carried by
the major incident vehicle appears in a separate bundle
of documents.


The special incident unit.   This is essentially a riot
vehicle and is a fully protected Range Rover.      It was
not used at Hillsborough and is intended for lifting
casualties from civil disorder incidents.


Marked and unmarked staff cars.      The marked staff cars
are used by Station Officers and are occasionally used
on operational duties.


A marked Range Rover which is the management incident
vehicle.   It contains back up equipment to be used in
support of an ambulance at the scene of an accident and
is a mobile flood lighting system.
The Control Centre
25.   In the control centre we have a separate Incident room which
      was set up earlier this year following the Kegworth and
      Lockerbie disasters.   Saturday 15th April was the first time
      that the incident room was used operationally although it
      had, of course, been tested previously.     The intention is to
      be able to manage a major incident from a separate room
      without disrupting the general services or "domestic"
      emergency work being dealt with in the control room which is
      next door.


26.   SYMAS use four radio channels:-


      Channel 1 is the emergency reserve channel which is a
      national emergency channel.       The intention is that any
      ambulance using ERC can pass from one area to another
      without having to switch channels and have radio contact at
      all times.


      Channel 2 is the SYMAS emergency channel.


      Channel 3 is the domestic channel for use on out-patient
      duties in the Rotherham/Barnsley areas.


      Channel 4 is the domestic channel for out-patient duties in
      the Sheffield/Doncaster areas.
27.   On Saturday 15th April ambulances were using the SYMAS
      emergency channel and only one of        the domestic channels
      because it was a Saturday.      During the incident many of the
      ambulances were told to use the emergency reserve channel.


Changes Following the Bradford Fire
28.   Following the fire at the Bradford       City Football Ground in
      May 1985 I arranged to meet with         John Davis, the Chief
      Metropolitan Ambulance Officer for the West Yorkshire
      Metropolitan Ambulance Service, to find out about the sort
      of problems which they had experienced in dealing with the
      Bradford fire, in order to improve the SYMAS planning for
      major incidents.      He identified the following main areas of
      difficulty:-


      1.   Locating off-duty officers because they were not
           equipped with radios or pagers.


      2.   Once contact had been made they did not have marked
           cars   to   go   to   a major   inc i d e n t   and   no   radio
           communications in their own cars.        As a result of this
           the WYMAS officers had great difficulties getting
           through crowds to reach the Bradford City Football
           Ground and to gain access to the ground itself.


      3.   When thety arrived at the ground they had no radio
           communications to their control.
29.   I immediately implemented an on-call rota call for the
      operational ambulance officers in SYMAS in order to give
      senior officer availability 24 hours a day.     There is a pool
      of six senior officers who work an on-call rota outside
      normal   working     hours   so that one of them is always
      available.    In addition the Deputy Chief Metropolitan
      Ambulance Officer and I work an on-call rota on a weekly
      basis,   taking alternate weeks.       When this system was
      introduced by me in 1985 it was done on a totally voluntary
      basis, payment was only introduced by national agreement in
      1987.


30.   In 1987 because of    the ambulance officers salary increase, I
      restructured the      service by inserting another    line of
      operational officers.     I now have a station officer on duty
      with the emergency tender from 0600 to 2400 every day.


31.   Therefore, outside    normal working hours, there is always a
      Station Officer onduty, a Senior Officer on-call,      and the
      Deputy or myself also on-call.


32.   All senior officers had been issued with pagers before the
      Bradford fire but these were upgraded after.


33.   All senior officers have had portable radio sets since the
      Bradford fire.
34. All officers on duty now have marked vehicles with radios.


35. The senior duty officer is equipped with a vodaphone as are
      the major incident vehicle and the Range Rover which acts as
      the management incident vehicle.


36. All senior officers now have magnetic blue lights for their
      own vehicles.


Major Incident Planning
37. There has been a major incident plan in SYMAS for as long as
      I have been there.     It is reviewed from time to time,
      specifically after each exercise.


38.   When a major exercise takes place only a few senior officers
      know about it, and none of those who would be taking part
      are informed.   The last exercise was in November 1988 at
      Doncaster Railway Sidings.   In 1987 there was an exercise in
      Rotherham where a building which was being demolished was
      used to simulate a collapsed building, and in 1985 there was
      an exercise in Sheffield where there was a simulated railway
      incident.


39. Following each exercise each of the emergency services and
      the hospital involved have an in-house debriefing followed
      by a co-ordinated debriefing.       The major incident plan is
      then updated.     The current version of the major incident
      plan is dated 1985.    It has been reviewed, but not altered
      since then.


40.   In fact, we were in the process of preparing a new major
      incident plan at the time of the Hillsborough disaster and
      the plan had reached its second draft.    A meeting had been
      arranged for the working party to discuss the second draft
      on 19th April, but this has been postponed as a result of
      the Hillsborough disaster.   The working party consists of
      myself, my Deputy, the four assistant Chief Officers, the
      Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services) and the
      Public Relations Officer (               who also acts as my
      secretary).


The Hillsborough Plan
41.   Following my meeting with John Davis of WYMAS in 1985 I
      delegated to an Assistant Divisional Officer (Mr Wilkinson)
      responsibility to co-ordinate plans for ambulance service
      involvement at five football grounds within South Yorkshire.
      Those   football grounds are the grounds of Sheffield
      Wednesday,    Sheffield United,   Rotherham,   Barnsley,   and
      Doncaster.


42.   In January 1986 I wrote to all five football clubs.    A copy
      of my letter of 16th January 1986 addressed to the clubs
      appears in a separate bundle, together with a reply from
      Sheffield Wednesday dated 29th January 1986.    Following that
      correspondence Mr Wilkinson contacted the club and the
      police and started a process of drawing up plans in
      conjunction with the Station Officers local to each of the
      football clubs.    In the case of Hillsborough the plan was
      prepared by Mr Wilkinson,     Station Officer Higgins and




43.   The plans relating to the football grounds were prepared in
      the late summer of 1986 and appear in a separate bundle of
      documents.   The incident plans for the grounds are intended
      for use by control and senior officers.   I would not expect
      individual ambulancemen to be aware of the contents of those
      plans.


Provision of Liaison Officers and ambulances to Hillsborough
44.   The   circular HC( 78)45 from the Department of Health and
      Social Security is entitled Health Services Management-
      Ambulance Services:     Operational Control and Use.      The
      circular summarises and updates advice and practice about
      the control and use of ambulance transport.    Paragraph 28 of
      the circular deals with sporting and other public events and
      states:-


            "Although the voluntary aid societies usually
            provide first aid cover at sporting and other
            public events where accidents and emergencies
           are likely to arise, NHS ambulances may be
           provided    if   appropriate.          In    such
           circumstances a written undertaking should be
           obtained in advance from organisers to meet
           the cost of providing special standby cover,
           though no charges     should    be    made    for
           conveying any patient to hospital.     It may be
           inappropriate    to   make    a charge       when
           ambulances are provided at public shows as a
           public relations exercise to benefit the
           ambulance service.    This is a matter for
           discretion of Authorities."


45.   Following the Bradford fire I decided that irrespective of
      finances we would place ambulances and crews into grounds at
      games where we felt it advisable;         this would happen at
      Sheffield Wednesday if the ground was going to be full or if
      the supporters had some particular reputation for trouble.
      In the case of the FA Cup Semi-final between Liverpool and
      Nottingham Forrest an ambulance was provided at the ground
      with its crew (with another ambulance and crew on standby
      nearby) because of the size of the crowd.


46.   Our policy is for either or both of Station Officers Eason
      and Higgins to attend all matches at Hillsborough.


47.   I recall that after Mr Wilkinson attended one meeting with
      Club Officials at Sheffield Wednesday he came back and told
      me that if it was going to cost the club money to provide
      ambulances then they were not interested.         For major
      matches, therefore, the ambulances are provided in breach of
      the terms of paragraph 28 of DHSS circular HC(78)45.


48.   The Club were, however, prepared to provide free tickets for
      the two liaison officers at every match and they regularly
      sit in the same two seats in the South Stand behind the
      directors box from where they have good views of most of the
      ground.   When, however, the club knows that they can sell
      all the tickets for a match the seats are taken away from
      the liaison officers to be sold to the general public.   The
      liaison officers then make arrangements with the police to
      gain access to the ground and they position themselves at
      pitch level and I understand that this would normally be at
      the North East corner of the pitch.


49.   In April 1988 I wrote again to the five football clubs and,
      in addition, to Doncaster race course.   I sent this letter
      because there had recently been a pop concert at the
      Sheffield United football ground and they had refused to
      allow ambulances to be on standby because we had given them
      a price estimate of £1,000.     The attitude of the clubs
      generally seems to be that they would prefer to make a
      donation to the St. John's Ambulance Brigade or the Red
      Cross of about £50 and rely upon 999 calls if they need us.
      St. John's Ambulance Brigade and Red Cross do excellent work
      but they are not in a position to give immediate help beyond
      first aid.


50.   Another reason for my writing in April 1988 was that I
      thought that it may generate some income for the ambulance
      service.     This was a secondary motive.    There had not been
      any pressure put on me from any source to generate income
      but there was a lot of talk generally at the time about
      income generation within the National Health Service.




15th April 1989
51.   On Saturday 15th April 1989 I would normally have been on
      call but Alan Hopkins had agreed to do my on call duty
      instead because I was on a course at Sheffield University
      that morning in relation to my position as a Justice of the
      Peace.     The course finished at 1230 and I arrived home at
      about 1330.


52.   At about 1535                telephoned.    She was at ambulance
      control in Rotherham and she told me that there was a major
      incident at Hillsborough.    I told her that I was on my way.




53.   I left home and arrived at ambulance control at about 1550.
      I saw Mr Jones leaving in a staff car to go to Hillsborough.
         He told me that there was a major incident at Hillsborough,
         that people had died, and that Mr Hopkins and Mr Morley were
         at the ground.    He was going down to the ground to back them
         up.


54   .   I went into the control centre and met Mr Clarke in the
         incident room (which had been set up by then) with Albert
         Smith.   They briefed me of the situation, providing details
         of the officers present at the ground, vehicle deployment,
         and the backup from the neighbouring ambulance services.      I
         gave instructions to call additional officers into the
         Northern General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals to act as
         liaison officers.    Standards and efficiency officer
         was sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and Control
         Superintendent                to the Northern General Hospital.
         It was clear when I arrived that we had sufficient officers
         at the ground but we also needed eyes and ears at the
         hospital.     I was told by Mr Clarke that there were eleven
         ambulances which had already been to the ground.
         was in the incident room dealing with press enquiries.        I
         went into the control room to speak to                about the
         out-patient vehicles deployed to the ground.        He told me
         that a further twelve vehicles had been deployed to the
         scene.      I also spoke to                 to ensure that the
         "domestic" emergency services were still being provided.
         Having satisfied myself that they were in control of the
         situation I went back to the incident room where I remained
      until about 1755.


55. Whilst I remained at control I was basically monitoring what
      was going on.      I was satisfied that my officers knew what
      they were doing and that they were doing an excellent job.


56. There was no point        in my going to the ground whilst the
      incident was at its height.     Mr Hopkins was at the ground
      and I was more use supervising the control end of the
      operation.    In the event of a major incident either Mr
      Hopkins   or I will attend the incident itself and the other
      will be at control.     The decision as to which of us is in
      which position depends purely upon our locations when the
      incident arises.     As I live near Doncaster it clearly made
      more sense for me to travel to control in Rotherham.


57.   Whilst at control I spoke to a number of the officers at the
      scene and took a number of phone calls.     It is difficult for
      me to recall the exact content of those conversations or the
      order in which they happened.    I do remember that I tried to
      contact Mr Hopkins at the ground and that there was some
      difficulty with communications (which I shall deal with
      later).   At one point I was able to speak to Mr Hopkins whom
      I believe told me that either 27 or 37 were then dead but
      that he thought there would be many more.     I told him to try
      to keep   in contact.   I spoke to him again later when he told
      me that   there were 53 dead.   I also spoke to Mr Jones and Mr
      Morley during this time In order to receive up dates
      relating to the situation at the ground.


58. I also remember a police inspector coming through to me at
      about 1605 requesting more body bags.


59. As well as receiving up dates from the ground itself I was
      being kept informed of the position by the staff both in the
      main incident room and in the control room.     I took about
      six telephone calls from the media which were mainly from
      television or radio.   I had wanted to speak to them myself
      because I knew that their reports would be going out almost
      immediately and there would not be an opportunity to correct
      any matters.


60.   I recall speaking to David Jones at about 1620 when he told
      me that all live casualties had left the ground and that
      ambulances should be sent to Herries Road Bus Depot.         By
      that time we were also transferring patients from the Royal
      Hallamshire to make more space available for the incoming
      casualties.


61.   Throughout the whole of my time at Control I was satisfied
      that we had sufficient vehicles and manpower at the scene.
62.   I spoke to the Regional General Manager of Trent Regional
      Health Authority twice whilst at Control.   He rang at about
      1615 and I outlined the situation to him and he said that he
      would do anything he could to help if we needed further
      resources.     I told him that we had sufficient resources at
      the scene and that we were receiving additional help and
      cover from other ambulance authorities.      I then telephoned
                    at about 1745 to give him an outline of some of
      the statistics involved in the operation.


63.   I went to the ground with Noel Wade,        leaving Control at
      about 1755.    At that stage I was satisfied that, as far as
      live casualties were concerned, the incident was closed.
      When Mr Wade and I arrived at the ground we saw Mr Hopkins
      and Mr Jones.      They briefed me as to the then current
      situation and how the incident had gone.      Mr Hopkins said
      that he thought we had moved about 200 casualties.      I also
      spoke to each of the crews (about 8 crews) who were then
      still at the ground before going into the gym to meet Chief
      Superintendents Addis and Mole.       We arranged that our
      ambulances would take the deceased to the Medico Legal
      Centre in Sheffield when they had been identified by
      relatives.    Dealing with the deceased is actually a police
      responsibility but it is normal for the ambulance service to
      co-operate in moving them in a situation such as this.       I
      left the ground at about 1850 and went back to headquarters.
      I gave a press statement to reporters who were there from
      the Sheffield Star and Sunday Mail and an interview to the
      BBC with Mr Hopkins.      They basically wanted details of
      statistics.
64.   I went of duty at 2100.


Statistics
65.   Forty two ambulances attended the ground, of which 31 were
      SYMAS vehicles and 11 came from outside areas.            Most of
      these vehicles made several trips between the ground and the
      Sheffield Hospitals.      In addition further vehicles were
      brought in from outside SYMAS and were put on standby.         172
      casualties were taken to hospital by ambulance, initially to
      the Northern General and then to the Royal Hallamshire.
      Three patients were taken to Barnsley District General
      Hospital.     Ninety Four fatalities were taken to the Medico
      Legal Centre in Sheffield, some having been returned from
      the Northern General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals to the
      gymnasium at the ground.     The last of the fatalities left
      Hillsborough at 0528 on Sunday 16th April 1989.                The
      incident itself was closed by Mr Hopkins at 0530 on Sunday
      16th April.


66.   Four paramedics attended the ground and three others were on
      duty.   There was no point in deluging the ground with
      paramedics because it is difficult for them to put their
      extended training into practice in crowds.    In any event, by
      1620 there was no need for them.       I understand that there
      has been      some criticism   about   the   fail u r e   to   use
      defibrillators.      I should explain that a defibrillator
      should not be used In a crowd situation.       It must only be
      used on a patient without a pulse.        If it is used on a
      patient who has a pulse, however weak, it would kill that
      patient, and if anyone was to touch a patient whilst the
      patient was being defibrillated then that person would
      receive an electric charge sufficient to kill them.


67. We received a large number of calls from the media.          The
      transcripts of our tapes show that by 1630 we had received
                     calls   (although some calls may have been
      counted twice if they were transferred from one telephone to
      another).     These calls caused a problem in that they blocked
      lines which were much needed, for example by nurses doctors
      and ambulancemen calling in to see if they were needed at
      work plus otherr routine calls and domestic emergencies.


68.   Between 1500 and 1800 hours on 15th April we also dealt with
      49 domestic emergency calls.


61.   As a result of the Hillsborough incident we have put in
      three additional telephone lines to the incident room to
      handle press calls.


Difficulties Experienced
62.   We did experience some difficulties in relation to access to
      the ground.     One problem was simply the crowds outside the
      ground, and another was vehicles in the way.      At one stage
      the yard in the area of gate 0 was partially blocked         by
      police vehicles and police horses.      It would have been our
      intention to drive ambulances into the entrance by the
      gymnasium which has recently been made in the row of
      terraced houses, collect patients and drive out through gate
      0 but that road was blocked because of a police feeding unit
      being parked outside the gymnasium and because of other
      police vehicles parked in the area of the entrance between
      the terraced houses.     As a result of this ambulances had to
      reverse into the yard through gate 0 which slowed down the
      rate at which we were able to remove casualties away from
      that area.


63.   In addition a number of the ambulances (and the major
      incident vehicle when it first arrived at about 1540) were
      trying to proceed up Penistone Road to gate 0 but were
      directed by the police into the service road to the south of
      the ground.


64.   We did experience some difficulties in relation to radio
      contact.     There were three main areas of difficulties:-


      1.   The handsets did not always work properly because of
           the stands at the ground.     I understand that there is
           not normally any difficulty in using the handsets from
           the seats in the South Stand which Mr Eason and Mr
           Higgins would normally sit in because these are well
             above ground level.


      2.   The   sheer   weight    of radio   traffic caused    some
             difficulties.   Most ambulances were told to use the
             emergency reserve channel but one or two used other
             channels in order to reduce the pressure on ERC.


      3.   There was interference on the emergency reserve
             channel.   This seemed to appear only on 15th April but
             is still present.     Phillips (who supply and maintain
             our radio equipment) were called in immediately after
             15th April and they are still trying to locate the
             source of the interference.


      The problems with the radio transmission has only caused us
      minor difficulties.     They did not result in the operation
      being handled any differently.


Conclusion
65.   My attitude and that of my officers is that we wish to
      provide a swift and efficient service.    We have always tried
      to be at the forefront of the ambulance services.          The
      equipment obtained prior to the Orgreave civil disorders,
      our training of paramedics, the setting up of the incident
      room, and the changes introduced following the Bradford
      fire, are all evidence of this.         Since the Hillsborough
      incident we have, as I mentioned above, already put in new
      telephone lines to the incident room and a television and
      commercial radio are being installed so that, in any future
      major incident, contemporaneous media reports will also be
      received in the incident room.   We shall be reviewing the
      position to see if any further changes should be made but
      the only alterations which we have put in motion at present
      relate to the incident room which had not previously been
      used other than for testing.




Sports Grounds:     The Future
66.   SYMAS would wish to make submissions to phase two of the
      Inquiry as to safety of sports grounds in the future.    The
      fire service have a degree of involvement in the question of
      safety both because they issue a fire certificate and
      because they are consulted by the local authority who issue
      a certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
      I would wish the ambulance service to fulfil a similar role.
      Such a role would, in particular, deal with the question of
      ambulance access and egress as well as the provision of
      equipment and ambulances at major sporting events.       Our
      views and recommendations will be set out in more detail in
      due course.


Signed ......
D a t e d ......
I                         born           am 25 years old.   I am
employed as Personal Secretary to Mr.Page and also as Public
Relations Officer by SYMAS.      I am based at Rotherham.


I normally work office hours 0900 to 1700 hours Monday to
Friday. On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was at my home when at
about 1510 I took a telephone call from a control room
assistant.   She asked if I would speak to Mr.Clarke,          I
agreed and Mr.Clarke spoke to me.


He said control were receiving a lot of press calls
regarding an incident at Hillsborough,        so I asked if he
would like me to go in he said yes, so I went at once.


I went into control and as I entered I saw Mr.Clarke opening
the incident room. I did not go into the control room but
into the incident room.


At that time we knew it was a major incident, but we were
not aware of exactly what it was.         My first job was to
contact Mr.Page at the request of Mr.Clarke.      Mr.Page was at
home when I rang him and he came in at once.


Mr.Clarke asked me next to contact off duty control room
staff.   I obtained a list from               - she was already
contacting control officers to inform them of the incident.
7.    I think I contacted three members of staff before          came
      and took the list.   She had contacted all officers and then
      began to contact the assistants.      It would be about 1530 by
      this time.


8.    I remained in the incident room for the next four hours or
      so taking press calls almost non stop.


9.    All the information I gave out, whether it was confirmed or
      unconfirmed was with the authority of Mr.Page.           As he
      obtained more details and they were confirmed he gave them
      to me, if they were to be released.


10.   I remember at one time, it would be about 1730 there were so
      many calls coming in that the switchboard was getting
      blocked so for about two hours a colleague and I were
      engaged in taking press calls.


11.   A press conference was arranged for Mr.Page at about 1930
      and I contacted as many members of the press as I could to
      tell them of this.     The conference was held and at about
      2015 Mr.Page told me I could leave.


Dated the                  day of   fYlGy             1989
I                         born            am 28 years old.   I am
an ambulance woman working for SYMAS.            I am based at
Middlewood.   I have been with SYMAS nearly 4 years.


I usually work at day shift 0800 to 1630 hours but on
Saturday 15th April 1989 I was on leave.


At about 1510 hours I was listening to the radio when I
heard that there was some trouble at Hillsborough.         To find
out more I turned the television set on to see that there
was some incident taking place.


I watched for a while and soon realised that it was
something serious and thought I had better contact control
to see if I could help.     I tried several times by telephone
but could not get through so I made up my mind to report in
anyway so I went to Middlewood I arrived at Middlewood at
about 1615 hours.


As I arrived at Middlewood I joined                    .   She had
already informed control that she was there, she also told
control I had arrived.     We were quickly joined by two others
          and


We were told by control to standby which we did.        Very soon
afterwards          and          were sent out with an ambulance.
They received their instructions by telephone.
7.    At about   1645 hours              and   I were contacted by
      Rotherham Control and instructed to attend a casualty on
      Parkside Road.        We attended and took the casualty to
      Northern General hospital.     The patient was attended to by
                 and I drove the ambulance.         The patient was
      accompanied by two of his friends.       We handed him over to
      the hospital staff.


8.          then contacted control by radio and we went "green".
      Control told us to return to base,        which we did.     We
      remained on standby until we were directed by control to
      attend a lady who had fallen at                    Care Home.
      We attended and took the patient to the Hallamshire
      hospital, at the direction of control.      We radioed "green"
      again by radio and were told by control to return to base.
      It was by now early evening.


9.    I think it would be about 1930 hours when we were told by
      control to make a transfer of a patient from Northern
      General to the Hallamshire for a scan.        We completed the
      transfer without difficulty, and again returned to base.


10.   It would be just before 2100 hours when              contacted
      control.   He was on days and had to be back at 0600 the
      following morning.     He pointed this out to control and he
      was told to stand down.    This meant I was also stood down so
      I signed off and went home.


11.   Traffic was very heavy on the first trip and we had to use
      the blue light to progress quickly to the hospital, as we
      did not have an escort.   The second trip was normal.




Dated the            day of                    1989
DATE OF BIRTH
CONTROL OFFICER (SYMAS)


1.   I have been with the ambulance service for 25 years
     originally with West Riding County Council and since about
     1974 with Symas based at Hoyland.


2.   On starting with the service I attended the training course
     for ambulance men.


3.   After three years as an ambulance man I attended a refresher
     course at Cleckheaton.     In 1974/1975 I was promoted to
     Leading Ambulance man based at Hoyland station and then
     attended the Leicester training school on a refresher
     course.


4.   About   1976 I was promoted to Control Officer based at
     Corporation Street Station/H.Q at Sheffield.       Almost 18
     months afterwards control became centralised for the whole
     of Symas at Rotherham HQ in Moorgate.


5.   Formally there had been controls at Wath for Rotherham and
     Doncaster, Hoyland for Barnsley, and Corporation Street for
     Sheffield.   Since that time I have been a control officer at
     HQ at Rotherham.
In relation to major incidents there is a manual in control.
The manual has procedures to following in the event of major
incidents.     I work on a three shift system.      There are 12
controllers on a 12 week rota system.        The hours you work
depend on which week you are allocated in the rota and which
control you are working.


Control is divided into three separate units


1.     Emergency control - South Yorkshire


2.     Domestic and outpatient - Doncaster, Sheffield


3.     Domestic and outpatient - Rotherham and Barnsley


In addition to this there is also a major incident room
specifically reserved for events of the Hillsborough type.
On Saturday I had been out for the day and returned home at
about 1430 hours.    Around about 1530 hours my wife answered
the phone and it was control asking for me.       I took the call
and it was              as far as I can recall.    She said "Can
you come into work as we have an incident at Hillsborough
and believed fatalities” I replied "Yes, I'll attend”.          I
got changed into uniform and went straight to Symas HQ in my
car.


I would estimate I arrived at Symas HQ at about 15.50 hours
      I reported straight     into control room and the first person I
      met was Don Page.     He asked what   shift I was on and I said I
      had been called in.      He asked me to carry on.


10.   I started answeringtelephone calls from outside lines and      a
      lot of these were press enquiries.        I toldk them that we
      were dealing with Hillsborough, but no further information
      was available.


11.   I received a call from West Yorkshire ambulance service
      saying   they were sending their Major Incident Vehicle.       I
      took this message into Mr Clarke the superintendent who was
      on emergency control duty.


12.   I was asked by superintendent Clarke to monitor the domestic
      emergency channel because a lot of the vehicles concerned
      with the Hillsborough incident were calling on that channel.
      They were finding it difficult to make contact on the
      Emergency Reserve Channel - channel 1


13.   I then listened for any messages on the domestic channel on
      the radio in the major incident room.       There were no calls
      relating to the Hillsborough incident that I could pick out.
      There was the usual volume of domestic calls.        I continued
      to monitor that channel for any Hillsborough calls for about
      10 to 15 minutes.
14.   I then asked superintendent Clarke if he wanted me to plug
      into the emergency channel to assist in picking up any
      messages relevant to the major incident.


15.   He asked if I would relieve him from that position.      I did
      so and              was logging all incoming calls on the
      emergency as I dealt with them.   At this time              the
      superintendent was in the other control room co-ordinating
      all the channels.


16.   I received a call from Alpha 4 station officer Eason stating
      he had enough vehicles at Herries Road bus depot and
      requested the vehicles be held on Netherthorpe.     As vehicles
      called in clear (green) I directed them to Netherthorpe to
      standby.


17.   I then received calls from West Yorkshire vehicles which
      were at junction 36 of the Ml.    I passed this information on
      to         via the assistants.    He requested that I send no
      further vehicles to the incident and I therefore called West
      Yorkshire vehicles to stand them by on a layby on the A61
      just off junction 36 of the Ml.    I then received a call from
      West Yorkshire major incident vehicle at junction 36.         I
      despatched him towards Hillsborough and informed
      then contacted Dale to tell him that the Major incident
      vehicle was on route with supply equipment.      I directed the
      West Yorkshire major incident vehicle towards Penistone Road
      where he would be met by Dale (Alpha 2).


18.   I continued to monitor the emergency channel and got Miss
               to telephone South Yorkshire Passenger transport to
      try and get a line open to the Herries Road bus depot as we
      were experiencing difficulty in radio contact with the
      vehicles there.   We got a direct line to the bus depot.


19.   I continued monitoring emergency channels, but there were no
      specific messages.    Trevor Dale then called to inform me he
      was taking Station Officer Higgins down to the Medico Legal
      Centre in Sheffield, the public mortuary.


20.   I cannot recall the exact time, but by then things were
      beginning to quieten down and the next call I remember
      taking was to stand the West Yorkshire vehicles down and
      return them to their own authority.     That was about 1800
      hours.


21.   Around 1900 hours the major incident room was closed.       I
      then returned to the control room to assist with telephone
      enquiries.    I continued to cover the phone until about 2300
      hours I was then told by superintendent            the night
      superintendent that I should stand down and go home.


22.   The only difficulty in communication was with incident
      officer at the Hillsborough Ground.     The emergency channel
    was very distorted and it was for this reason that telephone
     links were established.


Signed




Dated this   J> * day of May 1989
                      states:-


1.   My date of birth is


2.   I am the Station Officer at           and a fully qualified
     ambulance man.     I have    19 years experience with the
     ambulance service.      Prior to 1974 this was with the West
     Yorkshire area but I came into the SYMAS district after the
     re-organisation of the Metropolitan boroughs.    I have been a
     Station Officer since 1982, first at Hoyland and since 1987
     at


3.   I hold the Miller certificate and also the National
     Examination Board in Supervisory Studies qualification.


4.   I was not scheduled to be on duty at all during the weekend
     of Saturday 15th to Sunday 16th April 1989, having worked a
     normal shift pattern during the previous week.    On Saturday
     afternoon I was coming in from the garden at about 1630
     hours when the telephone rang.    I had not been following the
     match and was not aware of an incident.     The call was from
     Control and I was instructed to stand by at Barnsley
     District General Hospital, Casualty Department to act as
     liaison officer.      Control said there was a major incident
     taking place at Hillsborough and the hospital was to expect
     casualties.
I understood resources would be stretched and they were
calling in all off-duty staff.       I knew there was a major
incident plan and my role in this plan depended on the
location of the incident.     Sheffield was too far away from
Wath for me to be of direct assistance.      In any event I had
received specific instructions, which I followed.


I changed quickly into my uniform so as to be recognised and
drove to the hospital.    This took about 5 to 6 minutes.   On
arriving I noticed there was an ambulance already there and
a fellow station officer          from Doncaster Station,
             I went across to him and asked what the situation
was.   He said there was a major incident at Hillsborough but
he did not know how many casualties to expect.      He did say
that Sheffield Hospitals were filling up rapidly and he was
expecting some casualties to be brought to Barnsley.


I went into the hospital and found a team of staff who had
just returned from the ground with                      in his
ambulance.   They were standing by in casualty waiting for an
influx of wounded.     However,    it did not appear that any
patients had arrived at that stage.


I made myself known to a senior sister and told her that I
would act as liaison officer.         Meanwhile,
telephoned control on the direct line from the hospital to
inform them that I had arrived.      We were both told to stand
      by.                  was in any event on standby for domestic
      emergency duty.


9.    We waited by the ambulance because we could get better
      reception on the radio than on our hand sets.      We listened
      on channel 1 (ERC) automatically without being instructed to
      do so.   However, we also left the hand sets on channel 2 to
      gain as much information as possible.


10.   I remained at the hospital until approximately 1830 hours
      During this time one West Yorkshire Ambulance came in
      carrying two fans from Hillsborough who were in a state of
      shock as a result of the death of their brother.


11.   I took these patients into casualty and explained to the
      nurse on duty what had happened to them from the report
      given to me by the driver.       The patients themselves only
      spoke to me to give me their names.


12.   This was the only event of the entire afternoon.     Every ten
      to fifteen minutes               or I telephoned into control
      to check the situation.       We were concerned that so many
      Barnsley Staff were waiting while no casualties were
      arriving.   Control just asked us to keep standing by.


13.   At about 1750 hours.                and the ambulanceman with
      him from Doncaster took an outpatient to Brampton and I was
        left alone.   I telephoned in at about 1820 hours and was
        informed that no further casualties were expected,       save
        perhaps an over-flow from domestic emergencies for which the
        Sheffield hospitals might not have room because of the
        influx from Hillsborough.   I was instructed to stand down.


14.     I informed the casualty staff and went home at about 1830
        hours




Signed




Dated
ALBERT EDWARD SMITH



1.      I am Albert Edward Smith and was b o m on


2.      I am employed by SYMAS which is a divison of the Trent
        Regional Health Authority.      I have been in the ambulance
        service for most of my life .     I started as an ambulanceman
        at the age of 20 and have sinces worked my way up to my
        present position which is Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer,
        Control and Communications based at Ambulance Control,
        Farfield, Moorgate Road   Rotherham.


3.      I was promoted to my present post in June 1988 and I am
        responsible     for the planning       and use    of ambulances
        throughout    South Yorkshire, both on a routine basis and in
        any emergency.


        My duty normally covers Monday tr> Friday, and ea Saturday
        the 15th April T wnn n n H r n v r? I had worked the previous
        five days as usual.


        I think it would have been about 1530 hours; I was at home
        and took the telephone call from Control Assistant
                     She told me that    there was       an incident   at
        Hillsborough Football Ground.


6   .   I asked her what kind of incident it was, but she was unable
1




             to tell me, I enquired of her what response we were making;
             she did not seem to understand me so I hung up and went at
             once to work.


             I think it was about 1540 hours when I arrived at work and
             went into the main control room intending to see fof myself
             what was taking place.


             In the control room there were, as far as I can recall four
             people, who were under the control of


    9.             told me there was an insident involving a large number
             of people at Hillsborough Football Ground;       he did not know
             exactly what had happened.      He told me that vehicles were
             being sent to the ground.    He said all the day vehicles had
             been sent from Sheffield and some of the emergency vehicles,
             if they were not on route, were being sent        as they became
             available.


    10   .   The Control Room Superintendent was not in the control room
             and I realised he would be in the incident room so I went in
             the room next door and spoke to Superintendent Raymond
             Clarke.
                                                        r\




    11.      Also in the incident room was                   and
             the publicrelations officer.
12.   I noticed that an incident log was being kept by
      that is normal proceedure .      I spoke to Mr Clarke , he was
      actually on the radio, and was directing operations from the
      incident room.


13.   Mr Clake had brought into use a special emergency reserve
      channel which is used for unusual or major incidents which
      require special monitoring.


14.   I asked Mr Clarke what the incident was, but he did not know
      for sure.   He did tell me that he had received information
      from the police at Snig Hill Sheffield but he indicated that
      there were many injuries and some fatalities.


15.   I asked waht our response had been and he drew my attention
      to the log they were keeping.    The log indicated that we had
      responded with ten vehicles, each with a crew of two.            They
      had been told to go to hillsborough Football ground where
      there had been an incident.


16.   I knew we had two men at the ground as normal proceedure and
      they would coordinate the crew when they arrived at the
      ground.


17.   I knew                was in control of the control room and
      Ray Clarke of the   incident room so I then assumed the role
      of   supervisor     and   link    man   w h i c h is   in fact    my
      responsibility.


18.   This was doubly important because we still had the rest of
      South Yorkshire to look after as usual.


19.   Mr Clarke told me who had been sent to the ground.       He also
      said the Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer Alan Hopkins, was at
      the ground as was Mr David Jones Assistant Chief Ambulance
      Officer.


20.   I was satisfied at that time having spoken to                and
      Mr Clarke that our response had been quick, efficient and
      was satisfactory.   Indeed as time passed it continued to be
      so.


21.   I asked if Mr Page the Chief Ambulance Officer had been
      contacted and was told he had and was on his way to control
      at Rotherham.


22.   Other mambers of staff kept arriving at control;        they had
      either been contacted or just come in having heard about the
      incident.   As they arrived they were deployed on various
      duties , mostly answering telephones.


23.               was on a telephone contacting other memberrs of
      staff, to ask them to report for duty , I       •*&£   satisfied
      myself that this was being done satisfactorily and told her
      to continue.


24.   Mr Clarke told me that other ambulance authorities had
      contacted us or had been contacted by him and offered
      assisstance,   in fact vehicles had been despatched towards
      South Yorkshire.   They were West Yorkshire, Derbyshire and
      Nottinghamshire.


25.   Mr Page arrived at about 1550 hours and I told him as much
      as I knew about the situation and what our response had
      been.   He asked if we had set up liaison officers at the
      Sheffield Hospitals.     I instructed               to contact
      control superintendant                   to inform him to act
      as liaison officer at Northern General Hospital and for
                     , Standards and Efficiency Officer, to go to
      Hallamshire Hospital and perform the same duties.


26.   We also set up liaison staff at Barnsley District General
      and Rotherham General Hospitals.    First choice for Barnsley
      was            but as he could not be contacted I sent
                 Station Officer              was first choice for
      Rotherham, but as he could not be contacted
      a Standard and Efficiency       Officer was contacted and
      attended in his place.


27.   Some time after 1600 hours it was obvious that sufficient
      staff had attended Control and I told                  not to
        inform further staff to attend, but to stand by at home.
        This is standard proceedure because we have to cater for
        relief if the incident is lengthy.


28.   During the first half hour that I spent in control reports
        confirmed large numbers of casualties.       Our enquiries
        revealed that most casualties had been removed from the
      ground around 1630 hours.     I advised that all vehicles who
        reported their availability to standby at Netherthorpe Road.


29.   Around 1645 hours we were able to respond to a request from
      the Royal Hallamshire to transfer patients to create room
        for Hillsbororough casualties.   Vehicles from Netherthorpe
      location were used and we transferred at least twenty
      patients mainly to King Edwards Hospital.


30.   Around 1755 hours Mr Page declared the first stage of the
        incident as closed and he then went to visit the scene of
      the incident at Sheffield.


                       essed with the way my staff had responded and
        the^wa       ich they efficiently performed their duties.


Signed
         ALBERT EDWARD SMITH


Dated
            will say as follows


1.   I was born on the


2.   I joined the Sheffield ambulance service in 1972 and was
     initially based at Corporation Street, Sheffield.      I joined
     as a clerical officer, and after some time I transferred to
     the administrative block at Nethe^j^^^ Hospital in Sheffield
     and then on to the work”"shops back at Corporation Street
     until approximately four weeks ago.       At that time I came
     over to control to commence training as a control assistant.
     My   training to date has incorporated switchboard training,
     and I generally sit with other more experienced people
     within the control room.     I was not on duty on Saturday 15th
     April 1989, but I called in to control shortly after 1500
     hours with                   who is a Standards and Efficiency
     Officer.   As we arrived at control in               's car, I
     noticed Mr Alan Hopkins rushing out of the control building
     over to Roger Morley, who had just arrived at the same time
     as ourselves.    Mr Hopkins informed Mr Morley that there was
     trouble at Hillsborough Football Ground and then Mr Hopkins
     and Mr Morley got into the staff Range Rover and presumably
     left for the ground.                     and I went in to the
     control building, and as is normal practice when one is off
     duty               informed Control Superintendent Ray Clarke
     that we were both in the building.       The control room was
     very busy,      and Mr Clarke's basic comment was that he
required our assistance.


I was initially requested by Mr Clarke to telephone control
at West Yorkshire and inform them that there was incident
taking place at Hillsborough, just in case we required extra
assistance.


Mr Clarke then told me to sit in the Control Superintendents
office, which is just off the control room, and with a list
of names of all control officers and assistants,       I was
requested to make contact with as many people on the list
with the intention of asking them to come into work.    Four
control officers and four control assistants agreed to come
into the control immediately.


Shortly afterwards, Albert Smith who is the Assistant Chief
Ambulance     Officerheading Control and Communications,
arrived at control.     He asked me to telephone two more
officers and arranged for them to act as liaison officers at
the Northern General hospital and the Royal Hallamshire
hospital.     The twoofficers    concerned were
and                    and I gave them instructions to go to
their respective hospitals.


Thereafter I went back into the control room and shortly
afterwards                      , who is one of the control
assistants who had recently arrived, suggested opening up a
                                                            aJc
    switchboard.    The switchboard is not normally used    orf

    weekends.   It was a sensible suggestion bearing in mind
    that the telephone lines were jammed with press calls an
    other non emergency calls.   I assisted              on the
    switchboard initially and was then left on my own.        I
    carried on with this task until sometime between 1900 hours
    and 2000 hours by this time, the number of calls from the
    press had greatly reduced, and it was decided to close down
                       fA
    the switchboard.    jsey involvement with the Hillsborough

    incident basically came to an end at that point in time,
    although I continued to help out in control until I left
    with            at 2240 hours <




Signed
Noel Joseph Wade states


1.   I am employed    as   the Assistant Chief Ambulance           Officer
     (Training) for SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   In 1978 I joined SYMAS as an ambulanceman at Maltby.                I
     became a qualified ambulanceman in 1979 and in 1980 I moved
                                              gS
     to Rotherham Ambulance Station.    In 19J0O I obtained the
     National Health Service Training Authority1s Ambulance Aid
     Instructors Certificate and I also did extended training to
     become a paramedic in SYMAS.       At that time there was not a
     national course for paramedics and when the national scheme
     was started in, I think, the following year, those people
     who had done the SYMAS paramedic course                had to pass
     an exam rather than attend the national course.             I was the
     one exception    to   that   and   attended   the   first    national
     paramedic course effectively as a guinea pig.               From 1987
     onwards I spent roughly half of my time in training and was
     appointed the training officer in 1987.             In 1988    I was
     appointed to my present post.


4.   Saturday 15th April was officially a day off but               I was
     involved in a training exercise with a group of cadets on
     Burbadge Moor.   That exercise finished at about 1700 hours
     I could tell from the messages which I could hear over the
radio that there was some form of incident at Hillsborough
and I radioed into control to ask if they needed any help.
I was told to report to the headquarters in Rotherham.


I arrived at headquarters at about        1700 hours where Mr
Albert Smith briefed me.        He told me that the scene was
clear of live casualties at this stage, I saw Mr Page in the
ambulance room and he said that he and I would be going to
the ground.   We left for the ground at about 5.40 p.m.


We arrived at the ground at about 1755 hours where we saw Mr
Hopkins, Mr Eason, Mr Dale and Mr Jones.     Mr Hopkins briefed
Mr Page and I and we spoke to the senior policeman in the
gym whose name is Mr Addis.      Mr Addis explained what was to
happen about the bodies.   The bodies were being bagged at
this time for later removal.


We went back to headquarters at 1830 hours.        There was a
small press conference in Mr Page's office at 1900 hours and
I went off duty at 1930 hours


Approximately every 2 years a major exercise is planned with
the other emergency services.        The last one was in the
autumn of 1988 and involved the mock up of a train crash at
Doncaster.    Thirty to forty ambulance men from SYMAS were
involved and— tiawe— were— three— or— four— crewa— from— ether
districts— involved aa wolIrT    None of the crews knows it is
      an exercise until they arrive at the scene.


9.    We review the SYMAS major incident plan after each mock
      incident plan after each mock incident.                   This review is
      carried out by a panel of senior officers.                 A copy of the
      major incident plan is kept at each ambulance station.


10. All recruits are given an overview of the major incident
                                    inolu«tt:vo»v
      plan as part of their imduotive training, concentrating upon
      their part in that plan.


11.   When ambulance men go onto full time day duties we hold a
      week's course which I run and at that time they all see a
      copy of the complete major incident plan and we discuss
      recent incidents and the way they have been handled by the
      ambulance service.


12.   We    had   been   planning     to    hold    a major   incident   seminar
      shortly, but, in view of the Hillsborough tragedy this has
      been shelved for the time being.


Signed
           NOEL JOSEPH WADE


Da^      . . .H .. m r
                              states :


1.   I was born on
2.   I joined the Ambulance Service      in May 1974, and my title is
     presently Leading Ambulanceman.         I initially attended a two
     week basic induction course at a local training school in
     Sheffield, and within ten months or so I attended a six week
     residential     course   at Keighley,    in order   to obtain      the
     "Millar"    qualification in Ambulance Aid.          After twelve
     months duty I became a Qualified Ambulanceman.             Thereafter
     I became a Qualified Instructor for approximately ten years
     and approximately four years ago I was promoted to Leading
     Ambulanceman.     I am qualified in ambulance aid and this has
     allowed me to teach at Qualified Ambulance level.             I have
     lectured on various courses, including basic cadets, advance
     training and public relations work.
3.   Approximately three years ago I attended Banstead in Surrey,
     which is a Regional Ambulance Training Centre.            I undertook
     an Instructor Course for extended training, i.e. paramedic
     training.       This has allowed me to teach and practice at
     that particular level.       My practical experience in relation
     to extended training commenced in or about September, 1986.
4.   I was not on duty on Saturday 15th April, 1989.            I had been
     on night duty the day before.           In the early part of the
     afternoon my wife and I went shopping, and we arrived home
     at   approximately   1530 hours.        After we    had    taken   the
     shopping indoors, my next door neighbour came over to our
house and asked if I knew of the events at Hillsborough.                          I
immediately turned on the local radio whilst my wife turned
on the television.              I then telephoned Control,               informed
them who I was and my base and was requested to go straight
to Longley.       I arrived at my Station at approximately 1600
hours,    collected      all    my equipment,          and      teamed   up with
Ambulancewoman                     , who drove our ambulance down to
Hillsborough._____ We          approached    the      football       ground     via
Herries Road jSetrCTi and then on to Penistone Road.                        We had
been advised on the vehicle radio to report to gate 0, and
as we     drove   onto    Penistone      Road,       I jumped out         of    the
ambulance with all my equipment.                   I immediately spoke to
David Jones and Paul Eason and asked them where I should
attend.     I was advised to go to the gymnasium, and entered
the ground.       On arrival at the gymnasium I liaised with
Alan Hopkins.        By this time all the seriously injured had
been taken away to hospital,             whilst only^— fatalities and
                                                  AiZcSA M O
walking    wounded      were    left   inside        the       gymnasium.         I
therefore carried my equipment back outside the gymnasium,
and actually placed the same on the central reservation on
Penistone Road.          I asked Station Officer Eason to watch
over my equipment as Mr Hopkins had instructed me to collect
more     body   bags,     and    there      was     also       the   fact      that
Ambulancewoman                      had driven our vehicle away.                  I
collected five body bags from various vehicles parked along
Penistone Road,       and when      I returned to the gymnasium                   I
handed the bags over to Mr Hopkins.                 I then returned to the
Penistone         Road    area    and    became    involved       with    traffic
control, at which time I liaised with David Jones and Paul
Eason.         I actually began to control the flow of vehicles as
they came down Penistone Road,                  and also other ambulance
vehicles which were exiting from the ground.                      A short while
afterwards all remaining casualties inside                        the gymnasium
had     been      taken   away    to hospital,         although    there     still
remained a large number of vehicles parked on Penistone
Road.          David Jones asked me to take two vehicles from
Penistone Road around to the Leppings Lane end in order to
pick up six fatalities and bring the bodies back to the
gymnasium.            When I arrived at the Leppings Lane end,                        I
noticed that the bodies were covered up with canvass and
against a wall.            I have no idea how the bodies came to lay
at this point.            Three bodies were loaded onto each vehicle,
with one police officer in attendance for each body.                                  I
recall that Station Officer Higgins followed us in to the
Leppings       Lane      end   with   other     vehicles    to    pick     up    the
remaining bodies.              We then travelled round the perimeter of
the road behind the South Stand turning left on to Penistone
Road,       and    then    back   into    the    ground    at    the     point   we
originally entered.                The vehicle was reversed up towards
the gymnasium door and                I assisted with transporting the
                                                                                  *
bodies into the gymnasium.
Sometime later, David Jones gave a general briefing meeting
to    all    ambulance crew who were              in the vicinity          of    the
gymnasium,         and    ascertained     who    was    on which       particular
     shift.      Some ambulance crews were stood down although a
     nucleus of ambulancemen were retained at the ground.              Mr
     Jones actually requested me to collect a staff car.          I also
     recall that approximately 10/12 ambulances had to be checked
     for fuel and in      particular two vehicles were very low on
     fuel.       I therefore     took   these vehicles up   to   Longley
     Station    for refuelling and returned back to the ground as
     soon as    possible with both vehicles.         When I returned   to
     Hillsborough I replaced my equipment on to the vehicle that
     I had travelled to the ground with                     Jriving.
6.   A short    while afterwards I spoke to Station Officer Eason
     and as I was not crewed up           with anybody at that point   in
     time,    Mr Eason said I could be relieved of any further
     duties.     I therefore drove the Renault vehicle (i.e. the
     vehicle which I travelled down to Hillsborough in), back to
     Longley, arriving sometime around 2030 hours.After moving
     my equipment into the Station I signed off.


Dated this ^     day of   HAY.    1989.
                   will say as follows

1.   I was born on the


2.   My present position with Symas is Standards and Efficiency
     Officer.     I joined the ambulance service approximately 23
     years ago, where I initially worked in control which was
     based at Corporation Street, Sheffield.           I generally carried
     out administrative duties and thereafter became the personal
     assistant to the chief ambulance officer at that point in
     time, Mr Kennedy.       I then transferred with ambulance HQ to
     Netherr^dge    Hospital    in   Sheffield,      and   after   a    further
     period of time    I applied       for and obtained       a post         as a
     Liaison Officer at the Royal Hallamshire hospital.                   After
     approximately    8 years     in   this   post    I applied        for    and
     obtained the post of Standards and Efficiency Officer, where
     I am based at Rotherham.


3.   My basic roll as Standards and Efficiency Officer is to act
     as   a   link between     the various     hospitals     and   ambulance
     services within the Symas area.          I am one of four Standards
     and Efficiency Officers within Symas.             I normally work a
     five day a week because Standards and Efficiency Officers
     are initially responsible for all outpatient transport ( a
     very major task)    which only operates between Monday and
     Friday.


4.   I was not on duty on Saturday 15th April 1989.                    I was at
home when I received a telephone call from Control asking me
to go immediately to the Royal Hallamshire hospital.                   I was
informed that there had been an incident at Hillsborough.                     I
immediately put on my uniform and drove straight to the
Royal hallamshire.            I initially thought that an excercise
was taking place, but during my journey to the hospital I
tuned into Radio Sheffield and heard that the football match
had been stopped.


As    I approached       the   casualty   department       via    Claremount
Crescent,      I saw a number of ambulance vehicles with their
emergency lights turned on.            To avoid any confusion I drove
into A road at the hospital and parked on the outpatients
ambulance apron.         I ran into casualty and noticed a number
of casualties being ferried into the hospital at that time.
It    should    be    noted    that   there    are   two   entrances       into
casualty; the first entrance is the normal casualty entrance
whilst door 10, known as triage is used for access into
casualty when ever there is a major incident.


I was filled in with details of the Hillsborough incident by
some   police        officers who were        at   the Royal     Hallamshire
hospital.       I telephoned Control to inform them that I had
arrived and spoke to                           who is a fellow Standards
and    Efficiency       Officer.                       asked     me   if    the
ambulance vehicles leaving the Royal Hallamshire could be
mobilised so as to stand by at Netherthorpe Parkway because
at that point in time no ambulances were required baqk at
Hillsborough.                    asked me to keep in touch with him
on a regular basis, and I tried to telephone him every 30
minutes or so.


I recall a large number of hospital staff always waiting at
the   casualty entrance       when ever      ambulances    arrived with
further casualties.         The whole exercise was extremely well
organised, and there was never any delay in transferring the
casualties in to hospital          from ambulances.         Whenever an
ambulance      crew   had   offloaded     some   casualties     at    the
hospital, I made a point of speaking to every crew to inform
them to make sure allequipment            was put back into their
vehicles, and that they were then to travel to Netherthorpe
Park and wait on standby.         I also made a point of informing
each crew to radio Control when they had arrived at that
location.


As the number of ambulance vehicles arriving at the hospital
began to slow down, I recall telephoning                               at
Control to ascertain whether there would be any transfers of
casualties from the Northern General or Royal Hallamshire
hospitals.     I then went down to the admissions office within
the hospital to find out whether some patients required a
transfer to any other hospital.


At a later stage,                     informed me that a couple of
casualties with minor injuries from Hillsborough would be
taken   down    to    Barnsley    District    General     Hospital.     I
      proceeded to inform the sister                   in charge on the triage
      door,    and also Doctor Egbrook,           a consultant anaesthetist,
      that we were not expecting to bring anymore casualties from
      Hillsborough to the Royal Hallamshire.                  It should be noted
      that I continually contacted                              on the internal
      padio system in the hospital known as the monarch system
      which enabled me to make direct contact with Control.


10.   I then began telephoning a number of wards,                  in particular
      FI,     F2   and   Gl,     to    see   whether    any   patients   required
      transfer.        I then spoke to                        again and informed
      him that I would be moving round to B road reception and
      that I would stay at this location until I was satisfied
      that all patients who required transferring had been so
      transferred.        When     I arrived at reception I contacted
                   again and requested         some vehicles     for transfers.
      These vehicles arrived in a few minutes, and I proceeded to
      organise the removal of a number of patients off different
      wards, at all times liaising with the ward sister.                   During
      this     time,     an       ambulance maninformed me that Control had
      been     trying     to     contact me    because    one of   the hospital
      doctors, I believe Doctor Crosby, had informed Control that
      he had not seen anybody from the ambulance service at the
      Royal Hallamshire.              I immediately went down to see Doctor
      Crosby and brought him up to date with the situation, namely
      that no more casualties from Hillsborough were expected.


11.   After I informed                           that all transfers had been
      taken, he gave me an up date on the Hillsborough casualties.
      At the same time, he notified me of a large fight going on
      at Ecclesfield with a possible number of casualties - the
      incident had nothing to do with Hillsborough.


12.   When I arrived back at casualty,            there were a number of
      hospital staff milling around,            and I was informed that a
      number      of   bodies    from Hillsborough were      expected     to be
      brought up to the hospital mortuary.            I did consider this
      rather peculiar because whenever I had previously spoken to
                            he informed me that no bodies were to be
      conveyed by the ambulance service at that stage.                  I then
      contacted                      r informing him that I would proceed
      to   the    hospital      mortuary   to ascertain what     was    exactly
      happening and pass this information back to him.                  When I
      arrived at the Mortuary, there were two police officers in
      attendance and a number of hospital staff.            I asked them for
      an up date on the position, and they replied by saying that
      they were waiting for a number of bodies to arrive although
      no one was sure were the information had originated from.                I
      informed everybody at the mortuary that no bodies would be
      arriving by ambulance.


13.   After approximately 15 minutes I said I would go back to the
      porters lodge on B Road and contact                          to confirm
      that   no    bodies    had   arrived.     Everybody    present    at   the
      hospital mortuary then quickly dispersed.             I contacted
                  and he     informed me      that he had had Mr Qureshi
      (Consultant at Rotherham District General hospital) on the
      telephone enquiring as to whether any casualties would be
      transferred from the Royal Hallamshire down to the R.D.G.H.
      I checked out this enquiry with casualty,                 I believe with
      Doctor Crosby, and he replied by saying they were more than
      able to cope.      I then telephoned casualty department at the
      R.D.G.H and informed them that the Royal Hallamshire would
      not be transferring any patients.


14.   I believe I then went back to the administrative office of
      the Royal Hallamshire,          and I was informed that they were
      experiencing problems       trying to contact the police incident
      room.      They wanted an up date on the number of Hillsborough
      casualties and the extent of injuries.              I was able to leave
      a message for the police to contact the Royal Hallamshire,
      by initially speaking to Control.


15.   I   was    later   informed      by                         one   of   the
      administrators       at   the    hospital,    that    the    police    had
      telephoned,     but had not provided the information that was
      required.      The situation at the hospital began to ease and
      after     approximately another half         hour   I contacted
                 again, who informed me that an ambulance crew could
      be coming to the Royal Hallamshire hospital to collect one
      body - there was only one fatality at the Royal Hallamshire
      at that point in time.          The body was to be collected on the
      authority of the coroner, and I proceeded down to the charge
      nurse     at   casualty   who   was   in   charge    of   the   temporary
      mortuary in the plaster room to inform him of the situation.
      Within minutes       the   ambulance   crew   arrived     to    take    the
      fatality.


16.   I also received a message from                            that Mr Don
      Page wanted to speak to Tony Mapplebeck, who is the General
      Manager at Sheffield District Health Authority.            I was aware
      that Mr Mapplebeck was with all the hospital administrators
      within the administrative wing.          When     I arrived          at the
      administrative    wing,     I noticed    that    Mr Mapplebeck         was
      already giving an interview to a television crew.                     I was
      able to leave a message with                               who       is the
      publicity officer for the Trent Regional Health Authority,
      requesting Mr Mapplebeck to contact Mr Page                as    soon as
      possible.    Very little happened after this point in time in
      connection    with    the   Hillsborough      incident,        and   after
         telephoning                 once again at approximately 2100
      hours, I left the hospital and went home.
Lawrence Yoxall states


1.   I am employed as a qualified ambulance man with SYMAS.


2.   My date of birth is


3.   I have been with SYMAS since 1976, and became a qualified
     ambulance man in 1977.


4.   I was off duty on Saturday 15th April and wanted to attend
     the Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest FA Cup semi-final at
     Hillsborough.       I attend football matches quite regularly
     and try to see Liverpool play fairly often because my 12
     year old son is a Liverpool supporter.    On this occasion my
     son was not going to accompany me to the match.


     I did not have a ticket for the match but I knew that some
     Liverpool fans were going to a pub in Barnsley for lunch and
     so my friend,                 and I went there to see if we
     could obtain any spare tickets.     We arrived at the pub at
     1130 and we bought two tickets for the Leppings Lane stand
     at #6.


6.   We went to Hillsborough,     parking at Parsons Cross Estate
     which is about a mile from the ground and walking down to
     Leppings Lane from the North.    We arrived outside the ground
     at about 1440.
Before approaching the turnstiles, fans have to go through
some large blue wrought iron gates.       As we walked through
these gates a policeman closed one side of the gates and I
turned and closed the other side behind me.


There were large crowds of people outside the turnstiles and
I stood on a stanchion which supports a wall dividing some
of the turnstiles in order see over the heads of the people
in front of me.    I could see that it might be possible to
walk around the crowd and get in through the far right hand
turnstile.   I told         to follow me and we went around the
back of the crowd, passing to the extreme right where the
crush was were not too bad.     As we approached the far right
hand turnstile a concertina exit gate (gate C) which is to
the right of the turnstiles was open and I walked straight
into the ground.      The doors were slammed shut behind me and
my friend was unable to get in.       I do not know who opened
that gate, nor do I know who closed it.       I would estimate
that about 100 other people walked in with me.     As a result
of going into the ground that way my ticket was not checked
and I still have my complete ticket.


I was now in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand.     There
were several people there but the crowds were not nearly as
bad as they had been outside.       I waited there for about 5
minutes in an attempt to meet up with                    and I
            bought a programme whilst I waited.


10.              did not appear and as it was approaching kick-off time
            I walked to the right of the Leppings Lane stand and took up
            a spot on the corner of the ground underneath the score
            board.     I did not go down the tunnel in the middle of the
            stand because I had been there on previous occasions and I
            knew it would be very crowded.   Whilst I was waiting in the
            yard there were not any crowds in the   tunnel but I couldsee
            the crowd at the very front (i.e. at the ground end) of the
            tunnel, although I was not taking any particular notice.


11 . A couple of minutes after I had taken my position the game

            kicked off but like a lot of the people around me I was
            watching the crowd behind the goal and not the game.     People
            were already climbing the fence to get onto the field.


            During those first five minutes of the game I heard         two
1   2   *
            messages come over the PA system.     One was for Liverpool
            supporters to stop pushing in the Leppings Lane end of the
            ground and the other was for people to clear the playing
            area as people were already spilling onto the pitch.


13.         At about 1505 a policeman ran onto the field and grabbed the
            referee.     The game was stopped and the players left the
            field.     By now there were quite a number of people on the
            field and I could see some people on the pitch trying to
      resuscitate a youngster.          People around me stood staring in
      silence.


14.   I decided to try to get onto the pitch.             I could not move
      forwards and I realised I would have to leave the area where
      I was standing and try another entrance with the help of the
      police.


      As I came round the corner of the Leppings Lane stand near
      the entrance to the tunnel there were people lying on the
      ground.     A policeman and a supporter were resuscitating a
      man in his late 30's near the tunnel entrance.             As I bent
      down they asked if I could help.           I tried to resuscitate him
      but I realised it was too late.             He had no pulse and his
      eyes were dilated.


16.   Nearby a man of about 30 was lying on the ground and he was
      being turned on his side.              I checked him but he too was
      dead.


17.   I went to another casualty.             He was being attended to by
      people who seemed to know what they were doing.             They had
      him on his side and he was breathing.             As I looked around
      people     were   being   left    on   the ground with   their   faces
      already covered over.            I went over to a man of about 16
      whose face had been covered and a youth was standing near
      him in tears.      I asked if he knew him and he replied "no".
18.   By now an ambulance had arrived outside C gate.     I went down
      to the gate to speak to the crew.     I do not know who they
      but they were a Sheffield crew of two men with a front line
      ambulance.      One of the crew was already resuscitating a
      casualty in the gateway.    I spoke to the other crew member
      as he was loading casualties into the ambulance.     I tried to
      impress upon him the seriousness of the situation inside the
      ground and I asked him if he knew how many ambulances were
      coming.   He told me that 20 ambulances would be coming.


19.   As the ambulance left I spoke to a police officer and I told
      him that we had to get casualties down to the gate ready for
      the ambulances and that the other supporters had to be kept
      out of the way.


20.   As I returned through C gate into the crowd a policeman and
      policewoman were attending a youngster.      I asked how he was
      and they told me he was all right at present.     I checked his
      pulse which was strong and I told them I would try to get
      him a stretcher when one became available.


21.   I helped a number of casualties down to C gate.        Most of
      these casualties were able to walk but complained about
      chest pains.      I helped to carry one man with a group of
      other people.
22.   We placed the casualties against the wall outside C gate.
      There is a plan attached to this statement.            The casualties
      were placed in the area marked with a yellow line.                   Other
      people also took casualties down to the same area.


23.   Another ambulance had arrived on the scene by now and I
      recognised Leading Ambulance man                     I informed him of
      the    situation     and   I helped     load   a   casualty    onto   his
      ambulance.     This casualty was a man of about 40 with crush
      injuries     and    breathing   difficulties.       I also     loaded   a
      youngster onto              's ambulance and I travelled in the
      back    of   this    ambulance   with    LA              and   the    two
      casualties to Northern General.            As we left the scene I
      could see that another ambulance had arrived.                  We drove
      along the service road to Penistone Road and from there to
      the Northern General Hospital.           During the journey I was
      trying to keep an oxygen mask on the 40 year old patient.
      We arrived at the casualty area where the hospital seemed to
      be prepared for a large number of casualties.           We lifted the
      patient with the help of a porter because the patient was
      struggling so much.        We put him onto a heavy duty trolley.
      The other casualty was unloaded by hospital staff.              We went
      straight back to the ground, to the Leppings Lane end.


24.   When we arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground we
      loaded up two stretcher cases.           Both were men of about 20
      who were fully conscious and had crush injuries.                We also
        loaded up two walking casualties.    One of these was holding
        his chest and both appeared to be suffering from shock.     A
        nurse also got into the ambulance.     We left LA          at
        the ground and went to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital where
        we arrived at the fracture entrance.      I explained to the
        doctor briefly what the apparent injuries were and he put
        the patients into categories.   We simply unloaded them and
        returned to the ground.


25.   We arrived back at the Leppings Lane end of the ground from
        the south and again pulled into the service road.   There was
        an ambulance present already full of sitting cases and there
        did not seem any further need for my assistance.      Leading
      Ambulance man           was in the area and he returned to the
      ambulance.     As there was nothing further for me to do I
        started to look for my friend                He did not seem
        to be in the area of the Leppings Lane entrance and so I
        returned to the car where he was waiting.     I had left the
        ground at 1625.




Signed
           LAWRENCE YOXALL


Dated
                                                                                                           ‘ din Police Access


 Sheffield Wednesday F.                            C.                                             Police
                                                                                                  Room\
      Hillsborough Ground                                                                Room



                                                                             Gymnasium
                                                                                                                                 -77-88
                                                                                                                                   J 3-76
                                                                                                                                     5-72
                                                                         NORTH STAND




                                             6I




                      1-16
                                 i
                             ___ 2 ....|     41
                                 (A     I.
                                 k— - H
                                 f°          31
                                 £

                                             2\                         Player's
                             \                                          Tunnel
Away Fans Entrance
                                             I*                                                                                             V
  and Enclosures



        Police Control                19-22                            SOUTH STAND
                                                             w m m                                 (ZLXO
                                                  Official
                                                                              —— J        I"    29-32 33-36
                                                                                                 Car

      KEY
                                                                             @ a
      TURNSTILES   P77771                                    Directors Entrance
