PCM I L l . l t (L+
 lo: fVliKe Hedaes
    Chief &Asfctfo/eS O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                           P O LIC E
      ^ o u th Y o rS ir e ^ ^                       A U T H O R IT Y


               09 DEC 1999
                                      With Compliments

               r.h\rf Constable,       South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                                               P.O. Box 37, Regent Street




□□□
      Information                     Barnsley, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ
      Action                       Switchboard: Barnsley (01226) 770770
      Comment                              Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
             f


         /




\o   *
  South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
  P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
  Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
  Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
  Internet: www.southyorks.org.uk
                                                                                         At
  W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer

                                                                              S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
  Our ref:    W JW A /S
                                                                                               P O L IC E
                                                                                         A U T H O R IT Y
  Your ref:



  Date:   7 December 1999


  This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkinson

 Mr J Moseley
 General Secretary
 Police Federation of England and W ales
 15-17 Langley Road
 Surbiton
 Surrey KT6 6LP

 Dear


 I enclose as promised an outline of the tax problem, based on William Massey Q C ’s
 advice.

 To recap, the position is as follows:-

 (i)          The Authority has agreed to support the officers up to the conclusion of preliminary
              hearings in January 2000.

(ii)      subject to the outcome of those hearings, we expect to receive applications for
           funding for the trial itself (June 2000; 6-7 weeks; cost up to £2m [that fiqure is
           confidential]).

(iii)         If the payments are taxable, it only makes sense for the officers to accept support If
             the Authority meets the tax liability. This potentially adds 87% to the costs. It
             could mean the Authority is unable to continue support, taking into account its
             other financial commitments to policing. Apart from that, it is unreasonable to ask it
             to take a major decision when the costs estimates could vary by a factor of two.

(iv)      Therefore we need to resolve the issue before asking them to take the decision.

(v)       W e asked the Tax Inspector in October. He ruled it was taxable but would not
          enter into further discussion till a payment had been made. W e then asked
          Charles Clarke if he could expedite things. He received a similar reaction from the
          Inland Revenue.

(vi)      At that stage we hadn’t got William Massey’s advice, which considerably
          strengthens our position.
(vii)    ... therefore we are asking the Federation, the Superintendents’ Association, ACPO
          a n d the APA to use any channels available to them to persuade Home Office to
          take up the issue a g a in with the Revenue in the light of the advice now received.
          The aim is to secure a pre-transaction ruling so that when the Authority comes to
          take the main decision it has certainty about the financial implications.

(viii)   while the circumstances of this case could well be unique, the outcome of the
         In la n d Revenue ruling could have im plicatio ns on a much wider scale within the
         Police Service and elsewhere.

If you need any further information, don’t hesitate to contact me or Maureen Oades,
Assistant Clerk, on 01226 772801.

Thanks for your help.

Yours sincerely




         cmson
Clerk and Treasurer

Enc

Copy to:         M Oades

               A Barnes, Police Federation representative, South Yorkshire Police
               D Harlock, Garretts
               A Betts, Garretts
HILLSBOROUGH

SUMMARY OF LEGAL ADVICE FROM MR WILLIAM MASSEY QC


1.     Introduction

      The issue on which Counsel was asked to advise was whether the reimbursement of
      the legal expenses of David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray was taxable;
      i) as being emoluments from employment (Section 19 Income and Corporation Taxes
      Act 1988 - Schedule E );

      ii) as being benefits provided under a retirement benefits scheme (Section 596A Taxes
      Act)

2.    Section 19 Taxes Act and Schedule E

2.1   Section 19 provides that tax under Schedule E is chargeable in respect of

      “any office or employment on emoluments therefrom ...”


2.2   The emoluments which DD and BM received from their office as police officers were
      within Schedule E.

2.3   “Emoluments” is defined to include “ all salaries, fees, wages, perquisites and profits
      whatsoever

2.4   In view of the statutory provisions the question is whether the payments made or to be
      made by the Authority are emoluments from the office held by DD and BM.

2.5   Counsel emphatically stated that in his opinion the reimbursement of the legal costs of
      DD and BM did not come within the ambit of Section 19 of the Taxes Act.

      Clearly the reimbursement of legal costs is a “profit” to the officers. However, the
      payments are not made in return for DD and BM being or having been officers with
      SYPA, nor in return for past services. They are paid because of the predicament in
      which the former officers find themselves and because SYPA supports the Chief
      Constable’s view that it is necessary to preserve the morale of the current police force
      for SYPA to be seen to be actively supporting serving and former officers who face
      prosecution arising out of the carrying out of their duties at the Hillsborough Stadium
      disaster. Accordingly, they are not emoluments from office, which are taxable under
      Section 19 of the Taxes Act.
      Counsel referred to a long line of cases which had illuminated the parameters of the
      statutory provisions. These cases established that it is not sufficient to render the
      payments assessable that they would not have received them unless they had been
         officers of SYPA. It had to be shown that the payments were derived from the
         employment in the sense of being payments made in return for acting as or being
         police officers or having been police officers.


3.      Section 596A Taxes Act 1988

3.1     This provides so far as relevant:-


        “(1) W here in any year of assessment a person receives a benefit under a retirement
        benefits scheme which is not of a description mentioned in Section 596(1 )(a)(b) or ( c),
        tax shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of this section.
        (2) W here the benefit is received by an individual, he shall be charged to tax under
        Schedule E for that year>”


3.2     A retirement benefits scheme is defined in Section 611to mean “ a scheme for the
        provision of benefits consisting of or including relevant benefits”.“Relevant benefits”
        are defined by Section 612(1):-


        “Relevant benefits” means any pension, lump sum, gratuity or other like benefit given
        or to be given on retirement or on death, or in anticipation of retirement, or, in
        connection with past service, after retirement or death, or to be given on or in
        anticipation of or in connection with any change in the nature of the service of the
        employee in question....”
3.3.1   In Counsel’s opinion, it would be difficult to prove that a “scheme” did not exist for the
        purposes of Section 611 given the definition includes an “agreement” or “other
        arrangements”. Counsel also felt that the payment of legal expenses was capable of
        falling within the definition of a “relevant benefits” either as a “lump sum” or “similar
        benefit”. However, Counsel did not consider Section 596A was in point.

3.3.2   Counsel referred to the definition of “relevant benefits” which require the benefit to be

        “ .. in connection with past service after retirement or d eath...”. In Counsel’s opinion
        the payments were not in connection with past service but in connection with the
        criminal proceedings. In order to ascertain whether the payments were connected to
        past service it is necessary to look at the motivation behind the payments. SYPA’s
        motivation is to ensure the provision of an effective police force by being seen to stand
        behind officers faced with criminal proceedings directly resulting from the performance
        of their duties. In Counsel’s opinion the reimbursement of legal expenses in the
        present case was not in connection with past service and was not, therefore, the
        provision of an unapproved retirement benefit scheme.
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
Internet: www.southyorks.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer

                                                                          S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref:     W JW /FS
                                                                                           P O L IC E
Your ref:                                                                            A U T H O R IT Y
Date:      9 December 1999


This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkinson     Direct Line:


Jim Bradley
Police Resources Unit
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                        South Yorkshire Police
Westminster
                                                                          Cdf- 4 c c c s .
LONDON, SW1H 9AT

Dear        t                                                               14 DEC 1999

                                                                           Chief Constable
Hillsborough

I am writing to update you on the tax issue. Shortly after we met the Minister, we sought
Counsels advice on the matter, from William Massey QC, a tax specialist. His firm view is that
the payments should not be subject to tax, and he believes that the Revenue should be
prepared to reconsider their position and issue a pre-transaction ruling.

I am enclosing a copy of the advice.

Because of the wider potential implications, I have briefed the Federation, the Superintendents
Association, ACPO and the APA on the background, so I would not be surprised if you or the
Minister were approached by at least one of them. Perhaps you could let the Minister have
sight of the advice.

The overall position on Hillsborough is that the Authority resolved on 26 November to support
the officers in two short preliminary hearings scheduled for 20 December and 4 January.
Members hope that the tax issue can be resolved satisfactorily over the next month or so
before they have to consider funding for the full trial in June 2000.

Please let me know if you require any further information.

Yours sincerely




Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Enc.

Copies to.              M Hedges, Chief Constable *
                        M Oades, Assistant Clerk
                        D Harlock, Garretts
                                                     G arretts
                                                                                                    COPV
 Privileged/Confidential inform aHon
                                                                                                1 City Square
 may be contained in this facsimile and Is Intended only for the use of the addressee. It       Leeds
 you ate not ifae addressee, ot tha person responsible for delivering it to the person          LS12AL
 addressed, ym t TPtrfTOt copy cr deliver thla to anyone dsc. If you receive this facsimile
 by mistake, plecse notify ua tarniediately by telephone. Thanlcyou.                            0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                0113 207 9001 Facsimile (Central)
                                                                                                DX 26444 Leeds Park Square

                                                                                                25 November 1999


                                                                                                Fax no:         01226 772899
 To:             Maureen Oades
 From;
  Subject;       SYPA
 Pages to follow:         20
  If unreadable please contact [                           I n 0113 3996171


  Please find attached Note and Opinion of Counsel.




                                                           UK office*:                              Associated firm in Scotland
  A list of the names of the partner* is open to           Birmingham              London           Dundaa &'Wilson CS
  fcspection at the above office. The partners are         Cambridge               Manchester       Edinburgh
  either solicitors or registered foreign lawyers          Lcod9                   K04ding          Glasgow




tnn 'A                                                                                 3EYn?)S Alio I             Si =01 (.1H1) 66 ,'AOV
25.NCV.i999   10:41   PUMP COURT TAX CHWlEEKS                                  NO. 675       P. 2




                                       BE:      THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                AUTHORITY




                                          NOTE TO INSTRUCTING SOLICITORS




                                       Garretts




rnn ^                                                iw nfts   i .i, i o   I        c r :m    im iftfi   *\o\f
    35.NOV.1999   10:         r .'P COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                             NO.STS                  P.3




                        RE: THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




                                NOTE TO INSTRUCTING SOLICITORS




       I now enclose the Opinion in this matter. I would ask my Instructing Solicitors to consider
                                                                                                                  i

      carefully the summary of the facts at paragraph 1 of the Opinion. As Instructing Solicitors know,

      I have not seen the relevant resolutions of the South Yorkshire Police Authority and it should be

      ensured that I have accurately stated their effect. If Instructing Solicitors consider that the

      summary o f The facts needs in any way to be amended, I shall be happy to make those

      amendments.




•                                                                     1
                                                                      --------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                              W ILLIAM MASSEY QC
                                                                              Pump Court Tax Chambers
                                                                                      16 Bedford Row
                                                                                               London
                                                                                           WC1R4EB

                                                                                              24 November 1999




    £00d                                                          aavnfis . uio i                            St=01 I.1HJU66 . m
                                             Nfi A7S   P 4
PUMP COURT TAX CHfittBERS




                   RE:      THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                            AUTHORITY




                                   OPINION




                    Garretts
    25.NOV. 1999   10:<52       FU1P COURT TAX CHPr.HE.RS
                                                                                            NO.675    P.5




                            RE: THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY




                                                 OPINION




       1.     Background



       1.1    I have been* asked to advise the South Yorkshire Police       A u th o rity   (“SYPA”) in the

              following circumstances which I take from my Instructions, as augmented by the decision

              o f the Divisional Court in X -v- South Yorkshire Police Authority ex p. Chief Constable

              o f ike South. Yorkshire Police [1999] 2 All ER 873.



       1.2.1 Following the Hillsborough disaster in 1989, two former SYPA police officers,

^             Mr DuckerSeld and Mr Murray, were charged in July 1998 with manslaughter and wilful

              neglect to perform a public duty. Each of them had by then retired from their office with

              the SYPA, Mr Duckerfield in November 1991, Mr Murray in August 1992, in each case

              on medical grounds. Each draws a police pension.



        1.2.2 The committal proceedings took place in July 1999» and the two former officers were

              committed for trial. This is to take place in June 2000, if an application to strike out, due

              to be heard in January 2000, is unsuccessful.




                                                        1




    son'd
                                                                                       NO.©75       P.6
2S.H0V.1959     10^2          rUHP COURT TftX CHAMBERS




     1.3    In response to these events



     1.3.1 In February 1998, shortly before the prosecutions were formally brought, SYPA resolved

             in principle to authorise consideration being given, to applications by officers for financial

             assistance in meeting private prosecutions arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.



      1.3.2 On 5 March 1998 and 29 June 1998 the two former officers’ applications for financial

             assistance in meeting tho threatened private prosecutions were approved.               Further
                                                                                                t
             applications for fmand&l assistance towards legal representation in judicial review

             proceedings .against the DPP were made by the two former officers later in 1998.

             Initially SYPA, with great reluctance but on the basis o f legal advice received, resolved

             that they had no power to give financial assistance either to meet the cost of the private

             prosecutions or to meet the cost of the judicial review proceedings.



      1.3.3 In March 1999, the Divisional Court held in the judicial review proceedings referred to at

             1.1 above that SYPA had power (under the Local Government Act 1972 and the Police

             Act 1996) to meet the legal costs of officers incurred in relation to private prosecutions

             brought against them and judicial review proceedings in which they are represented.



      1.3.4 In May 1999 SYPA resolved that, pursuant to that power, it should meet the costs

             incurred by the two former officers in the committal proceedings and part o f the costs

             incurred, in. the judicial review proceedings.




                                                        2




 9 0 0 'd                                                           M nfts A! 10 1            9 c : 01 I M L ) 6 6 . ’AON
25.NOV.1999    10:42        PUMP COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                  NO.675        P.7




     1.4    SYPA, in reso lv in g to meet these costs supported th e Chief Constable’s view that it was

            necessary to preserve the morale of the current Police Force for the SYPA to be seen

            actively to be supporting serving and former officers who were facing prosecution arising

            out of the carrying out o f tbeir duties at Hillsborough Stadium. Unless this support was

            given, and seen to be given, existing officers would clearly feel reluctant to act in

            situations where they, too, could become exposed to prosecutions for acts carried out in

            the course of their duties. If the Police Force was to continue to operate efficiently and

            effectively it was important for ihese existing officers to know that their actions (within

            obvious bounds of reasonableness) would be supported by SYPA.



     1.5    SYPA’s resolution to bear the costs is restricted by certain limits, including monetary

            limits. SYPA has agreed to reimburse the two individuals their legal costs within such

            limits and has reserved the right to seek assessment by the Court of the level of costs.



     1.6   If the charges are successfully defended or dropped, then an order is likely to be made for

           their costs to be met out of central funds, and in that event any costa recovered would be

           used to reduce or extinguish the financial assistance provided by SYPA.



     1.7   There is no commitment, as yet, to fond the costs beyond the committal stage, but it is

           anticipated that a further application to SYPA will be made in relation to the costs up to

           and including the criminal trial.



    1.8    The costs claimed so far amount to £600,000 (£510,000 + VAT). About £300,000 has

           been paid on account.




•nn ‘ J                                                           wvnnc   m-i   t          ar-nr    nuncc   '\r>v
                           PUMP COURT TAX CH^r-RS                                    N0.S7S       P.0
25.IS0V.1S99   10:^2




          The Issue



   2.1    The issue on which I have been asked to advise is whether in these circumstances a

          Schedule E liability arises. I have been asked to consider the provision imposing liability

          under Schedule E upon emoluments from employment, Section 19 Taxes Act 1988, and

          the provision imposing liability on benefits provided under a retirement benefits scheme,

          Section 596A Taxes Act 1988.

                                                                                              i
   2.2    I have considered at the outset whether the provision being made by SYPA is money or

          money’s worth on the one hand, or a benefit in kind in the form o f a loan or guarantee on

          the other. The significance is that unless the provision consists in money or something

          convertible into money, there is no taxable emolument. I note also that if the person for

          whom the provision is made ia not in the year of assessment in which the provision is

          mads employed as a director or higher paid employee, no charge can arise under the

          “benefits in kind” legislation Sections 153 and 154ff Taxes Act 1988. See Wilcock -v-

          Eve [1995] STC 18. in particular, a loan made to a former employee by his former

          employer is not within charge under Section 160, if the loan is made in a year subsequent

          to the retirement of that employee, (cf. Section 160(3)).



          Whilst I consider that the greaier part of what has been received by the former Officers

          from SYPA is, ia reality, a loan in the light of 1.6 above, I have been asked nevertheless

          to advise on the basis that what has been received at least in part represents money or

          money’s worth, and I therefore advise on that basis.




                                                   4




onn J                                                            qvvnftc i i h   t        r : nt n u i u c   -\m-
     25. NOV. 1993   10‘
                       -43        PUMP COURT TAX CHAHBCK3                                  N0.67S           P. 9




         3.      Section 19 Taxes Act 1988



         3.1.1   Section 19 Taxes Act 1938 provides, so far as is material:-



                         "(1)    The Schedule referred to as Schedule E is as follow s -

                                                SCHEDULE E

                                 I.      Tax under this Schedule shall be charged in respect
                                         o f any office or employment on emoluments
                                         therefrom which fa ll under one or more than one o f
                                         thefollowing Cases - ...”


                 and there aw then set out the three Cases o f Schedule E.


         3.1.2   The two individuals held an office. They were officers o f the Crown. See Fisher -v-

                 Oldham Corporation [1930] 2 KB 364 and AG for NSW -v- Perpetual Trustee [1955] 1

                 All ER 846. The emoluments which they received from that office were within the

                 charge to Schedule E.



4P       3.1.3   Section 131(1) Taxes Act 1988 provides:-


                        “Jax under Case I, II or III o f Schedule E shall, ... be chargeable
                        on the fu ll amount o f the emoluments falling under that Case ...
                        and the expression "emoluments'' shall include all salaries, fees,
                        wages, perquisites and profits whatsoever.”


         3.1,4   So the question is -whether the payments made and to be made by SYPA are emoluments

                 from the office held by the individual.




                                                           5




     Ann 'A                                                                                     <■r - n t    nuncc   -*m'
25,NOV.1999    10:43         PUnP COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                  NO.675       P.10




  3.2     A long line o f judicial authority has illuminated the parameters o f the statutory

          provisions. Four eases, all o f which reached the House o f Lords, set out the fundamental

          dividing line between w h a i is and what is not an em olum ent.



  3.2.1   Hoehstrasser -v- Moves 38 TC 673 concerned the payment under a housing scheme

          operated by ICI, under which married employees who were transferred from one part of

          the country to another were entitled to payment by ICI in the event o f their making a loss

          on the sale o f the house which had been purchased on transfer. The House of Lords held
                                                                                               i
          that the payment was not an emolument Lord Radcliffe pointed out that the test to be

          applied is contained in the statutory requirement that the payment, if it is to be the subject

          of assessment, must arise “from’' the office or employment. He warned that although the

          paraphrasing o f the statutory words found in earlier judgments was valuable as

          illustrating the idea expressed by those words, such paraphrasing did not displace the

          statutory words. He went on, at page 707:*



                  “For my part I think that their meaning is adequately conveyed by
                  saying that, while it is' not sufficient to render a payment
                  assessable that an employee -would not have received it unless he
                  had been an employee, it is assessable i f it has been paid to him in
                  return fo r acting as or being an employee” [emphasis added]


          Then, referring to the facts o f the case, he said>



                 “Jf is ju s t because I do not think that the £330 Which is in
                 question here was paid to the [employee) fo r acting as or
                 being an employee that I regard it as Ttot being profit from
                 his employment The money was not paid to him as wages.
                 The wages o f employees are calculated independently o f
                 anything which they get under the housing scheme, and the


                                                     6




010'd                                                             m ’nOs m o      1        i t : o i H H l ) 66 ‘\f)M-
25.NOV.1999    10=43         PUMP COURT TAX CrPnBERS                              N0.67S       P. 11




                  IC I salaries compare favourably with salaries paid by
                   other employers in the chemical industry who do not
                   operate a housing scheme. We are bound to say on the
                  facts found fo r us that the source o f the £350 was the
                   housing agreement ... and that the circumstance that
                   brought about his entitlement to the money was not any
                   services given by him but his personal embarrassment in
                   having sold his house fo r a smaller sum than he had given
                  fo r it. ...

                   The essential point is that what was paid to him was paid to
                   him in respect o f his personal situation as a house-owner
                   who had taken advantage o f the housing scheme and had
                   obtained a claim, to indemnity accordingly. In my opinion,
                   such a payment is no more taxable as a profit from his
                   employment than would be a payment out o f a provident or
                   distress fund set up by an employer fo r the benefit o f
                   employees whose personal circumstances might justify
                   assistance”



     3.2.2 Laidler —v- Perry 42 TC 351 concerned the payment of £10 Christmas bonus vouchers to

           employees by the employer. Lord Reid, like Lord Radcliffe in Hochstrasser -v- Maves

           (supra) referred to earlier authority and said (at page 363):-



                  “... but in the end we must always return to the words in the
                  Statute and answer the question —did this profit arise from the
                  employment? The answer will be no i f it arose from something
                  e lse :'




           He cited the judgment o f Lord Radcliffe in Hochstrassar           Moves, with which he

           evidently agreed.



           (I observe in passing that Lord Reid warned against the use o f the terminology of

           ‘reward’ , having referred to the passage in Upjohn J’s judgment in H ochstrasser -v -


                                                    7




110 '<i                                                           wnfts m o   i        i r : 01 I1H1! f)f) ' \ 0 \ '
25.NOV.1999    10:43       PUTF COURT TAX CHfi“3ERS                               NO.675         P.12




           Moves which had been cited, with approval by Viscount Simonds in that case “to be a

           profit arising from the employment the paym ent... must be something in the nature o f a

           re-^ardfor services past, present or future". Lord Reid commented that it was clear that

           a sum given to an employee in the hope or expectation that the gift would produce good

           service by him in future was taxable. "'But one can hardly be said to reward a man fo r

           something -which he has not yet done and may never d o ")



   3.2.4   Shilton -v- Wilmshvrst 64 TC 78 concerned the payment to the footballer Peter Shilton

           by his club as an inducement to Mr Shilton to cater into a contract of employment with a

           new club. Lord Templatnan, giving the leading judgment, referred to Lord RadcIifEe's

           statement o f principle in Hochstrasser -v- Moves, and that o f Lord Reid in Laidler -v-

           Perry, and he said (at page 105):-



                  “[Section 131] is not limited to emoluments provided in the course
                  o f employment; the section must therefore apply first to an
                  emolument which is paid as a reward fo r past services and as an
                  inducement to continue to perform the services and, secondly, to
                  an emolument which is paid as an inducement to enter into a
                  contract o f employment and to perform services in thefuture. The
                  result is (hat an emolument ‘from employment” means an
                  emolument “from, being or becoming an employee**. The
                 authorities are consistent with this analysis and are concerned to
                 distinguish in each case between an emolument which is derived
                  "from being or becoming an employee" on the one hand, and an
                 emolument which is attributable to something else on .the other
                 hand, fo r example, to a desire on the part o f the provider o f the
                 emolument to relieve distress or to provide assistance to a
                 homebuyer. I f an emolument is not paid as a reward fo r past
                 services or as an inducement to enter into employment and
                 provide fu tu re services but is paid fo r some other reason, then
                 ike emolument is not received "from the employment
                 [emphasis added]




                                                  8




no d                                                          awnfts .uin i             8e = m   I.1HD 66 .\\0\'
25.NOV,1999      10:44          FUTP COURT TAX Chpr.c£RS                             NO.675        P.13




   3.2.5   M a ir s -V -   Hauvhev 66 TC 273 concerned payments made on the privatisation of the

           Harland & W olff Shipbuilding Yard to compensate employees for the loss of rights under

           a non-statutory redundancy scheme, to those employees who accepted the new terms and

           conditions and the ending o f the. schcme. The House of Lords held that the payment was

           not an emolument from the employment. Lord Wool£ giving the leading judgment o f the

           House o f Lords, referred particularly to the speeches in Hochstrasser —•v- Mayes (supra)

           and Shilton -v- Wilmshurst as being o f general assistance and he cited particularly the

           judgment o f Lord Radcliffe in Hochstrasser       Moves and the passage cited above from
                                                                                              t



           Shilton -v- Wilmshurst. And he said (at page 346):-



                    “When these two short citations o f the highest authority are
                    examined it is significant that they treat as being outside the
                    charge payments which are eitherfrom a distress fu n d or to relieve
                    distress. ...

                     The other significant characteristic o f a redundancy payment is
                     that it is payable after the employment has come to an end. Prima
                    facie a payment made after the termination o f employment is not
                     an emolument from that employment. It can be, however, an
                     emolument from the employment i f fo r example, it is a lump sum
                    payment in the nature o f deferred remuneration.”



   3.3     Applying these statements of principle to the present facts, I note from Lord Radcliffe

           that it is not sufficient to render the payments assessable that die former officers would

           not have received them unless they had been officers with SYPA. I then ask: are the

           payments made to the former officers in return for acting as or being police officers, or

           for having been (bearing in mind Lord Templeman’s words) police officers? I ask, in

           Lord Templeman’s words: are the payments in return for past services, or are they paid




                                                     9




fin 'A                                                                    mo t             or-nT   nuncc   ‘ ww
2S.NCV.1993   10:44       PUMP COURT TAX CHfir.&ERS                               MO.675        P.14




         for some other reason? And I ask, in Lord W oolfs words, is this for example a payment

         in the narure o f deferred remuneration?



  3.4    The answers to these questions seem to me to be clear. The payments are not made in

         return for the former officers being or having been employees. They are not in return for

         past services. They arc paid because of the predicament in which the former officers find

         themselves and for the reasons set out at paragraph 1.4 above. The payment is not by

         way o f deferred remuneration. To echo Lord Radcliffe in Hochsirasser -v- Moves:



        It is becauseJlie money which is in question here is not paid to the former officers for
        acting as or being employees that it is to be regarded as not being profit from their
        employment. The money is not paid to them as wages or salary. The wages or salary
        haye been calculated independently of anything which they now get following the SYPA
        resolutions. The source of the payments is the voluntary resolution of the SYPA in
        response to their predicament of facing serious criminal charges the defence o f which
        will involve them in very significant expense. The payment is no more taxable as a profit
        from their employment than would be a payment out of a provident or distress fund set up
        by an employer for the benefit of employees and ex-employees whose personal
        circumstances might justify assistance.


  3.5   For the above reasons the payments are not in m y opinion taxable under Section 19 Taxes

        Act 1988.



  4.1   I have however seen the contrary opinion expressed in the letter from the Inspector of

        Taxes dated 19* October 1999. That opinion was in response to the letter from my

        Instructing Solicitors o f 27th September 1999. The writer reached bis conclusion that the

        payments were emoluments by reference to citations from two cases, Hamblett —v-

        Godfrey 59 TC 727; and Brav -v- Best 61 TC 752. Neither citation when read in context

        conflicts with the statements of principle in the four House o f Lords cases referred to


                                                10




                                                              qvvaric i n i   t       0"   OT   ( H I ! \ CC
                            FUnP COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                 NO.675       P.IS
25.NOV.1999    10=44




          earlier in this Opinion, nor supports the conclusion that the payments to the two former

         officers are emoluments. In the absence o f reasoned argument as to why the authorities

         which I have referred to in paragraph 3 above are not determinative, I am in some

         difficulty following the Inspector’s reasoning. (I note that the authorities to which I have

         referred in paragraph 3 above were all referred to in m y Instructing Solicitors’ letter of

         27th September 1999.).



         The conclusions which are sought to be derived by the Inspector axe in my opinion in

         conflict with the principles set oux in the authorities.



         I take the three circumstances to which the Inspector refers in rum.



         (i)     It is said that the situation which gave rise to the payments being made arose from

                 the performance of the duties. The relevant issue is whether the carrying out of

                 the duties is the source of the payment. Quite clearly it is not. In other words it is

                 not because they served as police officers at Hillsborough that they are receiving

                 payments. Other police officers who served at Hillsborough or at other football

                 matches but do not face the predicament of these two individuals, receive no

                 payment.



                 The situation which gives rise to die payments is die uniquely embarrassing

                 personal position in w hich the two former officers n ow find themselves, as a

                result o f matters with which they were involved 10 years ago as officers, and to

                assist them in responding to that position. Whilst the payments would not be made


                                                  11




Sin d                                                               awnfts .uio i          6 T :ni I.1H1)66 . 'AON!-
2 S .N O V . 1 9 9 9    10=45        PUM P C O U R T T R X CHPP1BERS                           N O .6 7 5     P . 16




                           to them unless they were officers or ex-officers that is not sufficient to render the

                          payments assessable. The payments are not made "in return fo r being or having

                          acted as police officers".



                 (ii)     The Inspector notes that the payments are within the powers o f the SYPA. But I

                          do not see how that advances the argument. The payments made by ICI in

                          Hochstrasser -v- Moves were within the powers o f that company to make

                          provision for employees in the manner prescribed. And the payments made in

                          Mairs.—y? Haushev were within the powers of that company to make payments to

                          employees in the manner prescribed.          In both cases the payments were not

                          emoluments from the employment.



                (iii)     The Inspector points out that the payments have been made to maintain morale

                          and confidence within the existing Police Force. That is indeed the motive for

                          making the payment.        But it does not demonstrate, in itself, either that the

                          payments are or are not emoluments from the office. In Laidler -v- Perrv (supra)

                         it was argued by the taxpayer that the Christmas bonuses were                      not as

                         rewards, but to promote loyalty and good relations amongst the staff. Lord Reid

                         responded (42 TC 364)>



                                “That n a y be so. But each voucher must have been
                                given to promote the loyalty o f and good relations
                                with the recipient



                         And he went on, in terms highly relevant to the instant case:-


                                                             12




9in' d                                                                    qyvnfis u . in   t          f;r:nt n u iu r .   •\nv-
  2S .N 0V .199S   10=45        PUMP COURT TAX CHPtlBERS                                 N0.67S            P.17




                              “The case is quite different 'where, out o f
                             benevolence, a gift is made to an employee who is
                             in difficulties. That may be justified as a payment
                             which it is proper fo r a public company to make
                             became indirectly it will benefit the company by
                             showing that they are good employers. But the gift
                             is not made merely because the donee is an
                             employee.      His employment is not the causa — ■ ~
                             causans”



                     So in this instance, the payments are being made to the two former officers who

                     are in difficulties, payments which are justified on the basis of maintaining morale

                     and confidence within the existing Police Force, but not made merely because the

                    former officers served with SYPA.



     4.3    The payments are not made in return for being or having been officers with SYPA. They

            are not therefore emoluments from the office,



     5*     S ectio n 5 9 6A T ax es A ct 1988




     5.1    Section 596A Taxes Act 1988 provides, so far as relevant:-



                     (1)    Where in any year o f assessment a person receives a
                           benefit provided under a retirement benefits scheme which
                           is not o f a description mentioned in Section 596(1) (a) (b) or
                           Cc), tax shall be charged in accordance with the provisions
                           o f this section.

                   (2)     Where the ben& t is received by an individual, he shall be
                           charged to tax under Schedule E fo r that y ea r”




                                                    13



i. 10 'J                                                           aVV-lhc IMA T             r ~ . c\ t   i an i
25.NOV.1999       10:45        PUMP COURT TAX CHPtlBERS                                MO.675        P. 13




    5.2   A retirement benefits scheme is defined in Section 611 to mean *'a scheme fo r the

          provision o f benefits consisting o f or including relevant benefits'\ “Relevant benefits''' are

           defined by Section 612(1):-



                    “ "Relevant benefits " means any pension, lump sum. gratuity or
                    other like benefit given or to be given on retirement or on death, or
                    in anticipation o f retirement, or, in connection with past service,
                    after retirement or death, or to be given on or in anticipation o f or
                    in connection 'with any change in the nature o f the service o f the
                    employee in question

                                                                                                i




   5.3    Although there is no authority on the point, I consider that the payments would probably

          bs held to constitute a benefit. I also consider that the provision would be held to be

          made under a “scheme” in the statutory sense of ‘'arrangement”. The question therefore

          is ■whether the benefit is given or to be given:-



          (i)      on retirement or on death of the employee in question; or



          (ii)     in anticipation of retirement of the employee in question; or



          (iii)    in connection with past service, after retirement or death, o f the employee in

                   question;



          or whether the benefit is to be given




                                                    14




*110 'A                                                                     him    t            ■ n t ("iu <\ c c
.   25.NOV. 1999        10:45         PUMP COURT TfiX CHfitlBERS                                  NO.675      P. 19




                     (iv)    on or in anticipation o f or in connection with any change in the nature of the

                            service o f the employee in question.



                     “Service” means service as an employee o f the employer in question and other

                     expressions, including ‘Retirement” are to be construed accordingly. See Section 612(1).



            5.4     The suggestion of the Inspector of Taxes is that the payments fall within category (iii).

                    There are a number of reasons why I do not share that view. First although it happens

                    that the individuals for whom the provision is being made axe fonner officers rather than

                    officers, it is*not by virtue o f the fact that they axe retired officers (as opposed to existing

                    officers) that the payments are to be made. The SYPA's powers to meet legal costs

                    extend (and as is clear from the resolutions will be extended) to officers and former

                    officers alike. In short, the retirement of the fonner officers has no bearing upon their

                    eligibility for the payments which SY PAias undertaken to provide.



0      5‘5          Secondly I observe that where category (iii) above is concerned, the payment has to be

                   made “« connection with past sendee”. I can find no direct authority on the meaning of

                   this phrase in the Section 612 context. But it is reasonable to assume that the connection

                   referred to is a causal one, i.e. that the employment must be the reason for the payment.

                   If this were not so, the ambit’ o f the Schedule E charge on payments received by

                   ex-employees would be wider than fee Schedule E charge on emoluments from the

                   employment. There is no compelling reason why this should be so. I£ in circumstances

                   similar to those in H ozhstrosser-v- I C I         had undertaken to make payments under

                   the housing scheme not immediately on sale o f the house at a loss, but upon the


                                                             15




     C Tn    ' i
25.NOV.1999    10146          PU1P COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                NO.675     P.20




          retirement o f the employee, there would seem to be no justification for holding the

          employee liable to Schedule E under Section 596A, in circumstances where the payment

          would not have been. an. emolument if received immediately. So in order for the benefit

          to be regarded as “in. connection vvjih pasi service”, it seems to me strongly arguable that

          the past service must be the “causa causans” to use Lord Reid’s expression in Laidlsr —v-

          Perry.



    5.6   There is a third reason, why in my opinion the payment could not- in this instance be a

          payment under a retirement benefits scheme. Thai is that the former officers were not

          “employees” within Section 612(1) Taxes Act 1988. And they have provided no past

          service, “service” defined as “service as an employee o f the employer in question".

          “Employee” is defined to include for these puiposea:-



                   “(a)    In relation to a company, ... any officer o f the company,
                           any director o f the company and arty other person taking


•
                           part in the management o f the affairs o f the company, and


                   (b)    ■ In relation to any employer. Includes a person who is to be
                            or has been an employee; and "employer" and any cognate
                            expressions shall be construed accordingly."


          Notably, and unlike Section 19 which brings within its scope emoluments from any office

          and Section 154 Taxes Act 1988 which by Section 168(2) expressly includes “office”

          within the meaning o f "employment” for benefits in kind purposes, office-holders (other

          than company officers, directors and shadow directors) are not included w ithin the

          definition o f employees for the purposes of the charge on retirement benefits. The former




                                                    16
25.NOV.1999     10:46          PUMP COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                 NO.675            P.20




           retirement o f the employee, there would sesm to be no justification for holding the

           employee liable to Schedule £ under Section 596A, in circumstances where the payment

           would not have beea aa emolument if received immediately. So in order for the benefit

           to be regarded as "in connection wiih past service”, it seems to me strongly arguable that

           the past service must be the “causa causans” to use Lord Reid’s expression in Laidlar —v-

           Perrv.



  5,6      There is a third reason, why in my opinion the payment could not in this instance be a

           payment under a retirement benefits scheme. That is that the fonner officers were not

           "employees” within Section 612(1) Taxes Act 1988. And they have provided no past

           service, “sarvice” defined, as “service as an employee o f the employer in question”

           “Employee” is defined to include for these puiposea:-



                    “(a)    In relation to a company, ... any officer o f the company,
                            any director o f the company and arty other person taking
                            part in the management o f the affairs o f the company, and


                    (b)    ■ In relation to any employer, Includes a person who is to be
                             or has been an employee; and "employer" and any cognate
                             expressions shall be construed accordingly


           Notably, and unlike Section 19 which brings within its scope emoluments from any office

           and Section 154 Taxes Act 1988 which by Section 168(2) expressly includes “office”

           within the meaning o-f "employment*’ for benefits in kind purposes, office-holders (other

           than company officers, directors and shadow directors) are not included within the

           definition o f employees for the purposes of the charge on retirement benefits. The former




                                                     16




nrn   'A                                                           avvnftc ( f r o r       r\c • n   t   m i l l e r :   m   ,-n
25.NOV. 1999     10=46       PurP COURT TAX CHAMBERS                                   NO.675    P.21




           officers are officers of the Crown, not employees. See Halsbury’s Laws Vol 36(1)

           paragraph 205 and ths cases referred to at paragraph 3-1-2 above.



  57       5.7    For these reasons I do not consider that Seenon 596A is in point.
                                                  »



  6.       In view of the opinion Which I have formed on this matter, I think it would be worthwhile

            asking for a reasoned reconsideration of the Inspector's view in the light of the analysis

           on both issues set out above.




                                                                          W ILLIAM MASSEY QC
                                                                          Pump Court Tax Chambers
                                                                                  16 Bedford Row
                                                                                           London
                                                                                       W C1R4E3

                                                                                      24 November 1999




                                                      17




  trn '4                                                                                     no:nr nwiUf; '\m
           U \r fV\ {4^dg\ea
           CM    \  C cA n ^rcJo it
                     ^




                                                                    S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                     PO LIC E
                                                                               A U T H O R IT Y
                                              17 o tC 1999

                                              Chiej_Constable_      With Compliments

                                                                     South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                                                                             P.O. Box 37, Regent Street
       (A /1 ( U <Mp £V \_      0 ^ "Information                    Barnsley, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ
                                     Action                      Switchboard: Barnsley (01226) 770770
77 g ^ p g > ________________    □   Comment                             Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
Ref: P W /W A C


08 D ecem ber 1999



                                                    l:
M r Bill W ilkinson                                c
                                                   A
C lerk and T reasurer
South Y orkshire Police A uthority

Regent Street
Barnsley. S70 2PQ


D ear Bill,

I w rite fu rth er to our recent m eeting and yo ur letter of 24 N ovem ber.

A t a m eeting last w eek of the A ssociation's N ational Executive C om m ittee the issue of the taxation
of legal costs m et by police authorities w as discussed. I received full su p p o rt from the N ational
Executive Com m ittee m em bers for the position D avid and I discussed w ith you. O ur Parliam entary
A dvisor D avid M aclean is p rep ared to ask a question in P arliam ent on the issue in general terms.
H e has been told to hold off u n til all other avenues have been explored!

 am now h ap p y to w rite to the Inland Revenue. To help m e to do this w ill you please let m e know
 our contact at the Inland Revenue an d copy to m e correspondence w hich w ou ld assist in
form ulating such a letter. A n edited version of letters m ay be ap p ro p riate to avoid any breach of
confidentiality.                                                                       ~

Yours sincerely,


                                                                          ■a 1-*   \J




Peter W illiam s
S u perin ten den t
N ational Secretary
        South Yorkshire Police      S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                     P O L IC E
                                               A U T H O R IT Y
            21 JAN 2000

            Chief Constable
                                    With Compliments

                                     South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                                             P.O. Box 37, Regent Street
        Information                  Barnsley, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ
|   |   Action                   Switchboard: Barnsley (01226) 770770
|   |   Comment                          Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                                                            South Yorkshire Police
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899                                   21 JAN 2000
Internet: www.southyorks.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA . Clerk and Treasurer           Chief Constable
                                                                                      S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                                       P O L IC E
Our ref:     WJW/VS
                                                                                                 A U T H O R IT Y

Your ref:                                                                         Y
Date:      19 January 2000


This matter is being dealt with by:   B i 11W i Iki IlSOn          Direct Line:


Mr
Garretts
1 City Square
LEEDS
LS1 2AL




Dear Antony

TAX

Peter Williams of the Superintendents’ Association tells me that the Inland Revenue have
spoken with him following the Association’s submission. They say that they will deal with
the matter as soon as a payment is made to the solicitors. They suggest a meeting with
Garretts at that point.

Regards,




Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Copies to:            David Harlock, Garretts
                      Maureen Oades, Assistant Clerk
                      Mike Hedges, Chief Constable
                                    THE ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
                                    OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND

                                    President: Sir John Evans QPM LL.B
                                               Chief Constable, Devon & Cornwall Constabulary


                                                              ! South Yorkshire Police

A /A 6178                                                                                                                                  J a n u a ry 2000
                                                                        10 FEB 2000

M 11 Hedges Esq. QPM LL.B                                             Chief Constable
Chief C onstable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY




I w rite in response to your letter dated 4 J a n u a ry 2000 in w hich you outlined the
situ atio n in relation to taxation difficulties su rro u n d in g th e H illsborough D isaster
litigation. I have drafted a letter to th e Inland Revenue, a copy of w hich I attach , an d
would be grateful if you could let me have your view on th e co n ten t before I sen d it.




    DEVON & CORNWALL CONSTABULARY, POLICE HEADQUARTERS, MIDDLEMOOR, EXETER, DEVON, EX2 7HQ
    ______________________________ TEL 01392 452041 FAX 01392 452100______________________________
     The Association of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and N orthern Ireland is registered in England and Wales as a private com pany lim ited by guarantee.
                   Registered num ber : 3344583. Registered Office : 25 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0EX. Company Secretary : Miss Marcia Barton.
A /A 6167                                                                     J a n u a ry 2000


N M ontague Esq.
C hairm an
Board of th e Inland Revenue
Som erset House
The S tran d
London
WC2R 1LB




                 Taxation Issues Arising out o f Hillsborough Disaster

I w rite on behalf of the Association of Chief Police Officers to draw to your attentio n a
m atter w hich is cau sin g concern in my A ssociation an d, I know, w ith th e Association
of Police A uthorities. Colleagues in S outh Yorkshire Police have been liaising w ith the
Inland Revenue locally on potential taxation issu es w hich arise o u t of th e Hillsborough
d isaster enquiry.

Background

The Hillsborough S tadium D isaster occurred on 15 April 1989 w hen 96 people died
from injuries they received. In m id sum m er 1998 two retired police officers were
sum m oned for alleged offences arising o u t of th a t incident. The inform ation leading to
th e su m m o n ses w as laid by a private individual a n d th e two retired officers applied to
th e S outh Yorkshire Police A uthority for financial su p p o rt to pay legal costs. The
A uthority agreed to pay their legal costs u p to a n d including the com m ittal stage. The
paym ent of legal expenses h a s been m ade sub ject to incom e tax becau se it is said to
rep resen t a taxable benefit. T hat raised th e cost of th e legal rep resen tatio n from
£500,000 to approxim ately £900,000 (i.e. th e su m n ecessary after deduction of incom e
tax a t 40% an d n ation al in su ran ce to produce th e yield of £500,000).

The S outh Yorkshire Police A uthority agreed to fund two hearings; one in Decem ber
1999 (regarding th e adm issibility of evidence) an d one in J a n u a ry 2000 (concerning
ab u se of process). If th e ab u se of process arg u m en t does n o t succeed th e case will
proceed to trial in J u n e an d Ju ly 2000. Prelim inary estim ates are for a seven week
hearing a t a cost of £2M for the officers' defence. A cost to th e A uthority of £3.9M if
incom e tax an d n ation al in su ran ce have to be paid. U nderstandably, the Police
A uthority h a s indicated su c h su m s of m oney m ay n o t be forthcom ing. Having received
a response from th e local office, I am w riting to register ACPO's severe concern ab ou t
th e "pay tax first a n d we will talk ab o u t it later" approach.

The m atter h a s been d iscu ssed w ith th e M inister of State, The Rt Hon C harles Clarke
MP, on a n u m b er of occasions. O ur concerns centre u p o n a n u m b er of issu es b u t the
point of th is letter is to seek from you a review of w h at we w ould regard a s an
u nreaso n ab le in terpretatio n th a t th is co n stitu tes a taxable benefit. The concept of
taxing a su m provided to en su re defence to an action strik es ag ain st n a tu ra l justice.

I w ould value your earliest consideration of th is m atter.




cc     Rt Hon C harles Clarke MP
       M i l Hedges, Chief C onstable, S outh Yorkshire Police
       Miss M B arton OBE, G eneral Secretary, ACPO
11/02 00      FRI 14:25 FAX 01226 772899                                 SY JOINT SECRETARIAT                                                     @001




                                                                                                                 S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
       Fax Message /CVT tup ^                                                                                                     P O L IC E
                                                                             " W      W     U t/?                           A U T H O R IT Y



       To:                                                                   X    to ?
                                                                                                  ----- s        ..............          ■ ■ ■—

       Fax Num ber:                 Q                                    I



       Date:          w     . a      - OO                                                      No. of Pages (inc. this sheet):o



                                                                                                Tel:     0 1 2 2 S 7 7 ^ 2 C fe
       From:                                G oA eo


       C ontact fo r Queries:                                                                   Tel:     01226 77




       Message:


                                         £ jJl'i o W u > . X



                          V W           o ^ ,         ^                                                                   ^

                               O X er                                                            ^


                          W<1_ OorQ.

                                            _        1 ^ 0 cJ"



           IM PO RTA NT: This fax Is Intended for the above named only. It may contain privite and confidential Information or material that is
           privileged. H this has come to you in'error. you must take no action based upon it, not must you copy or show ft to anyone; please
           telephone us immediately and return original to us. The cost will be reimbursed to you.




                    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat: PO Box 37, Regent Street, Barnsley, S Yorks S70 2PQ
                                                      Fax: 01226 772899
                                                WJ Wilkinson BA (Econ), CPF A, Clerk and Treasurer
11/02 00    FRI 14:25 FAX 01226 772899                   SY JOINT SECRETARIAT                                                @002

 1.1-FEB.' OO(FRI) 12:37      S. Y. P. C H I E F DEPT                    TEL:01 14 2523481       8431                  P. 0 0 3




             A/A6167
                                                                                                   January 2000

            N Montagi ie Esq.
            Chairman
            Board of t ie Inland Revenue
            Somerset House
            The Stranfl.
            London
            WC2R 1LE




                             laaation fame*                 Qn% QffflUaboroagh

           I write on
                            ? * * Association of Chief Police Officers to draw to your . ^ r i ^ ,
           m atter wh;
           of Police A   is causing concern in my Association and, I know, with the Association
                                 Colleagues in South Yorkshire Police have C n u ism g S
           Inland Revb:
           disaster enqi          0n p0tentlal «*•&»> issues which arise out of the Hillsborough
                                                                  .               c'Vier o^s <».
           Backgroui                                   S?ck vd                                   joX W-Ae-tjF

           The Hillsbftrough Stadium Disaster/Occurred on IS Aorii lo so wK#n qa                        j   ,



           S     so X
                        m t mslUre
                            ~ r .—  Folice ^u th o n ty ior
                                                        for nnanciai
                                                              financial support to pa]
                                                                                    pay le £ l costs. The
                                            ••trai        iim       j •_ ,i_. «• .»       T
           ^ H ^ o f c           "*£ * # 1^ 1 ca5ls “ P “             deluding the conuhittal
                                                                                           ittal stage. The
                    “ gai                                     suigect to income tax i 3 j r . .....................^
           ZSw vSf ‘              ’b *ae*t- -That-**ieed the cost of the legal ^ r e s e n t a S m ^ ^




           proceed to trial in June and Julv                         nDt succeed 1116 case will
                                Une     JuIy 2000• Preliminary estim ates are for a seven week
11/02 00    FRI 14:25 FAX 01226 772899                     SY JO IN T SECRETARIAT                                       @003

 ll.-FEB.' DO(FRI) 12:38       S. Y. P. CH I E F D E P T                  TEL:01 14 2523481   8481                 P. 004



                                                                "r~Wca_                              bo.o-WV.


                hearing at
                income ti:ax
                Authority ; r                                         A T / t f & e AUthorit^ 0f
                                             °nmTi nf m nncir m ini uPuu -                     «hc Pul j ^
                                                                                                          *
                a responsi:>from the local o f f i c e , t o                             Havm« r e i v e d
                the "pay t
                           x first and we will talk about it late r“ approach          8 ***“ *                about
             The m atte
             MP, on a    i SSi T^SSr1'
            point of t Lis letter is to seek & !!? « ? ?
                                                                            :*** ^ 1,1    H™ch->«     ciark ,
                                                                        ^pon a num ber of issu es but the
            unreaso•na sic interpretation that this c o n s titu T ^                   w° uld regard as an
            taxing a s\ m provided to ensure defence to an                                       conccPt of
                                                                   uli '^truces against natu ral justice.
            I would value your earliest consideration of this matter.


                                                                                                        -a#.




           cc       Rt H<m Charles Clarke MP
                    K it e f S 'S T T iS ? - ^ ^
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.                      South Yorkshire Police
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
Internet: w w w .southyorks.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer         15 FEB 2000
                                                                                     S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                           Chief Constable                            P O L IC E
Our ref:     W JW /VS                                                                           A U T H O R IT Y

Your ref:



Date:      14 February 2000


This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill WilkillSOn                 Direct Line:


Mr M Hedges
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

Dear

HILLSBOROUGH - TAX - LETTER BY ACPO

In the light of last week’s developments we need to await the Inland Revenue formal
response to Garretts before sending the letter. It will probably not be needed to deal with
Hillsborough. However we gather that the Inland Revenue ruling may not extend to all
instances of support, so there may be other issues to take up separately with them.

Yours sincerely




Biii Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
23/02 00    WED 11:35 FAX 01226 772899                              SY JOINT SECRETARIAT                                                        @0
                  Inland
                  irnana

            Revenue
            South Yorkshire                                                                              Bradford Midland
                                                                                                         Tax District Office
                                                                                                         Selectapost 3
                                                                                                         Centenary Court
                                                                                                         1 St Blaise Way
              Messrs Garnetts                                12 FES 2000                                 Bradford BD1 4XY
              1 City Square
              LEEDS
              LS1 2AL                                                                                    Direct Dial:           01274 204314
                                                                                                         Minicom:               01274 204421
                                                                                                         Facsimile:             01274 204598

                                                                                                         Officer in Charge
                                                                                                         V J Sherred

    Date: . 1&Fefaruary_20C0
 Your Rdf: APB.CAG
  Our Ref: 100/3N/073/S3P/GF
   NINo: YX277874D



              Dear Sirs

             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICY AUTHORITY

              Following our recent telephone conversation I am writing to confirm that the payments made
              (or due to be made) to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray in respect of legal action regarding the
              Hillsborough Stadium disaster are free of tan.

              ! would poinf out that the Revenue does not accept that thte sets a precedent. The decision
              regarding these two former police officers is based upon the facts specific to their case,

              f hoes the above is satisfactory for your purposes.

              Your9 faiffifjjily



              Q FALCONER
              HM inspector of Taxes




   M eatt M p us to h tip you by quoting your National >mum ice Number end Tex M tm c e when replying.
   If pouible, may I also h a *t o tiny time tekohone number on whl(h you may be contacted. THANK YOU.     wvcsro* inft-ori-n     .twnini for««iienw

   Iniand Revtneelouikl^ffluhire: An Executive Office of the Inland Revenue                                     Dimeter: M iry May
                                                                                          ( c €\
             S o u th Yorkshire
                                                                          M 11 Hedges QPM LLB
             P O L IC E                                                                 C hief Constable
             JUSTICE       with    COURAGE

                                                                                      23 February 2000

Sir John Evans QPM LLB
President, ACPO
Devon & Cornwall Constabulary
Police HQ
Middlemoor
Exeter
Devon EX2 7HQ




I am replying to your letter o f 31 January and the accompanying proposed letter to the Board of
the Inland Revenue. You asked me for my views on the content of the proposed letter.

First of all, I apologise for the delay in responding but this has proved to be a wise decision
because I have received today a copy o f a letter from the Police Authority’s solicitors. A copy is
enclosed herewith for your information.

The gist of this is that the Inland Revenue has now decided that the support for Duckenfield and
Murray is free o f tax. This means that much of your proposed letter is now no longer relevant
but you will note that there is a sting in the tail. I am advised by our Clerk and Treasurer that
the Inland Revenue ruling, welcome as it is for our particular case in South Yorkshire, may not
extend to all instances of support for serving officers. So quite clearly there are other issues to
take up on behalf o f the Service relating to the principle o f taxation where police officers are
supported by their Police Authority in both civil and criminal prosecutions.

You may think it appropriate to re-work the letter to acknowledge and support the decision
made by the Inland Revenue in relation to the specific case, and raise the continued general
concern about the principle o f taxation on serving and retired police officers when support is
given by police authorities.

I thank you for the support you have given me in this matter.


   VccUM. s .

  ichael Hedges


Encs



            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill
            Sheffield S3 8LY
            Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
             Direct Dial no. 0114 2523400      Fax: 0114 2523481   E-mail: mhedges_syp@hotmail.com
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01220) 772899
internet: w w w .southyorks.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer

                                                                                           S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref:     WJW/FS
                                                                                                            PO LIC E
Your ref:                                                                                             A U T H O R IT Y
Date:      24 February 2000


This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkinson                Direct Line:


Letter to:             J Moseley         (Police Federation)
                       P Williams        (Superintendents Association)
                       M Barton          (Association of Chief Police Officers)                South Yorkshire Police
                       C Crawford        (Association of Police Authorities)
                                                                                                  23 FEB 2000
Dear
                                                                                                  Chief   Constable


I am writing to let you know that we have now received confirmation from the tax inspector
that the payments which have been made (or may be made in future) to the former officers
facing private criminal prosecution are not subject to tax. This will clarify the financial
position substantially when members meet shortly to consider further applications for
funding of the trial costs.

May I take this opportunity on behalf of the Chairman to thank you for your support in
making representations to Home Office and the Inland Revenue.

It should be noted however that the Revenue is treating Hillsborough as a specific case.
The relevant extract from their letter is:

“It would point out that the revenue does not accept that this sets a precedent. The
decision regarding these two former police officers is based upon the facts specific to their
case”

    So the legal and tax position is worth keeping under review and each instance will
need to be considered on its merits.

Yours sincerely
                                                                                       .
                                                                                                           .....




Bill Wilkinson
                                                                                           —
Clerk and Treasurer                                                                .




Copies to:            C Swindell (Chair)
                                                                                                      ...
                      R, Naylor (SY Superintendents Association)
                      A Barnes (SY Police Federation)
P n Z J ' D -v J '
                         THE ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
                         OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND



                                      With the compliments of the President
South Yorkshire Police


    2 3 MAR 2000                     SIR JOHN EVANS QPM LL.B CHIEF CONSTABLI
                             DEVON & CORNWALL CONSTABULARY POLICE H E A J/Q u/\kiej\z>
   Chief Constable       MIDDLEMOOR EXETER DEVON EX2 7HQ TEL: 01392 4520     FA X : 0139Z452100
V ),       0 3




       c
                                     THE ASSOCIATION OF CHIEF POLICE OFFICERS
                                     OF ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND

                                     President: Sir John Evans QPM LL.B
                                                          Chief Constable, Devon & Cornwall Constabulary




A /A 6240                                                                                                                                         M arch 2000


N M ontague Esq.
C hairm an
Board of th e In lan d Revenue
Som erset H ouse
The S tra n d
London
WC2R 1LB

                                                                                                                                                                   C




                           Taxation Issues Arising out o f Hillsborough D isaster

I w rite on b eh alf of th e A ssociation of Chief Police Officers to draw to yo u r attention a
m atter w hich h a s ca u sed concern in m y Association and , I know, w ith th e Association
of Police A uthorities.

You will be aw are th a t colleagues in S outh Yorkshire Police have been liaising w ith the
Inland Revenue locally on potential taxation issu es w hich aro se o u t of the
H illsborough d isa ste r enquiry.

The H illsborough S tadium D isaster occurred on 15 April 1989 w hen 96 people died
from in juries th ey received. In m id sum m er 1998 two retired police officers were
sum m oned for alleged offences arising o u t of th a t incident. The inform ation leading to
the su m m o n ses w as laid by a private individual an d th e two retired officers applied to
the S o u th Y orkshire Police A uthority for financial su p p o rt to pay legal costs. The
A uthority agreed to pay th eir legal costs u p to an d including the com m ittal stage. The
p ay m en t of legal expenses w as m ade su b ject to incom e tax b ecau se it w as said to
rep resen t a tax ab le benefit.     T hat raised th e cost of th e legal representation
considerably.

I w ish to form ally welcome th e decision of HM Inspector of Taxes a t B radford Midland
Tax D istrict Office th a t paym ents in resp ect of legal action regarding the Hillsborough
S tadium d isa ste r are free of tax.




    DEVON & CORNWALL CONSTABULARY, POLICE HEADQUARTERS, MIDDLEMOOR, EXETER, DEVON, EX2 7HQ
    ____________________________________TEL 01392 452041 FAX 01392 452100___________________________________
     The A ssociation of Chief Police Officers of England, Wales and N orthern Ireland is registered in England and Wales as a private com pany lim ited by guarantee.
                    Registered num ber : 3344583. Registered Office : 25 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0EX. Com pany Secretary : M iss M arcia Barton.
However, I w ish to raise the co ntinued general concern ab o u t th e principle of taxation
on serving a n d retired police officers w hen su p p o rt is given by Police A uthorities.

I w ould value yo u r com m ents concerning th is issue.




cc     M i l H edges, Chief C onstable, S outh Yorkshire Police
       Miss M B arton OBE, General Secretary, ACPO
