Statement Pages
 1898  -  2270
                                                                      p j& p O   j)j\ \   ISTATION
                                          ShefittArchives R e f * ^
      '<E:


    ADDRESS:
                              LIVERPOOL

    AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

    OCCUPATION:


    Who states:- This statement consisting of 014 pages, each signed
    by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
    it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
    prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
    to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATED: 120S89                                                                         (SIGNED)




               I em a supporter of Liverpool football club, I have supported the club

               regularly since I was about six years of age, attending most heme

               gaires and occasionally attending away games.

               On Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended the Football

               Association Challenge Cup Semi-Final game held at the Sheffield

               Wednesday football ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield, between Liverpool

               Foctball Club and Nottingham Forest Football Club.

               I cot my ticket for the game from the friend I travelled to the game

               with, it was a six pound ticket for the Leppings Lane Terraces.                 I

               paid face value for the ticket.

               I travelled to the game with a friend,

                               (Tel.              . We travelled by coaeh to

               Sheffield, an Aniberline coach leaving Wallasey Village at about 9.45

               am (0945) on the morning of Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489).

               The coach travelled direct to Sheffield I can't say which route we

               tock other than it was mainly motorways, I cannot recall any delays in

               the journey.


♦
                                                                                                     1898
As far as I can recall I saw a couple of people on our coach drinking

cars of beer, also as we drove through Sheffield towards Hillsborough

I saw a number of pubs open and I saw what appeared to be football

supporters standing outside the pubs having a drink.   And as is normal

whilst walking to the ground I saw supporters drinking cans of beer as

they walked along.

The coach arrived in Hillsborough sane time between 12.45 pm (1245)

anc 1.00 pm (1300), we parked in a side road only about 300 yards from

the football ground.

After the coach parked we started to walk towards the ground, we

stepped at a sweet shop to get something to eat and as we got close to

the ground the police stopped us and directed us to the Leppings Lane

entrance, we had mistakenly been walking towards the Nottingham Forest

Enc of the ground, neither myself or          had been to the ground

before.

During our brief walk to the ground I had not seen any sort of

disorder or fighting, I did see a couple of people who I thought were

the worse for drink, but they weren't causing any kind of problems.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground at about 1.15

pm (1315), at this time there weren't any queues as such at the

turnstiles it was very quiet.   There were quite a few people milling

abcut in the area of Leppings Lane outside the entrance to the ground.

As we approached the entrance to the terrace turnstiles I saw a few

policemen and stewards standing around in the area approaching the

turnstiles, there were also policemen standing infront of the

turnstiles searching fans before they entered the turnstiles.

Myself and           were able to walk straight up to a turnstile, I was

searched by a male officer outside the turnstiles, in my pocket I had

a v*hite plastic folding biro, the officer outside the turnstiles
allowed me to retain it and I entered through the turnstile handing my

ticket into the turnstile operator.

Once inside the ground on the other side of the turnstiles I was again

stepped and searched by a policeman, this officer on examining the

folding plastic biro I had in my possession confiscated it, the

officer took my name and address andprovided me with his number and

gave me instructions how to   reclaim my property afterthe game had

enced.

As we were being searched I saw a large concertina type gate situated

to the right hand side of the terrace turnstiles, I now know this to

be gate 'C', I saw a steward opening this gate to enter the ground.     I

never saw anyone else other than this steward enter through that gate.

I had not seen any unauthorised entry being made to the ground.

Normally I like to stand in a position behind the goals to view a

football match.

Having been searched, I looked for entrance 'B' to the terraces which

was the section shown on my   ticket. I saw the letters A and B above

the tunnel which goes under the West Stand, I did not see any other

signs giving directions to the terraces.

At about 1.20 pn (1320) myself and         entered the tunnel leading

to the terraces, I had not seen any policemen or stewards standing

either at the entrance to the tunnel or along its length.   We had free

passage along the tunnel.

As we got to the end of the tunnel I saw the dividing fence and myself

a n c w a l k e d   to the right hand side of that fence into the

terrace area I now know to be pen number three.

At this time just shortly after 1.20 pm (1320) there were only I would

estimate about ten or twelve people in the pen.

Between entering the ground and entering pen number three I had not
seen any sort of disorder I never saw anyone drinking alcohol inside

the ground.

Having entered pen number three, myself and              Lent and took up a

position in which we intended to stand and watch the gams.       I have

marked this position with a figure one (1) on the separate grid plan

which I produce (Ex. No.           ) (Ref. No._____ |.

We arrived at position number one at about 1.20 pm (1320) or shortly

after.   We remained at position number one (1) until a time I would

estimate to be about 2.15 pm (1415).

By 2.15 pm (1415) pen number three had become about three quarters

full and as more people were coming into the pen behind us both

         and myself found ourselves being pushed forwards down the

terraces towards the perimeter fence.     Within about two minutes we

enced up in a position I have marked as (1A) on the separate grid plan.

On arriving at position number (1A) at about 2.17 pm (1417) we had

travelled forwards down the terracing about sixteen feet during which

tine we had cane up against a crush barrier and had ducked down

underneath it as I prefer always to have crush barriers behind me.

On arriving at position number 1A although the front of pen number

three was crowded initially it was not too uncomfortable. As time

went on things around us were becoming tighter as I suspect more

people were coming into the pen.

From a time I would estimate to be about 2.20 pm (1420) I saw a steady

stream of people climbing out of pen number three over the dividing

fer.ce into pen number two.

During my time in position number (1A) between about 2.15 pm (1415)

and 2.45 (1445) there was a gradual increase in pressure around me and

by 2.45 pm (1445) although we were all very tightly packed together

and my movement was restricted it had not got so bad as to cause me
____________________________                                              5


any concern.

At about 2.45 pn (1445) a number of surges started occurring from the

rear of the pen which was gradually pushing me forward and to my right

as these surges occurred the pressure around me also increased more

drematically than before.

By about 2.50 pm (1450) I had been pushed forwards to a position I

have marked as number two (2) on the separate grid plan.    At position

twc (2) I was pushed up against the front perimeter fence and the

dividing fence between pen numbers two and three was against my right

sice.

Once in position number two (2) I found it impossible to move.     I

couldn't see clearly what was occurring on the pitch however I did

catch a glimpse of the players on the pitch as they were having their

kick about, at this time I was being severely crushed, I was having

difficulty in breathing, people around and myself were crying out for

help.   As people around me were pushing backwards against the crowd I

found the odd slight relief in the pressure which helped with my

breathing.

I vas aware of policemen walking past infront of me on the track

surrounding the pitch, we were all crying out to them to open the

gates and get people out because they couldn't breathe.    I cannot

recall seeing any reaction from the police, I think they must have

thcught it was just crowd trouble.

I vas stuck in this position pushed up into the c o m e r between the

perimeter fence and the dividing fence, earlier I had seen my friend

         he was about 3 or 4 people away from my position and to my

left hand side.

Whilst in this position although I could not see anything occurring on

the pitch I knew the game had kicked off from the reaction of the
                                                                          6

crcwd, also whilst in this position, again by what I could hear from

the crowd I knew Peter BEARDSLEY had taken a shot at goal and hit the

crcss bar.

Also at about the time when I believed BEARDSLEY had hit the cross bar

I became aware cf people trying to climb over the perimeter fence.

At a time which I can only estimate to be a short time after kick off

at 3 pm (1500) a young lad was suddenly pushed from behind me around

my left hand side and ended up in front of me.    This young lad ended

up in a sitting position with his back up against the wall below the

perimeter fence and his legs out in front of him facing back up the

terracing towards the stand.   I think someone had pushed the young lad

towards the front to get the attention of the police to get him out.

I cannot be sure but I think the person who had pushed this young lad

in front of me may have been his older brother.    Earlier on whilst in

position number two (2) I had been speaking to a lad about 18 years

ole who was wearing a red and white Liverpool jacket in a sort of

shiny waterproof material, he had said he had brought his younger

brother to his first game, this lad had his younger brother next to

hirt and I'm sure it was the same young lad who had been pushed in

frcnt of me, I saw that whoever was pushing him was wearing a jacket

with red shiny sleeves with a white stripe in a horizontal position

just under the elbow.

Just after this young lad had been pushed in front of me, I fell down

onto my knees because of the pressue of people who were climbing on

top of me trying to get over the fence.

As people were trying to get out their feet were trampling on this

young lad, and as far as I could see he was having difficulty

breathing, I could see he was going very pale,

                               I think he went unconscious his head
___________________________                                              7


flcpped to one side, his eyes were closed and his mouth was open, I

couldn't tell if he was still breathing, I can't remember seeing any

change in his colour as he went unconscious.

I can only guess that it was about two minutes past three when this

young lad was pushed in front of me and about three or four minutes

later when I believe he went into a state of unconsciousness.

I feould describe this young lad as a white male, aged about 13 or 14

years, he was only about 4ft 8ins (4'8) tall, he was of slim build, he

hac blonde hair cut short over his ears and had a side parting, he

also had his hair quite long at the front with a fringe.   He was

wee ring darkish blue denim jeans which appeared quite new, he was

wearing a round necked tee-shirt with short sleeves, I can't remember

whet colour it was, but I think it was a light colour, he was wearing

a Iiverpool scarf tied around his neck and another Liverpool scarf

tied around his wrist I think on his left wrist.

The lad who I think may have been the brother of the young lad I have

described above was also a white male, aged about 18 or 19 years, he

was about 5ft 10 ins (5'10) tall, of slim build, he had short dark

hair cut back over his ears, his hair was cut in a step running from

abcve his ears and trailing down at the back.   He was wearing faded

blue denim jeans and this shiny red waterproof type jacket which was

just below waist length, it had a white zip front fastening was bright

rec with one white band about 3 inches in width around the arm just

below the elbow.   It had Liverpool EC crest on the front right hand

sice.

After this young boy had been pushed in front of me and I had also

gore down on my knees I cannot remember much more about what was

occurring around me until the time I was dragged out of the pen.

I v\ould say it was about 3.25 pm (1525) when I was dragged out of the
                                                                            8


per.

At about 3.20 pm (1520) two supporters who were in pen number two

put their arms through the railings of the dividing fence and managed

to push the young lad who was still in front of me upwards to a

policeman who was hanging over the top of the perimeter fence, this

policeman pulled the young lad up and over the perimeter fence.      When

the policeman pulled this young lad up over the fence his body was all

lirrp and lifeless.

Abcut five minutes later 3.25 pm (1525) another couple of people with

their arms through the dividing fence pulled me up off my knees, I

think the same policeman who was on the top of the perimeter fence

tock hold of me and pulled me up, I was able to climb over the

dividing fence and drop down into the front of pen number 2.     I made

my way after a few minutes to the exit gate in pen number two and got

out and went onto the pitch.

I think it was about 3.30 pm (1530) when I got out onto the pitch.

Once onto the pitch I started looking for my friend            the

scene on the pitch was chaotic, there were numerous bodies lying about

sate with their faces covered, and people trying to resuscitate others.

I can't remember much about the people I saw lying on the pitch except

one man he was lying just behind the goal line about ten feet away

frcm the goal post, the right hand post as you look frcm the Leppings

Lare terrace.

Twc policemen were working on this man trying to revive him, one was

holding his head and the other one was pushing his chest, the

policemen stopped doing this and covered the mans head with a cream

coloured coat and then walked away.   Some supporters who had been

standing by this man just burst out crying and when the policemen went

started beating this mans chest to try and revive him.   I never saw
anything after this I walked off to continue to look for

This man who the police and supporters were trying to revive I can

only describe as a white male, aged about 25 to 35 years, he was not

very tall about 5ft 8ins (5'8), but was of heavy build, he had a pot

belly, I think he was wearing an ordinary shirt with collar which was

open at the front.   I can't remember the colour of the shirt, I think

he may have been wearing fawny coloured cord trousers although I

car't be certain.

At about 3.50 pm (1550) I found          wandering about in the area of

the middle of the pitch.   We just walked around for some time, and

eventually went and sat down by the South Stand.

At about 3.55 pm (1555) or 4.00 pm (1600) myself a n d h e l p e d

other fans carrying people across the pitch.

With other fans we firstly ran across the pitch to the Spion Kop end

anc pulled off one of the advertising hoardings frcm infront of that

stand, I can't remember what was on the hoarding other than it was red

print.   There were about eight of us including myself and

carrying the hoarding we ran back down the pitch to the Leppings Lane

goal.

We placed the hoarding on the pitch in an area by the six yard line of

the Leppings Lane end goal on the North stand side.   There were

stewards placing bodies onto the hoardings.    Near to this position we

saw stewards placing a body on another hoarding, myself and

and about another six supporters picked up this other hoarding with

the body on and ran with it across the pitch to the Spion Kop end of

the ground.   At this time about 4.02 pm (1602) the corner of the

pitch between the Spion Kop and the North Stand had a number of

ambulances on it.    We took the hoarding over to a position by the

ambulances and laid it on the pitch.    There were other hoardings lying
                                                                        10


on the pitch in the area also with bodies on.   We left the hoarding

anc ran back across the pitch to the area of the Leppings Lane end

goal.

I cannot remember anything about the other supporters who were helping

carry this first hoarding.

The person lying on the hoarding was lying on his side, I can't

rerrember which side.   As we ran across the pitch towards the Spion Kop

with this first hoarding myself and           <ere holding the centre of

the hoarding North Stand side, I had one supporter in front of me at

the front of the hoarding           was behind me and I think another

supporter was behind

The person on this first hoarding we carried I can only describe as a

white male, I can't say how old, although I would say older than

younger, I can't remember anything else about him.

Myself and          helped carry I think another two hoardings frcm

arcund the same area of the Leppings Lane goal I can't remember

whereabouts we placed them other than it was up the other end of the

ground.   I know at least one of the other two people we helped carry

across the pitch was a female but like the first one I can't remember

anything about their features or what clothing they were wearing.

Having helped carry the hoardings we wanted to get out of the ground

to phone our parents,          ]and I left the ground of our own accord

at about 4.15 pm (1615).

Although now I realise that I would have been fairly close to the

barrier that broke in pen number three I was not aware that it had

brcken during my time in pen number three.

As a result of experiences in pen number three I received the

following injuries, I had a black eye (left eye), I had bruising to

the upper part of my right arm and a large bruise about four inches
                                                                                   11


         wice running down the centre of my back.     I did not receive any

         mecical treatment for my injuries, I did not lose any time from work.

         I cannot think of anything further that I wish to add to this

         statement.

         I am a white male, 5 feet 8 inches (5'8) tall, I am well built, on

         that day I was clean shaven, I have brown hair cut short above my

         ears.     On that day I was wearing a pair of navy blue corduroy trousers,

         I vas wearing a light grey sweatshirt which has a polo neck type

         collar,



•
                              I was also wearing a grey and red Liverpool scarf

         arcund my neck.




                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE:

           TIME:               DATE:   120989

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^F]'■ICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                        1 908
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 101C89                                                              (SIGNED)



           I Em a single man and I live at the above address with my parents and

           twc brothers.   I am a supporter of Liverpool Football    Club and in

           seeson 1988 - 1989 (000088-000089), I held a seasonticket for the Kop

           at Anfield. On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), Liverpool were to

           pley Nottingham Forrest, in the semi-final of the F.A Cup competition.

           The match was to be played at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield.        I

           obtained my ticket from Liverpool Football Club, by going to Anfield

           in person.   As I was a season ticket holder, I managed to get a #6

           terrace ticket for the Leppings Lane standing area.      This was the end

           of the ground designated for Liverpool supporters.

           On match day, the weather was warm, sunny and dry.       I travelled to

           Sheffield with a friend,

                     Merseyside.          I travelled to Sheffield on an "Amber

           Lire" coach, which left the "JOLLY MILLER" public house, in Queen's

           Drive, West Derby, Liverpool, at about 10.30 AM (1030).      This coach

           was full of fans.

           The coach did not stop on the way to Sheffield arriving about 1245 pm

           (1245).   Our coach parked as directed by the police, into a side road,




                                                                                       1909
I con't know the name of this road, which was at the Liverpool

supporters end of the football ground.

    and I walked straight to the ground.     This was my first visit to

Hillsborough stadium but I believe        had been before.   The area

outside the ground and on the walk from the coach was quiet.       I never

saw any signs of disorder or fighting.

It was a short walk to the ground and         m d I arrived outside the

leppings Lane entrance of the ground at about 1.05 pm (1305).

The turnstiles were open, there was no queue, the area was very quiet,

a policeman outside the main gates asked to see my ticket, and I

produced it to him.

I entered the ground through a turnstile and handed over my ticket,

the turnstile operator tore off my stub and handed the remainder of

the ticket back to me. Once I got through the turnstile another

policeman searched me, and he warned me to be careful of pickpockets

in the crowd.         was also searched by another policeman.   I saw some

stewards in this area,        bought a programme and we saw a tunnel

ahead of us, it had a letter 'B' directly above the entrance, and as

we had not seen any other indication signs,         ind I entered the

turnel.    I thought the tunnel was the entrance to the terrace and that

once inside I would be able to move freely sideways as you can at

Anfield.   At Anfield I don't like to stand immediately behind the

goel, preferring to stand more to the side position.

    and I had a free passage along the tunnel, which was virtually

empty as we walked along.     Once we got to the terracing      and I

found a position in an area known as Pen 3.     The pen was very quiet,

alirost virtually empty of fans.    It would be by now between 1.10 pm

(1210) and 1.15 pm (1315).     I sat on the terracing steps with          we

had lots of room.     There was a metal barrier immediately in front of
us. At one point, while the terrace was very quiet, I attempted to sit

on this barrier, on the top bar, I was aware of the barrier bending as

I sat on it, even although no-one else was on top of this barrier I

was surprised that I had felt the barrier sagging under only my weight,

I vould estimate my weight to be 11 st 0 lbs.    This barrier was

in pen 3, about a little over half way down the terracing and quite

clcse to the fence separating our section of the terracing from pen

4.   There was no disorder among the fans.

     and I got to our feet as the players came out onto the pitch in

their suits, this was about 1.45 pm (1345). The terracing was by now

filling up, but we still had plenty of room, although we could no

longer sit down on the terracing.     I was standing with the metal

barrier against my stomach area,       was at my right hand side.     The

crcwd was in a good mood, we were enjoying ourselves.    The crowd

continued to build but there was a gap behind us.

A heavily built lad, white, about 19-20 yrs 6'0" (6') wearing a light

shirt, with long fair hair, kept getting onto peoples shoulders, or

perhaps on top of a barrier and jumping down again, with the result

that people were being pushed forward resulting in my being crushed

into the barrier I was standing at.     I was being forced over the

barrier as the crowd continued to fill up the terrace.

I remember the teams being announced on the loudspeaker system and

and I were still together at this time.

Abcut 2.40 pm (1440)       :old me that he couldn't stand the pressure

any longer and told me he was going to move away down towards the

frcnt, as he was being crushed.     This was the last time that I saw

               •hat day.

I vas singing with the crowd as the teams came out to prepare to start

the game.


                                                                            19
_________________________                                                     4


Due to the crowd pressure still increasing, I was at times halfway

over the top of this barrier, I decided to push myself clear of this

barrier, as I could'nt get any air with the barrier digging into my

stcmach.     I felt hot in the crowd and was by now having difficulty

breathing.

At the kick-off I was still being forced against this barrier.        I saw

the kick-off and then started to move backwards in the direction of

the tunnel.    People where shouting for the game to be stopped and

shcuting at the police for the gate to be opened.      I saw people

climbing over the top of the perimeter fence onto the track area

behind the goal, while others were climbing from pen 3, where I was,

into the pen on my left, the area known as Pen 4.      I am tall about

6' C (6') but I could not see the people irrmediately behind the

perimeter fence.

As the game went on I began to push my way backwards towards the

turnel, I at first tried to get pulled up into the West Stand above

the Leppings Lane terrace, as people in this stand were dangling their

ants over the edge of the stand, down towards the terracing, in order

to drag people out of the terracing.       I gave up the idea of getting

pulled up into the West Stand and continued to make my way towards the

tur.nel.

As I got to the tunnel mouth, loads of people were standing beside the

tur.nel, some had shoes and socks missing and a couple of lads had no

shirts on.     The game had now stopped.

I began to walk out of the ground, through the tunnel, there was'nt

anyone coming into the terraces but fans were lining both walls of the

turnel.    Fans were carrying injured supporters off the terracing out

through the tunnel.

When I got out of the tunnel, I stood in this area for about 30
mirutes.     People were bringing shaken and injured people out the

turnel from the terracing area.     There were only a few police in this

area.   As I was there I saw a St John's man and woman giving a man

mouth to mouth and beating on his chest.        After a while the St John's

mar put a coat over this mans face.         They both left this man.   I would

describe this man as white, aged about 40 or mid 40's, 5'10 (5'10),

stocky build, with a pot belly, and ginger coloured hair and a

moustache.     I remember he wore jeans and trainers and a shirt with

whet appeared to be squares or a design pattern.          I can't remember

whet the jacket they used to cover his face was like.         The man's face

was drained off colour and was white.

I kept looking round for        [ny mate.     I saw people being laid out on

the ground at the tunnel exit, some were being covered up.          I had

never before that day seen a dead body.         I believed that the people I

saw being laid out and covered up were dead.

After about 10 minutes, near 3.30 pm (1530) Ambulances started to

arrive, at first outside the ground and later they drove into the area

close to the West Stand.

I could'nt get out, when I first came out the tunnel as the exit gates

were closed, this was about 3.15 pm             (1515).   I never saw theexit

gates being opened as I was looking for my mate.

I saw many people in shock, several crying, some people who had come

out wanted to go back into the tunnel, towards the terrace but the

Police were blocking their path and would'nt let them back down the

turnel.

I vent out the ground about 3.45 pm (1545) as the area behind the

turnel was becoming crowded with people and the Police and

ambulancemen were asking people to leave.         I waited outside the ground

by a telephone pole, where I had arranged to meet              in the event of
our becoming separated. I waited till about 4.30 pn (1630).     I then

wert and managed to use the 'phone in someones house, to telephone my

parents and let them know I was alright, after 'phoning I went back to

our meeting place and waited about 10 minutes, but when        lid not

shew up, I ran to the bus in case it left without me.         ras'nt at

the bus and I waited for about 5 minutes and then told the driver I

was going to look for my friend.     I again ran back to the pole, we

hac arranged to meet at, again I looked for       and then hurried off

to the ground.    At the ground the gates had been closed.   I spoke to

a fireman outside, he told me everyone was out off the ground.

This fireman gave me a telephone number to ring for news of people

killed or injured in the disaster.     I tried this telephone number from

soneone's house, who was allowing people to use their 'phone but I

could not get through. I then ran back to the b u s , s t i l l had not

shewed up.     The bus left for Liverpool,     /as the only one missing

off our bus.

I vas'nt physically injured.     I was on                        so did

not lose any time.     It was about 7.30 pn (1930) when the coach dropped

me off at the "JOLLY MILLER" PUB.     I was met by my dad at the pub car

park and went heme.

I learned later that day that                  was in hospital in

Sheffield with an injured leg or ankle.
STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                           STATION

NAME:           ANTONY     MAXWELL
0               GRIER

ADDRESS:
                                       MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me,   is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be   falseor do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I   £m a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.

           I   Em a fan of Liverpool football club and I have a season ticket for

           Anfield.     I go to all the Liverpool heme games and seme away games.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I got a ticket from Liverpool

           Football Club, costing #6.00p for the FA cup semi final between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.     This ticket was for the terracing of

           the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Stadium, the heme of Sheffield

           Wednesday.     I have been in this ground 3 or 4 times previously and I

           was at the semi final there in 1988 (000088), when    again I had a

           ticket for the Leppings Lane end of the football ground.

           I travelled to the game in a car owned and driven by                    age

           19 years                                       MERSEYSIDE.   Also in the

           car was

                                                           had tickets for the West

           stand above the Leppings Lane terrace.           iid not have a ticket,

           but he managed to buy one as he walked down the hill towards Leppings

           Lare, he paid #20 for a #14 ticket for the North Stand.      This was

           about 2pm (1400) he just bought it off a fella not a ticket tout.




                                                                                         1916
GRIER                   ANTONY   MAXWELL


_______ and I went to              house about 10.30am (1030) to 11.00am

(1100) on the match day.             and I were then taken by

in his car to                    house.    We met a car load of friends

there, apart from            :here was                   the car driver of

the second car, Martin and Stuart THOMPSON, and

brother                 came in the car I was in.     We all left together

frcm                    house, around 11am (1100) or just before.

On the M56 motorway                      :ar got a puncture and we then got

separated from the car driven by                       as we had to stop and

change the wheel.

We next stopped at a "KWIK SAVE" shop at an unknown point, close to

Sheffield.    I bought a pie and seme cans of beer.      It was a sunny dry

day.

          parked his car, in a street beside seme houses, on a hill

abcut 1.30pm (1330).      I don't know the name of the street.

The four of us walked together to the ground, it was a good 15 minutes

walk and we arrived at the ground about 1.45pm (1345).        We met Stuart

anc Martin THOMPSON and the other lads from the other car, outside

the shop at Leppings Lane, near to the ground entrance.

Stuart THOMPSON,                  and I then left the others as we had

tickets for the terrace area and the others all had tickets for the

seating area.    We all arranged to meet up again outside this same

shep, at the end of the game.

It was quite busy outside the football ground with a lot of people

abcut.    There was no problem for us three in getting into the ground,

we all entered by means of the same turnstile at the Leppings Lane

end.     I handed over my ticket, the turnstile operator tore off the

ticket stub and gave me back the other part.         I have since returned

this part of the ticket to Anfield for a refund.         It was about 2.15pm
GRIER                  ANTONY    MAXWELL                                    3


(1415) when I got inside the ground with my two friends.

We usually stand behind the goal area, for the atmosphere.      The three

of us set off along the tunnel leading out onto the terrace.      It was

quite busy but I did not find it any problem walking along the

turnel.    If I had wanted to I could quite easily have turned around

anc walked backout of the tunnel, without any problem.

As we came out onto the terracing we moved to the right of a metal

barrier that divides the standing area into sections.     We made our way

forward to about half way down the terrace.     We had no trouble in

doing this.    There was plenty of room in the area.    I had plenty of

rocm where I was standing and in fact had so much room that I could

climb on top of a metal barrier to sing.      I climbed on the same

barrier three or four different times.      Stuart THOMPSON also got up on

the barrier, to stand up and sing.                   left us and moved to

the back of the terrace, when you stand on the barrier the person

nee rest you in the crowd supports your legs, whether they know you or

not, it is just the accepted way of behaving it was a big game and the

crcwd was in a happy mood.      Everyone was singing and getting on well.

On one occasion when I was standing on top of the metal barrier, about

2.20 (1430) to 2.35pn (1435) I looked towards ny right at the

perimeter fence and I saw a lad I know standing about 4 feet (4'0)

frcm the fence and looking through it onto the pitch.      This lad was

Kevin WILLIAMS I have known him through school.      Kevin was with

          and I also know                  Kevin WILLIAMS saw me, he waved

towards me and shouted out, I shouted out            and waved back at

Kevin. I never saw Kevin WILLIAMS after this.

It kept getting busier and busier, as it always does, and just before

the teams came out there was a bit of pushing, as the late-comers get

in, this is quite normal and usually once the teams come out, everyone
GRIER                   ANTONY   MAXWELL                                    4


settles down.     I've been in similar crowds before and I wasn't too

concerned by this.

The teams came out onto the field and about 2.55pm (1455) Stuart

THOMPSON and I were standing on top of the same metal barrier, we were

both singing.     Stuart was at my right side with his left arm linked

into my right arm, as we tried to support each other.     We both had our

free arm in the air, as we sang, no-one else was standing on this bar

at this time.

We lost our balance and I fell backwards behind the barrier into the

crcwd but managed to land on my feet.      I saw Stuart fall forward into

the crowd, he turned to the right as he fell forward to break his fall

I suppose Stuart THOMPSON let out a yell as he fell forward.     This

yell was just like a normal cheer, there was nothing wrong with

Stuart at this stage.

I then went under the barrier and stood with the metal barrier against

my back so that I would not be pushed.     The crowd was still building

up and it was becoming more difficult to move around.      I knew that I

could not get room to climb back onto the barrier I couldn't even get

my arms up in the air.

Stuart came up to me, he stood facing me, with no-one between us.

Stuart said to me, "I'm getting under" I told him not to, as I feel

you are safer with the metal barrier against your back, as in this

position it stops you being pushed as the crowd builds up.

Stuart THOMPSON then crouched down and went under this metal barrier.

I was looking over my right shoulder and I saw Stuart start to stand

fully up again.     I could not turn my body because of the crowd

pressure but I turned my head as far as I could and I did see Stuart

standing up with the barrier irrmediately in front of his body.

I never saw Stuart THOMPSON, or spoke to him again.      I have wondered
GRIER                ANTONY    MAXWELL                                     5


if he tried to climb back on the barrier but I just do not know if he

tried to or not.   The teams were out and the game was yet to start.

The game kicked off, just before kick-off, a great roar went up, the

terrace I was in was absolutely heaving.    If ten (10) more people came

in that would have been too marry but I heard that thousands more did

care into the terrace I was in, after the kick-off.   As the roar went

up at kick-off I was physically turned round by the pressure of the

crcwd and ended up facing the West stand.   I managed to turn myself

arcund again to face the pitch, my arms were pinned to my side, it was

so packed a woman behind me was screaming and a man in front of

me, a blonde haired lad about 26 years old fainted.   The man slumped

anc his head dropped forward, there was no roan for him to fall down.

He was holding a match programme in his hand.   This man was passed by

the crowd to a policeman outside the perimeter fence and as he was

passed over the top of the fence, the programme fell out of his hand

to the ground.

The lady immediately behind me was still crying and screaming, I could

not turn around but I managed to move my head forward and she made her

way over the top of the crowd to the perimeter fence and she was

helped over the top of the fence.   She was in her early 20's I can't

describe her clothing.   I was shouting at people at the front to climb

over the perimeter fence as we were all being crushed.

I could not watch the game due to the discomfort I was in.    People all

arcund were shouting and screaming to get out of the crowd pressure.

Scne people were crying in the crowd.

I co not remember any single crowd surge.    It just kept getting more

anc more packed, until eventually the crowd could not move and it was

as if the crowd was set in concrete.

I was gradually forced further down the terracing towards the
GRIER                  ANTONY   MAXWELL                                        6


perimeter fencing.     This was caused by people coning under the metal

barrier I was leaning against and forcing me forward.        There was

nothing I could do to prevent this gradual pressure forcing me further

dovvn the terracing.    I eventually finished up in front of a barrier

with an exit gate to ray right side.

I think the game had stopped by now as there were so many supporters

on the pitch.   I didn't see the game being stopped.

I tried to make my way to the exit gate but there was people stumbling

over bodies, near the gate. I saw a pile of 12 - 15 bodies piled on

top of each other, near the perimeter fence and I saw that the man on

top was blue coloured.     I couldn't believe this could happen at a

foctball match and I refused to believe that this man, or any of the

other bodies in these piles were in fact dead.

I rrade my way through the crowd to the back of the terrace.       People

were being pulled into the stand frran the terracing.    I was so

petrified, I almost felt like I could have jumped into the stand area.

I net a Policeman near the tunnel area.     This Policeman told me to

leeve by using the tunnel area.     I told him I couldn't.     I was in such

a state of distress I was thinking of the game re-starting and that if

I cid leave as the Police wanted, I would not then be allowed back

into the ground.

I was helping to pass kids up into the West stand from the terrace.

The Policeman never approached me again.

I vas also hauled up by the supporters into the West stand.        This West

stand was packed, there was people everywhere.

In this stand, I again saw the pile of bodies in the terracing.          The

perimeter gate was open and there was chaos with people trying to get

out of the gate.

I saw my dad, who had been in the North stand, on the pitch.        I also
GRIER                  ANTONY    MAXWELL


sav                and Martin THOMPSON on the pitch.

I climbed back over the stand, into the Leppings Lane terrace, which

was by now very quiet.     There was a pile of discarded clothing on the

terrace.   The bodies had been removed.

I tried to get cnto the pitch through the hole in the fence with ray

dac but the policeman there refused to let me out the fence and

directed me to the gate, which I used with ray dad onto the pitch.

%   dad went to phone ray mother to tell her we were both alright.     I

stayed on the pitch.     Martin THOMPSON came up and asked me where his

brother Stuart was and I just told him I didn't know.    Martin then

becan to get upset, as he could not find Stuart.

I talked around looking at the dead and injured but could not find

Stuart THOMPSON.

I left the ground about 4.30pm (1630) with friends,

             m d two lads we had met up with,                and

        I don't know their addresses.

I later found out, that Stuart THOMPSON and Kevin WILLIAMS had both

died at the football ground.

We were walking around for a bit                 drove

             and myself heme I got home about 8.45pm (2045).       I did

not attend hospital for treatment.

I had visible bruising in the centre of ray chest.



A GRIER
        GRIER            ANTONY   MAXWELL                                  8


                                            ANTHONY MAXWELL GRIER SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   240589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:             PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                               I 923
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                             SURREY,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and I reside at the above address with my mother.

           I have resided in                for the past Sixteen years after having

           moved

           I support Liverpool football team and have been a season ticket holder

           for the past 3 years.       I attend most of League games both home and

           awey.

           At the beginning of April 1989(000489) I sent off to Liverpool

           Football Club to obtain a ticket for the Liverpool, Nottingham

           Forest football match which was being held at Hillsborough on

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).       I had no problem obtaining a

           ticket as I am a season ticket holder and I used my vouchers at the

           back of my ticket book. At the same time I sent for a ticket for my

           friend,                 as he is a season ticket holder too.     Myself and

                   decided to attend this match and to travel to Sheffield by

           trein. At 6.30 am (0630) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489),

           tocether with                    I caught the train frran Fameonbe Station

           to Waterloo. The train was empty and I did not see any football

           supporters on this train.




                                                                                         19 24
At Waterloo we got the tube at 7.30 am (0730) to St Pancras to catch

the train to Sheffield which was due to leave at 9.00 am (0900).

At St Pancreas Station I saw a group of Liverpool/London supporters

abcut 50 in numbers who were waiting to catch the same train.

The train left St Pancreas at 9.00 am(0900) and arrived at Sheffield

at the scheduled time at 11.30 am (1130) with no delays.

At the main entrance to Sheffield Station I was aware of a heavy

Police presence, one of wham stopped us and asked us where we were

going.    I told him around town.   He did not say anything else and let

us carry on.

Myself and        then waited from the train station into Sheffield

Tofcn.   We decided to go for a drink in one of the public houses.    I

car,'t remember the name of place but we saw it was full of Forest

fans so we had a pint of lager each and left to avoid any

confrontation between supporters.

We then went to a pub which I believe was called the Market Tavern, it

appeared that we were the only supporters in that pub so we stayed for

abcut an hour and a half and drank about 2 pints of lager each and a

nurrber of vodka and oranges.   I can't remember how many.

We left the pub at about 1.45 pm (1345) to go to the football ground.

We were both merry and happy but not drunk.    We got a taxi frcm

outside the pub straight to the football ground.     The taxi dropped us

right outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles at just after 2.00 pm

(1400). On arrival outside the ground I could see there were a number

of supporters spread all over Leppings Lane end, approximately a

Thousand in numbers, none of which were queueing to get in but were

just hanging around near to hot dog stands and that and in and around

nesrby shops. I saw that there were about four police officers, all

male, who were standing by the large gates to the entrance to the
ground. The gates were open as those gates gave access to the

turnstiles. I remember seeing on the big gates a sign which read

'Liverpool Supporters Only'. The tickets that             and myself had

were for the stands in the 'B' section so we went to one of the

turnstiles which was marked with a large 'B' and I went in first.          I

gave my ticket to the attendant who tore off the stub and gave me the

main part back. On the otherside of the turnstiles were about 6 to

8 itale Police officers, one of which did a body search on me.

Whilst searching me he asked me if I had been drinking.        I stated I

hac to which he then stated that I looked a bit drunk to him.        I said

I vasn't and he let me through.     I waited a while whilst         i?as

searched and he was asked the same questions and was also let through.

Once past the turnstiles I could see the tunnel in front of us.

There were about 100 Liverpool supporters milling about in between the

turnstiles and the tunnel. Together with           te   went to the toilets

anc then returned.    I saw that there were about 4 or 5 Liverpool

stewards I knew that they were Liverpool stewards as they wore bibs

anc I thought it strange that there were no Sheffield stewards.         The

stewards were directing fans to the stands via the tunnel and in fact

one of them tried to direct me and         that way but as we had visited

the ground before we knew where to go.     I did not see any signs

directing me or other supporters around the ground after passing the

stewards.   Myself and        then walked through the tunnel to the

terraces.   The tunnel was in no way congested it was only when we got

to the terraces that we saw they were packed,     they were packed right

back to the tunnel.      I did not see any police or stewards or signs at

the end of tunnel directing supporters where to go.        Myself and

war ted a good view point of the match so we worked our way into what

is Pen 3 right up by the left hand fence, working through the crowd to
abcut 10 yards from the front fence near the pitch.    Ws managed to get

to what I think was the second safety rail back from the pitch and sat

on that to get a good view of the game.    The stand was packed, this

was not unusual in itself as I had been there the year before and it

was this packed then but that was at kick off time not 2.15 pm (1415)

like now.At about 2.55 pm (1455) the players came out onto the pitch

anc I stood up on the bar to geta good view of them.     Somehow I got

pushed down and sat on the safety bar again.    I was aware it was

packed as the crowd were swaying backwards and forwards.    I could feel

this as I was being pushed forwards and backwards, the crowd were

singing and everything appeared to be alright apart from the amount of

people there.

The game started and after a couple of minutes Liverpool hit the

crossbar with a shot, the crowd all shouted in anticipation of a goal

anc that caused a big push from the back which caused me to be pushed

off the safety rail and onto my feet in front of it.    I turned round

to see what was happening and saw a man who was behind the bar was

bent double forwards over it, he appeared to be in great pain and was

uneble to shout out as I could see his stomach was completely crushed.

I vould describe this man a white, 20-21 yrs with long black curly

hair and he had a Liverpool shirt on.     Upon seeing this I was in fear

of it happening to me and I began to work my way through the crowd

forwards towards the fence to climb over to get out.    At this time I

lost sight of       I climbed up the front fence which was just to my

richt hand side of the goal and jumped onto the shingle pathway around

the pitch.

I saw that there were other Liverpool supporters on the pitch looking

back into the stands.   I saw approximately six police officers

standing behind the goal. With others we went up to them asking them to
                                                                           5


do something as there were people dying in there. The officers didn't

do anything as they were unaware of what was happening at that time, a

couple of minutes later one of the stewards got a small gate open at

the front and people began spilling out of it.    The first person I saw

cote out of the gate was pushed back in by the one officer standing

richt by the gates, then everyone, because of the pressure, just

spilled out of it.

After a while about 20 of us ran down the pitch towards the Forest

Enc as they were singing about us.    I was angry and wanted to fight

them but I was stopped by police on the pitch.     I then began to walk

back towards the Liverpool end and saw loads of fans on the pitch,

sate lying on the pitch injured.     I was still with seme of the lads

whc I had ran across the pitch with and it was then that I saw a press

phctographer with a big camera lens taking pictures of the dead and

injured lying down.    I was outraged at this and with other lads rushed

over to him and laid into him.     I hit him in the jaw, the others all

over him and he fell to the floor.    We then left him and went over to

help the injured.     I knew he was press as he had a big yellow bib on

with 'Press' on it.

I helped the injured by rolling up jackets and putting them behind

their heads on the floor to support them.     If they were conscious I

would speak to them to make sure they were alright.     I can't remember

hovv many I went too but I do remember going to a young lad lying on

the floor on the pitch he was about 12-14 yrs, white lad, he was

blue in the face and appeared to be dead.     Three other blokes came

over to him with a stretcher and I helped pick him up onto it and

carried it over to the c o m e r of the pitch to the ambulanceman.   I

then ran back and with others assisted carrying people on the

advertisement boards over to the ambulanceman.     Sometime later I began
        to look for        I couldn't find him so I made my way out of the

        grcund.

        I vas wearing my blue jean dungarees and a blue jean shirt with blue

        training shoes.

        I left the ground via the North Stand and along Leppings Lane and then

        onto a bus.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIMEs            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  ?C




                                                                                 1929
                                                                              STATION

NAME!


ADDRESS:
                           HUMBERSIDE,           P

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 37

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                                 (SIGNED)


#          I em a married man living at the above address with my wife

           anc   four children.   I have lived                           but I was

           born and bred in Liverpool.      That is why I support Liverpool FC.

           This year I've only been to one league game but I've followed

           Liverpool in the FA Cup.      When I heard that Liverpool were to play

           Nottingham Forest in the Semi-Final at Hillsborough I decided to go to

           the game because I can catch a train frcm                     directly

           to Sheffield Central railway station.

           I caught the 0620 train                   and arrived at Sheffield Central

           at about 0810hrs.(0810)       I travelled alone.    I went into the station

           buffet first and had a coffee and a sandwich.        Then I caught a black

           cat frcm the station rank to Sheffield Wednesday's football ground,

           Hillsborough.     Whilst in the taxi the driver asked me if I wanted a

           ticket for the Liverpool end as he had 3 given to him the previous

           nicht.     I said no because I had a ticket for the Leppings Lane stand

           for which I paid #6    My friend              got it for me frcm

           Liverpool.      He is a Liverpool season ticket holder and he got it for

           me through the normal channels.




                                                                                         1930
I cot to the ground shortly after 9am (0900) and I met a lad called

     who I had met at other games.     It wasn't a pre planned meeting.

Ws walked around the outside of the ground chatting, we were both mad

that we didn't have the Kop end and then we caught a bus back to the

Railway Station.     I wanted to meet the Liverpool train to see if

           were on it.    I don't know any of their second names but

      telephone number is                        -

he knew where to catch the bus.

We got back to the station at about 1015am (1015) and waited in the

buffet until about 1115am (1115) when the Liverpool train came in.           I

couldn't see        but by this time we were amongst the Liverpool

supporters from the train as a Policeman made us get onto a bus bound

for Hillsborough.

We went on a double decker bus to Hillsborough arriving there just

after 12 noon(1200).      The bus dropped us off at the Leppings Lane end

anc then we walked away from the ground out of city and sat on a

grass verge talking.     We sat there until about 1255pm (1255) and

then walked back to the ground.

           I then met                outside the Leppings Lane end of the

ground.      Again that was not pre-planned.    That    was at about1.15pm

(1315).      There were a few Policemen outside the     ground at that time

anc we were all searched.      The policeman who searched us looked at

our tickets and then directed us to a turnstile I think it was

lettered       'B'.It was 2nd or 3rd frcm the end.

We went through     the turnstile and the stubs were    t o m off ourtickets.

There was a Policeman at the other side but he was good humoured and

we had a laugh.      There were very few people going through the

turnstiles at that time, there weren't many people there at all.         I

bought a cup of tea and a chip butty frcm a man and then I bought a
prcgraimte.    We then sat against a wall and ate our food and read the

prcgrairme.    Then we made our way down the tunnel and went into Pen 3.

Thet was because it was directly behind the goal.         There weren't many

pecpie on the terrace and we stood towards the back.         That was

at 20 past 1 (1320), I could see the clock on the stand.

I stood w     i     t   h   a    g    a   i   n     I don't know their

surnames, left us and went into Pen 4.

Our Pen, number 3 slowly started to fill up, there was no atmosphere

until about 1410 to 1415 hrs(1415) when it started to get packed.

Then people started to sing.         In fact two lads in their late 20's,

one with a beard and chubby, climbed onto the barrier which later

collapsed and started to lead the singing.         They both wore the

official Liverpool FC shirts and I remember both lads kept falling off

the barrier and had to be helped back on.         They were facing back

towards the Liverpool crowd and were punching the air and we sang, 'We

are on the march with Kenny's army'.

The first surge started at about 1420 when we sang various supporters

sorgs.      The surge is a normal thing amongst Liverpool supporters.

Whot happens is that people at the back deliberately push down on

pecple at the front and as each person is pushed he pushes the person

in front.      This creates a general surge forward until it is stopped

by the barriers.        Liverpool supporters always do this, as do other

grounds.      I think this action started in the sixties.       After the

surge we push our way back, normally to where we started.          Its all

part of the atmosphere.         It gets the adrenelin going and then we sing

our heads off.

I remember a couple of such surges but I had the feeling that

something was wrong because at the end of each surge people were

screaming.        Also there was no way of moving back after the surge.
After the second surge I was right up against the barrier which later

collapsed.      That was about 1440hrs.   I was being pushed into the

barrier and I found it difficult to breathe.               suggested we

shculd move back so we tried to push back and we managed to move back

abcut 3 steps ard to the left of the barrier as one looks at the goal.

At this time, approx 1440 hours I am convinced people were dying.            I

am                                 yet it took all my strength to remain

on my feet.      Also      fras behind me keeping me up.           is 33 yrs

of age and although only about 5'9(5'09) to 5'10 he is

          very strong.

At about 1450 we just couldn't move, we were wedged solid just to the

left of the barrier.      There was a roar and a huge surge.       I could

just see the team caning out when I was carried with the surge.           The

upper part of my body was pushed forward and then as I tried to right

myself my legs were swept forward from under me.       I remember a lot of

pecpie were down at that stage and I sensed there was a lot of space.

I pushed my feet forward to try and get up and I remember pushing

against a lad who was lying on the terrace.       I think he had fair hair

anc was in his early twenties.

I was now oblivious to time, somehow I managed to get to my feet but

after that great surge forward and the gap opening it immediately

filled with more people so we were being crushed again.          I kept

trying to fight my way to the back in the direction of the tunnel and

suddenly I found myself with room, it just seemed to clear.          I could

see by that time that the players had left the pitch.          I just cannot

renenber what happened to me following the great surge and finding the

rocm at the back of the terrace, or at least half way up.

I turned back toward the pitch and someone shouted 'Lad get hold of

hirr' .    Next thing I knew I had the top end of a youth in my hands.
I carried his neck, someone else held his waist and another held his

lees.     We ran into the tunnel with him.     Someone was   still climbing

up to the seats above and his feet hit my head.       I also remember

sorreone ccming down the tunnel into the ground with what looked like a

trey of tea in white cups with lids.

We came out of the tunnel at the Leppings Lane end and there was a

bluish ambulance there.       A Police Officer screamed to the ambulance

mar 'It's a youth, it's a youth'.       Then I heard someone screaming

            I turned around and saw it was          We put the youth in

the ambulance and the other two lads who helped carry him ran back

into the ground.     I stayed for a moment because I wanted to see the

lac breathe.     The ambulance driver just shook his head and said he'd

gore.     I just cryed.     The youth was white, about 17 years of age,

fair complexion, I think he had fair hair, I remember he wore trainers

anc I think ice blue jeans.       He was quite tall but I was in sort of a

tirre warp, and my memory is vague.

I then ran back into the ground down the tunnel and into Pen 3.           I

saw 2 men carrying a man of about 40 with a beard, towards me.          I ran

dovn to them, I remember we were directly behind the goal but about

twe thirds down the terrace when I got to them.        I lifted under his

arrrs and we carried him through the tunnel.      When we came out of the

tunnel a Policeman told us to lie him on the floor to the left of the

tunnel.     I think the man was dead, I remember he wore big boots and I

think a heavy jacket and a scruffy jumper.       He was not tall but

seemed very heavy.        I think his jumper was green and his trousers

black.



I vent back to pen 3 and helped carry another youth out.         I only

helped carry him from the terrace end of the tunnel.         This time we
                                                                              6

put the youth to the right of the tunnel entrance.      I just cannot

rertember this youth other than that he was about 18 or 19 years of

age.      He wore denim jeans but he was naked from the waist up.

Thst's all I can remember of him.

I vent back dowr the tunnel into pen 3 and I remember grabbing

an advertising board that was to be used for a stretcher.        It was

passed down to me frcm people in the seats above.      A Policeman came

up to me and said, 'Give it us here then' so I gave it to him and he

tock it away.

The next thing I remember was being outside the ground just outside

the Leppings Lane main gates, the one by which I had entered the

ground.      I remember a Policeman had a lad up against a wall and he

was saying something like 'Leave it fucking out'.      Then another

Policeman came up and the lad went on his way.      Up until then I was

just crying and didn't know what I was doing.      This incident seemed

to bring me out of it.

I remember seeing about 6 Policemen on horseback and about 10

Liverpool supporters were facing them.      The supporters were clapping

anc shouting 'Murdering bastards' at the Policemen.      I then just ran

anc ran.

I ended up outside a house, I didn't know where I was.         I was crying

anc a woman came out and stood watching me.      Then two lads came out

anc took me in.      It's then I realised I was on my own.     They gave me

a whiskey and I phoned my wife.      I couldn't stop crying.     Then they

tock me to the station in a red cortina.      I'm very grateful to them

but I was too upset to ask who they were.

I should mention that I had lost all of my money and train ticket

whilst in the ground.      They must have fallen out of my sweat shirt

pocket.
The people took me to the station and to a Sergeant who then took me

to a British Transport Policeman.      He in turn took me to a guard who

put me on a train home to

During my time on the terrace in Pen 3 I saw no trouble at all and no

one drinking alcohol.     Lots of people were boisterous but I don't

think they were drunk just high spirited.      I was certainly the same

anc I had nothing to drink (intoxicating liquor).

On that day I wore light blue denim jeans a beige long sleeved 'T'

shirt with a collar and a breast pocket on the left hand side.      Under

thet I wore a red round necked tee shirt.     At the time my hair which

is a mousey brown was shoulder length and as I've said previously I am

            tall

I ettended last years semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest at Hillsborough and we were packed solid in the Leppings Lane

enc then.     I couldn't believe it this year when we got the same end

again, I believe this was a mistake.

I vould like to add that whoever is responsible for this enquiry has

got to ensure this never happens again.     The deliberate surges forward

have got to be stopped.     I believe by the use of more barriers and

not by all stadium seating.

If I can be of use to this enquiry I am willing to attend if only to

prevent anything like this ever happening again.
                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             DS




                                                   1937
                                                                             STATION

NAME:           STEVEN   JAMES
                CAIN

ADDRESS:
                             RUNCORN, CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 16

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250589                                         STEVEN CAIN           (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my mother and have done so for the

           past six years.

           I have supported Liverpool Football Club since I was about five years

           ole but have only been going to watch them since last season.       I am a

           season ticket holder.

           I vent with two of my friends, Kevin TYRELL (deceased) Bn 19.6.1973

           (19061973) of                                     Runcorn and

                                                                           Runcorn to

           the semi final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).                               also

           treveiled to the game with us.

           The four of us met at           house and then his

           drcve us to Shopping City where we caught a coach.       We travelled

           with Amberline Coaches from Liverpool,               dad bought the tickets

           for me and            I'm not sure how much we paid.

           got their tickets.

           We caught the coach at 9.45 am (0945) and stopped on route to pick

           other supporters up.     We didn't stop for any other reason.    We got




                                                                                         1938
CAIN                   STEVEN   JAMES                                         2

caught in a traffic jam on the way, for about twenty minutes but I

couldn't tell you exactly where it was.

I don't remember seeing any police on our journey until we got into

Sheffield.    We arrived in Sheffield at around 1 pm (1300) and the

cosch was parked by the main coach park which was near to the South

Yorkshire traffic Police Station H.Q.

The four of us, Kevin,                  and me got off the coach and walked

to the ground.    We had a look where we had got to go in and then went

to the 'Chippy' (Chip Shop) whilst we were walking to the ground,

before going to the 'Chippy' I saw quite alot of Policemen.       There

were also quite a few supporters about, same were sitting on a bridge

by the ground.    I didn't see anyone fighting or behaving badly and I

don't remember seeing any-one drinking.

I didn't go to the semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

last year, (1988) but           and his             lid.   They seemed to

knew which way to go.    I didn't see any Policemen giving directions to

the ground.

When we first went and had a look at the turnstiles where we were

going to go in, it was very quiet, that must have been around 1.15 pm

(1315).   There weren't any queues at all.

The four of us went to the Chippy, which was just down the road from

the ground.    We all had chips except Kevin.     We walked back to the

turnstiles and Kevin,           and me decided to go in.    The three of us

had tickets for the Leppings Lane Terraces and             had a ticketfor

the North Stand.    I paid #6.00 for my ticket and got it from

Anfield, in fact                got my ticket for me.

It was around 1.20 pm (1320) when we left           and went through the

turnstiles.    It was still quiet outside the turnstiles and we

didn't have to queue, we walked straight through I handed my ticket
CAIN                  STEVEN   JAMES                                      3


to the turnstile operator and he gave me the stub back.

Before we went through the turnstile all three of us got searched

anc when we got through the turnstile we were searched again by

a Policeman.   We had a laugh with the Policeman infact he had one

of the chips I v^as eating.

Kevin           went and bought a programme and I walked over to them.

We then went to the toilet.    I think they are situated next to the

tunnel that leads to the pitch and then we went down the tunnel and

into the pen on the right (pen 3).

It was normal for me to go to Football matches with Kevin

anc we always used to stand behind the goal.    I don't remember seeing

any signs before we went through the tunnel indicating standing areas

to the left or right but to be honest we would still have gone down

the tunnel because we like to stand behind the goal.

When we got into pen 3 it was really empty.    The three of us made our

way to the middle of the pen but slightly to the left (position 1 on

the Questionnaire).

We sat on the floor, just infront of a barrier, reading the programme.

The area gradually filled up and we decided to stand up.    It was a

reelly nice hot day and everyone seemed to be in a good mood.     We were

singing with the other supporters.

There was music being played over the tannoy but apart from that I

can't remember any-one giving any specific message.

Arcund 2.30 pm (1430) the pen seemed fairly full but no more than you

would expect for a semi-final.     I was standing with       on my right

anc then Kevin on         right.   I remember a beach ball being thrown

arcund but thats something that happens at most games you just jump up

anc hit it onto the next person.

At around 2.45 pm (1445) it was getting really packed where we were
CAIN                  STEVEN   JAMES                                          4


anc I remember looking to my right and the pen next to ours was

fairly empty.    I mentioned it to         md    Kevin at around this time I

reirember being pushed forward and I got seperated from           and Kevin.

Twc girls I can't describe them to you stepped between            and Me.

At this point I wasn't distressed at all, it's normal at a Liverpool

match to be pushed.   They push from the back causing everyone to move

forward and then you move back to where you were standing before you

were pushed.

I tried to move back towards           and Kevin but by this stage it

was really bad, really crushed.      I was being pushed all over the

piece and I hadn't got any control over where I was going.       I

dor.'t remember any-one in particular around me, it just seemed like

one mass. The players had came onto the pitch, I remember seeing them

cate on. There was another push and I moved forward again.       I was

weering a pair of dungarees and the strap came undone.       I was holding

onto the strap trying to do it up and I saw a gap between the barriers.

No-one wants to go between the barriers, this happens at Anfield quite

often because if you do you get crushed.        I've been injured before at

Anfield, I got all my hips bruised.      I decided to move into the space.

As I did there was another push and I ended up about 1 yard frcm the

frcnt fence (Position 2 on the grid).

It was really packed, I was being crushed and I tried to move my arm

up above my head but as I did it started to get bent back.        I thought

it was going to break.    I managed to get my arm back.      Someone had

their elbow in my throat, I felt as though I was choking but I

couldn't move.    A man standing near to me could see what was happening

but he couldn't help me because he couldn't move either. Eventually

the elbow moved and I could breath a bit better.

 I could see the Police at the front of the pen, they were facing the
CAIN                   STEVEN   JAMES                                       5


crcwd.    People in the pen were shouting at them to help us but they

dicn't seem to take any notice.

I cot moved over towards the gate at the front of the pen and I

reirember seeing a Policeman open the gate and push someone into the

per.

Everyone seemed to get annoyed at this and they were screaming 'open

the gate'.    Within a matter of seconds the gate was opened again and

pec pie started to get out.     To start with people couldn't get out

because there was such a squash but eventually with help frcm other

pecple they did get out.      I managed to get to the gate and get out

onto the pitch I walked along the pitch infront of the pen and a

Policeman told me to go and sit down on a hoarding.     At that stage I

dicn't realise how serious it was, I didn't think people had been

killed.    I just thought that it was a huge over crowding in the pen.

When I was on the pitch I looked into the pen and I could see people

pushed up against the fence.      When I saw their face, I knew something

was wrong.    I went over to the fence and leant over and tried to pull

sorreone up but the fence was digging into my arm pit, it was really

hurting so I had to let him go.

The game was still going on, I don't remember it starting but I

rearember seeing a fan run onto the pitch to GROBBELAAR (the goal­

keeper) I couldn't hear what he said but I saw GROBBELAAR motion to

hiit to get off the pitch.

At this point alot of supporters went onto the pitch to stop the game.

The game was stopped.

I remember seeing alot of people lying on the pitch, some were injured

anc some looked dead I was looking for Kevin and           but I couldn't

fir.d them.   I just seemed to be wondering around the pitch in shock.

The Police seemed to be disorganised, they didn't seem to know what to
       CAIN                    STEVEN    JAMES


       do.

       I remember hearing someone on the tannoy say that the game had been

       abandoned and that we could leave the ground.       I think I was there for

       a couple of hours.     I remember someone giving me a cup of water on the

       pitch and me splashing water on my face.

       I vas just about to go back to the coach to see if            )r Kevin were

       there when I bumped into                               aadn't seen        or

       Kevin.     We made our way back to the coach and after a While         same

       back, Kevin wasn't with him.       The coach waited for about half an hour

       anc then we made our way back to Runcorn.

       The first time I knew that Kevin had been killed was when             dad

       cane round to our house on Sundays morning.

       On Saturday 15th April (150489) when I went to the match I was wearing

       a pair of denim dungarees and a grey sweatshirt.       I was also wearing

       a Liverpool hat.     I took the hat off when I got onto the pitch.    I

       dicn't lose anything in the crush.

       Steven Cain

       Desc White male, 5'6" (5'06) tall

       Medium build, Mousey brown hair.




                                                              STEVEN CAIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:      250589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                          PS




                                                                                      1943
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                            KIRBY,   MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 29

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything Which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I sm                      a married man living at the above address.

           I em a Liverpool FC supporter and have been for a number of years, I

           am also a season ticket holder at the club.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I travelled to the Hillsborough

           Foctball ground in Sheffield to watch the semi-final between Liverpool

           anc Nottingham Forest.

           I travelled to the match with several friends on a 52 seater coach

           which was hired frcm Mersey Buses, Liverpool. It wasn't an organised

           party, just   a group of friends. I got my ticket via a friend who

           attended the ground on my behalf to get my ticket using my voucher out

           of my season ticket booklet. The ticket was   6 (six) and was for the

           Leppings Lane standing area. On the way to the match, just outside

           Sheffield, we stopped at a pub ''The Travellers Inn'' for some food

           anc a drink. After leaving the pub, we drove straight into Sheffield

           without any delays and arrived at about 2.05pm (1405). The coach

           driver dropped us off near to a pub, Which I think was called ''The

           Owl'' Which is about 5-10 minutes walk frcm the ground. The driver

           then left and parked the coach elsewhere I don'nt know where, having




                                                                                    1944
                                                                        2

mace arrangements to pick us up after the match.

When we got off the coach, walking to the ground, I didn't see any

supporters drinking alcohol, in fact most of the pubs seemed to be

closed. We saw a lot of Police dotted around on street comers near to

the ground, but we didn't receive any escort or direction frcm the

Police, mainly because most of us on the coach had been before

the previous year and knew where to go. The mood as we approached the

ground frcm the supporters was boisterous and high spirited. I saw no

fichting, disorder or drunkeness.

We actually arrived at the gates of the Lappings Lane standing area at

abcut 2.15pm (1415). There were no queues as such, just a great

crowd of people all trying to get through about 6 turnstiles. There

dicn't appear to be any organisation at all. The crowds were pushing

anc shoving but there was just too many people all in a space Which

was far too small for them. I saw 3 mounted Police officers, and as I

stood in the crowd one of the Police horses left the area. As I got a

little further forward within the crowd, there were masses of people

pushing behind me, but there was no-where to go because the people in

front didn't seem to be moving. There were times when the crowd was so

packed that my feet were off the ground and I had no control over my

movements. There was a fellow standing near to me who seemed to have

fainted or passed out. His eyes were closed but there was no space for

hiit to fall and I saw two fellows on either side of him suppporting

hiit and trying to revive him. I didn't see any stewards at all,

outside the ground.

Because I'd been to the ground the previous year, I had no problem

fir.ding where I wanted to go, and the only difficulty I had entering

the ground was due to the crowd. It took me about 30-35 minutes to get

to a turnstile at Which place I handed my ticket to a steward who tore
__________________________________                                      3


off the stub and handed it back to me. As I passed through the

turnstile, there was a Policeman standing on the other side, making

sure no one got in without a ticket. I also saw about half a dozen

officers standing about 15-20 feet (15'-20') away, within the space

between the turnstile and the tunnel. These Police didn't seem to be

doing anything and they were getting a lot of verbal abuse from fans

whc were entering the ground, complaining about the crush outside the

turnstiles.    Before entering the ground, outside the ground, I saw

abcut half a dozen youths climbing over the wall and into the ground

without passing through the turnstiles, I couldn't say whether that

was because of the crush or whether it was because they had no

tickets. Inside the ground, because I'd got seperated frcm my friends

in the crowd outside the ground I waited on the other side of the

turnstile waiting for them to come through the turnstile. As I waited

I saw 4 Policeman and a steward open the gate which is situated on

the left of the turnstiles. As the gates opened, people started

streaming into the ground in a fairly orderley manner, the majority of

them seemed to head towards the tunnel, although others of them

entered the stands via the steps and headed into Pens 1 and 2 which

was situated    to the right as you entered the ground.

After a minute or so I realised I had little chance of spotting my

friends so I joined the group and walked through the tunnel. Walking

through the tunnel there were loads of people walking through although

it wasn't really too congested, As I reached the standing area on the

other side of the tunnel, people were banked up, blocking the way so

it was a case of pushing through the crowds, combined with people

pushing me to get out onto the terrace. Other than the Police and

Steward I've already mentioned, I saw no Police or Steward control

within the ground.
Eventually I ended up somewhere behind the goal in pen 3 (Grid box F6

on the plan shown to me by WPCj            I, I didn't particularly

chcose this spot, it was just where I ended up after the initial

pushing stopped from the people behind. At this point the match had

already started with the players on the pitch, I saw no one drinking

any alcohol within the ground, and the only organisation I saw was the

far.s having a go at the Police, like I've already stated, about the

crowds outside the turnstiles.

I only managed to watch a bit of the game for a couple of minutes

before I felt myself becomming more and more hemmed in by the crowds.

I couldn't move and the heat was roasting. At this, even though I

couldn't move, I wasn't really too alarmed, it was similar to other

matches that I've been to, it was nothing that I wouldn't have

expected with it being a big game.

The crushing of the crowd all around me began to get more and more

intense and I began to think something was seriously wrong, especially

when people started climbing onto the heads and walking along over the

heeds and shoulders of the crowd to escape the crush.

At this stage   I was standing alone, I still hadn't managed to find

any of my mates who I'd lost sight of outside the ground, I didn't see

any fights or disturbance inside on the terrace, there was just no

room to move let alone anything else. I wasn't really aware of a

particular crowd surge, I just felt mounting continual pressure

pushing me from behind forwards, all the time the force of the crowd

pushed me forwards down onto the perimeter fencing down by the pitch.

 (Grid box F-8 on the plan shown to me by WPC             ., As I was

down by the fence, myself and most of the people around me were trying

to get the kids   out who were trapped down by the fence. We were

trying as best we could to lift them up and over the fencing onto the
__________________________________                                       5


pitch. As I was lifting these kids over, a lad about 10 years old

tripped by the side of me and fell to the ground near to the gate

which had been opened onto the pitch. Me and another fellow grabbed

hirr straight away before he was trampled by the people who were trying

to get out of the terraces. I lifted him up towards the gate and a

Police officers grabbed him through the gate and out onto the pitch.

The next thing I knew the Police officer grabbed me by the arms and

dragged me out onto the pitch, I immediately climbed straight back up

on to the fencing and continued pulling the fans out of the terrace

anc out onto the pitch. I did this for a few minutes until there was

one particular person who was too heavy for me to lift. At this point

another lad climbed up and took my place and began pulling people up

anc; over onto the pitch. As I stepped back, I could see a lad who had

his eyes closed and looked as though he'd passed out still trapped

within the fan packed in pen 3. He was about 20 feet (20') away frcm

me, on his feet, but I couldn't get to him because of the crowd.

There were loads of people lying injured on the pitch in front of the

terraces and people were shouting to use the advertisement hoardings

as stretchers. So me and another lad began tearing the boards down and

stocking them for people to use as stretchers.

After about 5 minutes, I saw a Policewoman and I think a Policeman

giving mouth to mouth resucitation to the youth who I'd seen trapped

on the terraces with his eyes closed a short time previously. The

lac was about 14 yrs old,, white, with shortish blonde hair. He was

slim built with jeans, white shirt and a light coloured jumper, Ithink

it might have been beige.

There wasn't anything at this time I could do to help with the first

aic so I walked around some of the injured and tried to comfort

anc reasure them. A short time later I returned to find the lad, lying
                                                                          6


alcne, still with his eyes closed.   I thought he was just unconcious

so me and a couple of others lifted him up and placed him

onto an advertisement board intending to take him to the other side of

the ground where the majority of the injured were being taken. As we

lifted him up on to the board, a Policeman came forward and pulled the

lacs jumper up and over his face and I realised then that he was

deed. We carried him across the ground and placed him on the pitch in

the area where the injured were being attended to.

I then walked back over to the Lappings Lane Terrace and saw two big

mer. being given mouth to mouth first aid actually on the terraces

within Pen 3. I don't know whether these men were dead or alive,

because by this time I was in a bit of a daze, I couldn't even

describe what they looked like. They were lying on the terrace around

abcut the area of E-7 on the grid map shown to me by WPC

I walked around on the pitch for a while, and then I remember that

sorre of my mates might be in the North Stand so I headed in that

direction. My friends spotted me and shouted to me so I went over and

they pulled me up into the North Stand with them. I broke down then

anc said I needed to get out of the ground so we all left the ground

at about 4.00pm (1600) and went back to the coach.

At no time did I witness anything that I'd consider to be a criminal

offence.

After the match was stopped, in my opinion the Police were slow to

reect and seemed to treat the incident as a public order situation

rather than a serious emergency situation, it was obvious to almost

everyone what was happening but the Police just didn't react. On the

whcle, although there were several Police officers, in particular the

bald headed Police officer who pulled me out of the terrace and who

also pulled dozens of other people out of the terrace.     That officer
        was superb, he must be responsible for saving many lives. The thing I

        couldn't understand was all the Police who stood across the half way

        lire, they could have been used to help the trapped fans, but all they

        die was just stand there.

        Basically, the organisation of the whole match day details was at

        fault. There was no organisation of the fans outside the ground, not

        enough Police especially when compared to last year, when there was a

        cordon of Police approx 50-75 yds away from the turnstiles checking

        tickets and organising the queues on the main entrance gates and on

        the turnstile barriers.




        I em willing to attend court to give evidence if required.




                                                                      SIGNED

^ftTEMENT TAKEN
W         ELACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    240589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                 1950
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior. if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120689                                                              SIGNED)



           I em a single person, residing at the above address.

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA

           Cup semi final football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           at the Hillsborough Football ground in Sheffield. I attended the match

           as a Liverpool supporter.

           I obtained my match ticket frcm my brother                      The

           ticket was for the Leppings Lane standing and cost six pounds.

           I travelled to the game by car, with my brother________

           We travelled directly to Sheffield, however, after we had just got

           into Sheffield, the car broke down.   There was some problem with the

           clutch and we had to leave the car where it was.   We did not encounter

           any real traffic delays on the way to Sheffield.   Having left the car

           where it was at about quarter past twelve (1215), we started walking

           to the ground, which I think was about twenty miles frcm where

           we broke down.   We walked a few miles and then caught a bus.    Having

           got off the bus, we walked a few more miles and eventually got to the

           ground.   We ended up approaching the ground from the Forest end.

           Whilst walking to the ground, I remember seeing people drinking in




                                                                                     19
puts.   These were all forest supporters, as we were walking through

their end of the ground.

We did not get any Police directions to the ground, it was a case of

following the crowd to the ground.      I did not see any form of disorder

or fighting, or any drunkeness amongst supporters.

We actually arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about twenty

five to three (1435).     Neither         or myself had been to

Hillsborough before and upon arriving at the turnstiles.     We saw some

turnstiles saying A and G.    We assumed these were the entrances to

the standing area, and we joined the rear of a queue which was

orderly.     We got to the turnstile where we were challenged by a

Policeman.     We showed our tickets to him and he said we couldn't go in

through this turnstile and he directed us to the set of turnstiles to

the right of where we were.     It transpired that we had tried to get

through the seating turnstiles, which we thought were standing

turnstiles, not being familiar with the ground.     We made our way to

the other set of turnstiles and came into a crowd of people.      There

were no orderly queues, just a mass of people.      By this time it was

abcut quarter to three (1445).      Whilst at the rear of this crowd, I

got separated from              I started making my way towards the

turnstiles with the crowd.     It was very packed and I remember hearing

pecple screaming.     I was tMnking at the time, I must keep away from

the wall, because if I ended up against it, I'd have stood no chance.

As I got towards the turnstile, I saw a man who had his hands

outstretched in front of him against the wall.      The man was letting

pecple slip under his arms and into the turnstile.      I eventually got

to this man and slipped under his arms and got through the turnstile.

Whilst outside the turnstiles, I can remember seeing two Policemen on

horses, there weren't any Police by these turnstiles.      I can't
rerrember them giving any directions.    I did not see any stewards at

all outside the turnstiles.     I handed my ticket in at the turnstile

anc was given the stub back.     I subsequently lost this stub during

the course of the afternoon.     Once inside the ground, I s   a   w   b   n

a vail and we joined up again.     I did not see any gates open at all.

While I was outside the ground, neither did I see any gates being

opened.    Once inside the ground, I did not see any signs saying where

to go.    All I could see was a tunnel running under the stand, which

appeared to be the only way in.     Because of this we headed straight

for the tunnel.     From the time that I got through the turnstiles, I

die not see any disorder or fighting.     I did not see any people

drinking alcohol either.    We walked along this tunnel quite freely.          I

did not see any Police or stewards either at the entrance to the

tur.nel or inside it.

At the end of the tunnel we walked into a wall of people and came to a

sucden halt.     With the amount of people coming in behind us, we were

suddenly being crushed.     I remember the players were still having a

kick about, so the time would have been just before three o'clock

(1500).    The crush was that bad that I just couldn't move at all and I

started being carried forward by the crowd.     There was nothing

you could do to stop it, you just went with the crowd.     I was carried

by the crowd to the right hand side, into what I now know to be pen

nurrber three.    I have marked my initial position in pen three on the

separate grid using the figure one.     I was still being carried forward

by the crowd and eventually came to rest towards the front of the pen.

The pressure was still intense and I was still unable to move.         I had

became seperated from            again during the crush.   I have marked

the second position in pen three, where I ended up following the crush

on the separate grid using the figure two.



                                                                                   1953
                                                                          4


Whilst I was still being crushed in this second position which was

abcut two yards behind the front fencing, and a bit to the left of

the gate at the front of the pen, I became aware of a person crushed

up against the left hand side of my body.     I looked at this person

anc saw a man with his head dropped back and his mouth open.     He was

not moving at all and was obviously dead.     The man's face was blue and

his eyes were still open.     The man was still in an upright position,

being held up by the crush.    At that time, I remember being aware of a

lec underneath me, which was at an angle to the ground.     I think it

was probably one of the dead man's legs.     The man being pressed up

against me, I had never seen before.     I would describe him as white,

aged about fifty.    The man was virtually bald on the top of his head,

but he had red hair, on the back and sides of his head. The man did

not wear glasses and as I remember, hewas clean shaven. I cannot

say what the man was wearing as he was      very tightly crushed againstme

anc I could only see his body from theneck upwards.     At this point I

would estimate the time to have been about six to eight minutes past

three (1506 - 1508).    Having seen this man, I got into a state of real

paric when I suddenly realised I might die as well, and all I

reirember thinking was I had to get out somehow.

I v^as very hot and sweating a lot, I also began to feel very faint.      I

sorrehow managed to claw my way up above people in front of me and get

myself a grip on the top of the front fence.     I remember clawing my

way up onto the top of the fence and dropping onto the field where I

was caught by a Policewoman who laid me out on the ground.     After that

I klacked out.     I don't know how long I was out for, but when I

eventually came around, all I was thinking was where was my brother

          Only a matter of a few minutes later I saw him and he

rejoined me.     For some time after that I just sat on the pitch as I
       was that exhausted, I couldn't even walk.    Fran this time onwards I

       lost all track of time and I don't know what time I left the ground.

       As a result of being involved in the crush, I sustained a swollen left

       eye, this occurred as I was climbing out from the pen as I was caught

       in the face by someone's elbow.   I got a lot of bruising to the left

       anc right side of my back and the sides of my ribs.

        I have made my views and caiments to an Officer on a previous occasion

       anc they were recorded on a questionnaire.    I have nothing further to

       adc to those previous caiments.

       Throughout the course of the afternoon, I did not see anything that I

       would consider to be a criminal offence.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE;

          TIME:            DATE:   120689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                PC




                                                                                 195b
                                                                                  STATION

NAME:          GILES     WILLIAM
A              HUTT

ADDRESS:
                          MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150689                                                        G W HUTT (SIGNED)


#          I em a single man and I live at the above address with my parents and

           one sister.

           I em a                                                        Liverpool.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Football Association

           Challenge Cup Semi Final match between Liverpool Football Club and

           Nottingham Forest Football Club at the Sheffield Wednesday Football

           Grcund, Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I em a supporter of Liverpool Football Club.         I have been attending

           foctball games at Liverpool since I was seven years of age, during the

           1968 (000088) football season.       I have visited a number of away

           fixtures.     I went to Hillsborough for the 1988 (000088) FA Cup S a m

           Fir.al.

           I e m a season ticket holder for the Kemlyn Road seating area at

           Liverpool.     I exchanged my stand voucher from my season ticket for a

           grcund voucher and I purchased from Liverpool FC a six pound ticket

           for the Leppings Lane terraces (standing).

           Myself, James THOMAS o       f   L   i   v   e   r    p   o    o   l    ,   and

                                                                travelled to Hillsborough
HUTT                 GILES   WILLIAM                                     2

tocether.

We travelled with a coach company booked through Amberline Travel,

Boctle Stand Shopping Centre, Liverpool.

We boarded the coach at Bootle Strand at sane time between 9am (0900)

anc 10am (1000) on Saturday 15.4.89 (150489) and departed for

Sheffield. The coach made no stops on route to Sheffield and I cannot

recall any delays in the journey.

We arrived in Hillsborough at about lpn (1300) and the coach parked on

a irain road on a hill close by to I think a Bass Brewery.

I cnly saw one person, a man sitting in front of us on the coach

drinking beer, he drank 2 cans of Heiniken.

I saw the odd person drinking beer from cans as we walked from the

coech to the ground but not on a large scale, nothing unusual from any

other match day.

We walked from the coach we were heading for the Railway Public House.

I had been there at last years semi final with my friend

Christopher DEVONSIDE and his father and I had arranged to meet them

at the pub this year.

We had no escort or directions from the Police during our walk to the

put lie house or the ground, there were Police on the route we walked.

When we got to the Railway Public House it was closed, there was no

sicn of Christopher DEVONSIDE or his father so we then walked to the

Gateway Supermarket on the main road leading to the ground and I

purchased 2 cans of lager which I drank, James and           also drank 2

cars.

We sat on a grassed area by Gateways for sane time drinking our cans.

It was whilst we were here that Christopher DEVONSIDE and his father

cane and stood with us, this was at about 2pn (1400).

Christopher DEVONSIDE, his father and a friend of his father's also
HUTT                  GILES   WILLIAM                                    3


brought a couple of cans of beer from the supermarket and we all stood

tocether talking and drinking our beer until about 2.20pn (1420).

At about this time 2.20pn (1420) seme mounted Police Officers and foot

officers came down the road and asked us and other supporters close by

to make our way down to the ground, we walked off towards the ground,

myself James THOMAS and                  Christopher DEVONSIDE and

Jason KENWORTHY who had travelled down with Christopher DEVONSIDE all

walked down to the ground together because we all had tickets for the

Leppings Lane terraces.   Christopher DEVONSIDE's father and his friend

stayed behind as they had tickets for the seating area.

The Police Officers followed us down to the ground, between leaving

the coach and walking down to the ground.    I never saw any signs of

any sort of disorder or drunkeness everyone seemed to be in good

hurrour.

When we were a short distance from the ground I saw a group of other

friends who had travelled by mini bus included in this group were Gary

CHURCH,                          ind Antony OWEN o f _____________

Formby.

Both Gary CHURCH and Antony OWEN walked down to the ground with

us.    We got to the entrance to the ground at about 2.30pm (1430). We

split up with Antony CWEN, he went off to a shop with another lad.

When we arrived at the entrance to the ground there were no orderly

queues just a mass of people packed together, we joined onto the back

of the mass of people at a point I believe was just inside the outer

perimeter gates, there were plenty of other people joining on behind

us.

On joining the mass outside the turnstiles there was myself,

           James THOMAS, Christopher DEVONSIDE, Gary CHURCH and Jason

KEKWORTHY.
HUTT                   GILES   WILLIAM                                     4


I saw two mounted Police Officers ahead of us in the mass.    I didn't

see them giving any specific directions but I wasn't really taking any

particular interest in them.

I cid not see any stewards outside the turnstiles.

On first approaching the turnstiles we actually got into the wrong

crowd and had to ask a policeman for directions to the terrace

turnstiles as it was not clear from the sign posting which turnstiles

to use.

We did experience difficulty entering the ground because of the mass

of people and the absence of orderly queues.     If you were not

directly in line with a turnstile you had to push your way over.     It

was very packed amongst the crowd but it wasn't excessive at that time.

We slowly moved our way towards the turnstiles, our group staying

roughly together.

When we were about 3 or 4 meters from the front of the turnstiles I

saw    another late friend Simon BELL of Crosby, Liverpool.

Sirron was on his own and he came over and joined myself and the

others.    When Simon joined us the time was about 2.40pm (1440) he was

in good spirits smiling and laughing.

As we got closer to the turnstiles it was becoming a little more

packed and uncomfortable in the crowd but nothing that caused me

concern.

At about 2.42pm (1442) we entered the ground through a turnstile.     I

handed my ticket into the turnstile operator.

We quickly purchased a programme once inside the ground myself and a

couple of others went to the toilet and on returning to join the

others in our group Anthony OWEN came through the turnstiles with a

friend of his                   we all joined up together.

I never saw any signs directing me to the terraces.     I saw the tunnel
HUTT                   GILES   WILLIAM                                     5


anc I assumed that the tunnel was the only entrance to the terracing.

At a time I would say was a short time before 2.45pm (1445) we all

entered the tunnel as a group, we had free passage along the length of

the tunnel.

I cannot recall seeing any Police Officers or stewards in the vicinity

of the tunnel.

As we got to the end of the tunnel we were confronted by a mass of

pecple, the terraces appeared to be very full.

All of us worked our way into the terraces to our right and forwards

to a point marked as Number 1 on the attached grid plan (Ex No       )

(Ref No       ), we arrived at this point at about 2.48pm (1448) we were

all stood together in a group comprising of myself, James THOMAS,

                   Chris DEVONSIDE, Gary CHURCH, Jason KENWORTHY, Simon

BELL, Antony OWEN and

At this time I had noticed that there seemed to be space probably 2

feet at the front of the terracing by the perimeter fence, the rest of

the teracing was very full.

We stood at position No 1 for a few minutes, people were singing and

junping about, there were the odd few sways of the supporters but

nothing unusual.

Gradually the terraces began to became very uncomfortable as they were

filling up as things became tighter and tighter.     There was a gradual

crush pushing me forwards down the terracing.     I looked about me, I

car.'t be sure of the exact time but it was within a couple of minutes

of the kick off.     I saw that because of the forward movement of the

crowd our group was no longer together and the only two I could see

was Anthony OWEN and

The players at this time were already on the pitch for their warm up.

A iroment or two after seeing Antony and          I was suddenly aware of
HUTT                   GILES    WILLIAM                                     6
a cuick change in position and I was propelled forwards, I don't know

whet caused this to happen but I finally ended up in a position I

believe to be approximately as that marked as number 2 on the attached

grid plan.

At this time, position no 2 I would say the time was about 3.01pn

(1501) shortly after the game had kicked off.

When I got to position no 2 I was aware that I was being severely

crushed.     I had no room for movement in any direction.     There was a

mar. in front of me whose elbow was pushing into my breast bone, this

was impairing my breathing.      There was a girl to the left of me

positioned slightly sideways on, her face was pushed right into the

left side of my face.     This girl was screaming out "I can't breath, I

car.'t breath."

I can't recall much about the people who were around me at the time,

except that I think the girl with her face pressed into mine had fair

to mousey coloured hair.       I think she was wearing a white tee shirt.

I can't recall much more about her other than I think she was well

built and her face was red and she was very hysterical.

At this time I was aware of someone to my right shouting to a

policeman, "Open the gate, open the gate."

I vas at this time about 6 feet away from the perimeter fence and the

gate in the fencing was about 3 feet to my right.         I could see a

policeman standing by the gate and the man to my right was still

shcuting at him to open the gate.         It was then apparent from this

policeman's actions that he did not want to do this.

The policeman was looking down into the terraces and after a short

tiire, maybe a minute, he opened up the gate and let about the nearest

3 cr 4 people to the gate out and onto the pitch, then the policeman

clcsed the gate and walked away.
HUTT                            GILES       WILLIAM                                     7


A short time later a policewoman walked past the perimeter fence in

front of me, I think she must have said something to the policeman who

hac previously opened up the gate because he returned and again opened

the gate and left it open.

I vasn't too sure at this time what was going on around me.                     I was

starting to panic because I couldn't breath and I was on the point of

passing out, the severity of the crushing was such that I was only

getting little gasps of air.

After the policeman returned to open the gate together with others I

spilled out onto the pitch.                  I believe at this time the game was still

going on.

After I got out of the terraces I was stumbling about, a policeman

tock hold of me and sat me down by the advertising hoardings.

I cot my breath back after a few minutes and then a policeman asked

me to go into pen 2 which I did through the gate in the perimeter

fence.     I stood on the terraces there was plenty of room in that pen,

I think the game was still in play and I stood and watched it, I can't

be sure.        Very shortly after entering this pen number 2 the game must

have been stopped because I can remember looking and seeing James

THCMAS and                              standing on the pitch by the goal.

I vent and joined James and                           on the pitch.   I sat down with

           whilst he was trying to catch his breath.

We looked around on the pitch for friends, we saw Antony OWEN who was

w      i    t      h      w     a       s      lying on the pitch, he was unconscious.

A supporter was giving him first aid, this supporter eventually

brought                round.

Eventually we got one of the advertising hoardings and carried____

towards the Kop End and left him with a couple of his friends.

Although my friends Christopher DEVONSIDE, Simon BELL and Gary CHURCH
HUTT                   GILES   WILLIAM                                   8


died during the tragedy, to the best of my knowledge I did not witness

anything of their deaths or any other deaths.

Prior to entering the ground I did not see or witness the opening of

any gates.

Between entering the ground and getting to ray match viewing position

(Nc 1) I did not see any sort of disorder or witness any consuming

alcohol inside the ground.

The only injuries I sustained was a large bruise on ray chest where the

mars elbow had been stuck in me, I did not seek any medical treatment.

I think that there were several things that were factors in causing

the deaths and injuries being too many people were allowed into the

certre of the terracing, during the 1988 (000088) semi final the

tur.nel was closed off when the terraces became full.   Also there are

insufficient gates in the perimeter fencing to allow escape.    Also

last year I went into pen 3 and when it started to become overcrowded

we were able to go through to pen 2 via a gate positioned in the

dividing fence.    I believe this year these gates were not open.

The lack of directions to the side pens resulting in the majority

entering the centre.

I think we left the ground at about 5.30pm (1730) of our own accord.

I consider that there was a lack of organisation between the emergency

services, the whole thing was a muddle, a lot of them appeared not to

knew what to do.

There was an obvious lack of medical equipment available.    There was a

very bad lack of information to the supporters if announcements

hac been made to the supporters in the Leppings Lane terraces to leave

the terraces through the rear, early on, this may have relieved the

crush and probably saved lives.

Also there were a large line of Police stood across the pitch, I
        HUTT                 GILES   WILLIAM


        corsider such a large number would have been better used to help the

        injured.




                                                             G W HUTT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                               1964
                                                                            STATION

NAME:          GARY JAMES
£              GAINS

ADDRESS:
                            LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260489                                                    G J GAINS (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and reside at the above address with my parents and

           one sister and my brother.

           I have been a Liverpool supporter for the past twelve years and hold

           a current season ticket for the Liverpool Kop.       I go to all the heme

           gaires and all FA Cup away or home games.   I tend not to travel to

           many away games as I work on Saturdays.

           For the Hillsborough FA Cup match Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, I

           obtained my ticket from Anfield by producing my Voucher 7 out of my

           see son ticket book.   The ticket I purchased cost me #6 and stated

           that I enter at Leppings Lane standing area.     There were no other

           details on the ticket stating where I should stand or in which

           blcck.     I am not a member of the official Liverpool supporters club

           anc in order to get to the match my friend                 who lives at

           ___________________ went to Amberline coach's at Speke and booked

           three seats on a coach and obtained the details of where we had to

           get the coach from to get to Sheffield.     We paid #9 each for our

           tickets.     The other friend who came with us was         that's all I

           knew him as, as I only see him when we go to the match's.




                                                                                       1965
GAINS                 GARY   JAMES                                         2

At about 10.00 am (1000) we went to Amber-line coaches to get our

coech which should have left at 10.15 am (1015) but we didn't leave

until about 1/4 to 11 (1045) due to all the coach's leaving together.

When we left Speke coach station we had to pick up seme more people

frcrn Brood-green and when we had done that the coach was totally full

anc we made our way to Sheffield.    In order to get to Sheffield we

treveiled along the motorway and didn't stop at all until we got

stepped by the Police just before we got into Sheffield, this was

abcut 10 to 1 (1250) to 1 pm (1300).   All the people on the coach were

in good spirits and looking forward to the game.    There were a few

pecple with beer cans and lager and several with cans of soft drink,

nothing excessive and certainly nobody was drunk.    By the time we got

to Sheffield all the cans that there was had been consumed as when

the Police stopped us no cans were taken off our coach.     I saw that

the Police weren't stopping every coach, just stopping them at random.

We got to the ground at Hillsborough and the coach was parked by a

brewery off Leppings Lane at about 1/4 past 1 (1315).     We all got

off and we went to see if we could get a drink at a nearby pub.     The

put was shut so we went to get something to eat.    I believe the pub

was called the Travellers Arms or something similar.    We found a shop

anc bought something to eat and we went down the road a bit further

anc found a Gateway Supermarket open, there was a lot of people

(fens) sitting on the grass bank outside the shop drinking cans of

beer, so we bought a couple of cans each and sat on the grass drinking

them. This was at about a 1/4 to 2 (1345).    At about 2 pm (1400) two

police officers on horseback came and began to move everyone down

towards the ground.   There was no trouble and the majority moved off,

the Police were OK and we moved towards the ground.     We arrived at

the ground at about 1/4 past (1415) to 20 past 2 (1420).     There was a
GAINS                 GARY    JAMES                                        3


lot of people (supporters) outside the ground as we walked down but

not a crush.   As we got to the turnstile area B and C the crowd

thickened and as it was a strange ground I asked a mounted Police

Officer which turnstile to go to, he told me 'B' after he saw my

ticket.   We were actually standing at 'C' and whilst trying to get to

'B' I lost both my friends.     It was a mass of people and we were all

crushed together. I was squashed up against the 'C' & 'B' turnstile

dividing wall and had to help three men by giving them a leg up to get

over the wall into the 'C' section where they had to be to get into

the ground.    It was totally impossible to get out of the crush; at

this stage I only saw two mounted Police horses having seen six

officers earlier when we walked down just standing in a huddle talking

neer the Gateway supermarket island.

Both these mounted officers were having trouble controlling the crowd

because everyone just wanted to get into the ground.     I came to the

serri-final last year at Hillsborough with the same teams playing and

car. state that then the Police organised everyone into queues to get

into the turnstile and this problem of crushing never occurred.     I was

still crushed against the dividing wall and facing the first

turnstile which is on the left as you go through the gates.     I got to

the turnstile eventually and handed my ticket in, got my stub back

anc walked in.    At no time was I searched nor did I see any Policemen

or Stewards inside the ground at this point.     I went to the toilet

which is directly opposite the turnstile I entered through.     I saw no

sicns directing me to where I had to stand so I approached two

Policemen and a Steward who were standing at the gates to the

Leppings Lane seated stand.     I asked the Steward if I could go to the

seating area above the standing area with the stub I had but he told

me no.    I asked where I had to go and he directed me down the tunnel,
GAINS                  GARY   JAMES                                         4


he did not tell me I could go to the left or the right of the tunnel to

stend on the end pens.    I walked towards the tunnel and was able to

walk straight through and into Pen 3 with no trouble at all (refer to

diagram.)   I still didn't see a steward or a Police Officer.    I went

into the standing area and stood about a l/3rd of the way down Pen

3.   Shortly before the players came onto the pitch there was a surge

behind me and I was pushed down the steps a short way.      I took no

notice really because that surging happens all the time, only this

tine it didn't go back up again.      Things after this became a bit

cor fusing to me.   I remember the players coming onto the pitch and

sirging up to Steve MCMAHON.     I remember being pushed towards another

barrier further down but I managed somehow to duck under it and was

then pushed down onto another barrier nearer the front and near to

per 2 dividing wall.     I was behind another lad who I was unavoidingly

pushing against onto this barrier, he somehow managed to get one leg

arcund the barrier goal side and then due to the force of all the

crushing got stuck and I got pushed onto his right knee totally

crushing it against the barrier.      I heard it crack (his knee) and the

lac who was only about 15 or 16 years old began screaming but there

was nothing we could do, we couldn't push back or get him out or

anything.   We were just being crushed more than ever.     I remember

pecple shouting to the Police at the front of the stand to open the

gates because people were (tying in here.     I don't know what happened

I just heard them shouting.     This all happened before the kick-off

because I remember glancing up and seeing the players lined up on the

pitch.   At this point someone shouted "the barriers going, the

barriers going."    I was about a foot (1') away from the bar of the

barrier and the lad whose knee had just crushed was actually on the

bar and the angle supporting bar on the co m e r of the barrier.       At
GAINS                  GARY   JAMES                                           5


this stage I was in a complete state of panic, I found it difficult to

breathe and my heart was pounding.     All of a sudden I found myself on

the floor and my right foot trapped in the broken barrier and under

bodies of people lying across both my legs.     I was lying on my

stcmach facing the concrete steps.     I managed after some time to get

myself onto my right side but was unable to move my right leg at all

as a youth in his teens was lying on me and he wasn't moving at all.

I would describe him as having short brown or black hair of a medium

build.    I was unable to describe his face or how tall he was as he

was lying face down across my legs with his stomach over my legs.        He

was wearing a dark coloured track suit type top and that's all I can

say.     I believe that this man was dead as he didn't move at all.     I

eventually managed to wriggle my left leg out and got it free loosing

my trainer in the process.      I really began to panic when I felt

scrreone standing on my back.     I grabbed his leg but he still stood

there, he eventually got off and I could see some light ccming

through the darkness on the floor.      I don't know how long I'd been

there but after what seemed like an eternity the pushing seem to ease

slchtly and people moved back up the steps. Two lads then grabbed my

ants in Pen 3 and began to pull me backwards. I screamed at them

that my foot was stuck under the lad and under the metal barrier.

Sorrehow they managed to get the lad off my legs and free me frcm the

brcken barrier and they caried me out of Pen 3 over the fence and

into Pen 2 handing me over to two other men who carried me onto the

pitch and into the c o m e r by number 1 pen.   At this stage there were

no football players on the pitch at this time.      The St Johns

Amtulance men came and asked me what happened to me.      I'd already

taken my sock off and had a look at my ankle that saw two cuts on it,

they were just about to bandage it up when someone ran over and
GAINS                 GARY   JAMES                                          6

said, "Quick, they'res someone (tying." They went and left me the

bardage and I strapped my ankle as best I could.   I remember walking

back towards Pens 3 and 4 in a daze and seeing people lying covered

by blankets and being carried away on boards.   I was amazed at the

tine it happened I thought it was just isolated to Pen 3 but when I

sav it all across I was staggered.   The next thing I remember is

sitting on the pitch by the South Stand and two Policemen asking me

what happened to me and if I was alright.




Unfortunately in my honest opinion I would like to say that it was so

bacly organised or should I say lack of organisation by the Police

anc the Stewards.   Pens 3 & 4 were packed by 2 pm (1400) and if

sorreone did open the gates to let the fans in they should have shut

the tunnel and made the fans go to the wings of the stand where it

was quite empty.    I would also like to add that I saw that no-one was

drinking in the stadium or pens 3 or 4 nor was there any fighting.      I

dicn't see anybody who was drunk at all.
        GAINS             GARY   JAMES                      7


                                         G J GAINS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          1IME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:              PCf




                                                                1971
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          TERENCE   MATHEW
£              MOORE

ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 30

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                    T MOORE (SIGNED)



           I am a single man living with my brother and his wife and children at

           the above address.     At present I am unemployed.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) together with about six friends,

           I con't know all their names but as I remember there was Paul

           HEKITSON who died,                                                     I

           travelled to Sheffield football ground at Hillsborough to support

           Liverpool in the F.A. Challenge Cup Semi-final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.     We travelled there in a van that belongs to

                      leaving Liverpool at 10 o'clock on (1000) Saturday morning

           arriving at Sheffield at about 1 o'clock (1300).

           We didn't stop on the way but were held up in traffic the other side

           of Manchester.   We all had tickets, I got mine a couple of days

           earlier.    I bought it in a pub for #14, it was a #6 ticket for the

           stands at Leppings Lane end.     We got the rest of the tickets on the

           way.

           I had a drink on the way to the match in the van, we had bought a

           fevv cans in Liverpool to take with us.     I don't particularly

           renember seeing anyone else drinking on the way to the match, although
M X RE                 TERENCE    MATHEW                                    2

I'c given a couple of my cans away to people in other cars.

We parked the van at about 1 o'clock (1300) in Leppings Lane near the

ground by a big heating place.      The streets were packed then.   I had

a valk round and made a couple of phone calls and visited a few wine

shcps to try and get seme more cans, they were sold out, all we

managed to get were four cans between 3 of us.      We got back to the

entrance to the ground at 2.30pm (1430) and sat on the bridge over

the river looking towards the turnstiles for the terraces.

All round the turnstiles and outside was packed, around 4 to 5,000

people. From about 2.30 pm (1430), I know the perimeter metal gates

were shut and there was people packed between the outside gates and

the turnstiles.

At about 2.55pm (1455) I was still sat on the bridge when a policeman

stepped right next to me and I heard him say something like "open the

west gates at the Leppings Lane end" over his radio.      In the enclosure

before the turnstiles there were at least two horses which were

causing people to panic, they should have got the horses out because

they were causing a crush.       I couldn't see any turnstiles open and

couldn't understand why they were shut.      We'd given up on getting in

when we heard the gates were going to be opened.      We went along the

embankment on the river side of the fence and climbed over into the

enclosure.   While we were getting in, the gates were opened,

everybody made a rush for the gates and then slowed down when they

realised they were staying open.       There were no stewards on the

gates.   As I went through the gates I could see straight ahead the

tunnel and the Forest fans at the other end of the ground.       We just

mace for the tunnel.    I wasn't really looking for any other signs

just heading for the tunnel.

In the tunnel itself, it wasn't too packed, in fact I stopped, turned
M X RE                TERENCE   MATHEW                                    3


round, went back for a short distance to give my mate my ticket to

take out and give away, because we'd then realised we were in the

ground and didn't need them anymore.     I carried on down the tunnel

with Paul, we intended to go of down to the right, that's where we

always go which ever ground we go in.    We did go to the right but we

where more or less carried down that way with the crowd.    We carried

on down to the point, I've shown on the grid you've marked where we

stepped, it felt tight and we decided to try to move out but it was

impossible to move, we were jammed and locked solid.     I think the

match had just started at this point.     It was a few minutes later

when I heard the barrier, it sounded as if the floor was going

through.    The second the barrier broke everybody just seemed to tilt

forward as if we were on a hinge.    All I could see of Paul was his

head, he was looking towards me and he said, "Get me out Terry, get

me out" but obviously I couldn't.    He was just to my left.   I was

jairmed leaning forward for about 15 to 30 minutes, when the crush

seemed to ease and I slid down on to my knees.     I can't really

rearember, I think I was close to passing out.    It took me 15-20

seconds to come round when I stood up.     Right from when the crowd

first locked together people were shouting and screaming to get them

out or pull the fences down.    After I stood up there were people

piled up in front of me, I pulled some out of the way, I don't know

if they were dead or just unconscious, to find Paul.     When I found

hirr he was lying on his front with his arms out stretched.    I pulled

hirr clear and lay him on his back but I realised he was dead.

Sctrebody immediately came and gave him mouth to mouth.    I turned

away and started pulling people out of the heap and lying them on the

terraces.

 I'c been helping for a while, when I went to look for my friends who I
       M X RE                 TERENCE    MATHEW                                  4


        eventually found.   We returned to the van and went to the hospital to

        sort Paul out.   I hadn't told them he was dead.




        The only thing I couldn't understand is why the Police didn't do more

        to help, seme of them stood around looking when it was obvious people

       were dead, it was as if because they hadn't been told to do it they

        didn't bother.




                                                               T MOORE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 PC




                                                                                     1975
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          ANTHONY JOSEPH
A              HOIIiINRAKE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 25

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                        ANTHONY HQLLINRAKE (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents I

           am a life long Liverpool supporter and on Saturday 15 April

           1989(150489). I attended the semi final football match at Hillsborough

           foctball ground between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest. I am a

           season ticket holder, and obtained my ticket for this match from

           Liverpool F.C. I paid six pounds for my ticket, for the Leppings Lane

           terrace. I travelled to the match with a local coach firm who arrange

           coaches for all the away matches for Liverpool. The coach firm is

           Eavesway coaches. Ashton in Makerfield.   At about 11.30am(1130) I got

           on the coach at Ashton in Makerfield, together with

                       We set off and outside Manchester, on the motorway we

           were held up for some time by roadworks. When we got outside

           Sheffield the police stopped the coach, two or three police officers

           got on the coach, and searched it for alcohol, and they asked if we

           all had tickets.

           At about 2 .40pm( 1440) we arrived in Sheffield, the coach parked on the

           main road next to the other coaches. As we had arrived late

                       I ran towards the ground. On the way to the ground I saw
HOILINRAKE           ANTHONY    JOSEPH                                  2

no incidents or any fighting.

At about 2.50pn(1450) we arrived at the ground and saw a mass of

pecple in Leppings lane all trying to get into the ground I could see

only two or three policemen on horseback in Leppings Lane itself

trying to control the crowd.

We joined the crowd and started to look for entrance 'B' I couldn't

see 'B' only 'A' and 'C'. I worked my way forward past the main

entrance gates to the ground and towards the turnstiles. On the main

entrance gate there was a lone policemen who was trying to regulate

the crowd by opening and closing the main gate. This gate was closed

as I approached the ground, but it was open when I got to it, and it

was now impossible to close it as the crowd had now filled the

entrance. As I got near to the turnstile I could see people standing

on the walls and other people, climbing onto the walls, to get out of

the crush. It was very tight and I heard the occasional scream. To

the right at the entrance of the terraces there is a three foot high

safety rail. At the other side of this rail there was a policeman on

horseback he shouted to everyone to come under the safety rail and to

go to the right hand side of the turnstiles. Both            and me

die this and came to a gate which was open. We saw no stewards or

police at this gate. As we went through the gate the rest of the

pecple came round and entered by the gate. No one asked us for the

tickets as we went into the ground. We walked quickly and in front of

us we could see the entrance to the tunnel leading to the terraces.

As we approached the tunnel we saw a steward to the right hand side

next to some stairs. We asked him if we could go up but he said it

was only for the stands. We made our way back to the tunnel entrance

anc at this time it was about five minutes to three. I entered the

tunnel and walked on the right hand side,                  was behind
HOILINRAKE           ANTHONY   JOSEPH                                   3


me and slightly to my left. Inside the tunnel there were a lot of

pecple, but nothing worse than a normal football match. As we got near,

to the end of the tunnel, the ground became steeper and we began to

walk faster. As I got to the end of the tunnel, I came to a stop as I

reached a solid wall of people, I could feel people behind me pushing

me forward. At this point I lost contact with my brother. I had no

control over my movements and the crowd pressure dictated where I

went. I got pushed to the right, and forwards, I nearly fell over,

I think that had I fell over it would have been impossible for me

to get back up. The crowd pressure then took me to my left. I came

to a barrier and was being pressed onto the barrier which came just

abcve my waist. The pressure was very great. I tried to push back

against the barrier but it was no use, I kept being pressed against

the barrier. Next to me to my left was a lad about 25 years wearing

a white rugby type top. He was standing against the barrier, but he

was backwards looking up the terrace with his back to the pitch. He

said to me "Help me, please help me." He was bent backwards over the

barrier. He was bent right back, his torso was bent at nearly ninety

decrees. He appeared to be in intense pain. I tried to hold his head

anc shoulders and to pull him up right. This was impossible due to

the pressure of the crowd. I believe that due to the angle that he

was over the barrier his back was broken. I felt the barrier moving

very slowly forward and I realised that the barrier was breaking.

The barrier then gave way slowly and folded forward, I lost my grip

on this lad and fell forward onto the backs of the people in front

of me, I totally lost my balance. I did not fall to the floor, but

onto the backs of people who had fell over in front of me. I then

felt people falling on top of me. I felt as if I was going under

water, I coudn't breath and the pressure on me was unbearable. I
HOILINRAKE           ANTHONY   JOSEPH


could feel myself going dizzy and I knew that I had to get out. I

could feel people on my back and legs but I couldn't move my arms or

lees. I managed to look up and saw that I was only about five feet

from the safety gate, I could s ee________________ on the pitch. I

started screaming his name to attract his attention. He saw me, and

at this time the pressureseemed to ease I managed to work my way

forward over the other bodies, and then. I held my right arm out and

shouted to a policeman to grab my arm and pull me out. The policeman

told me to hold on and we will get   you all out. The policeman pulled

sareone else out, then as      he againreached   in through the safety gate

I crabbed his arm and then        grabbed me and I got pulled out. as ]

was being pulled through the safety gate I felt someone grab hold of

my left leg, I was kicking out, trying to get out, I then felt this

grip release and I was pulled clear. I staggered onto the side of the

pitch. I felt physically shattered and was covered in sweat. I

stopped on the pitch to get my breath back. At this time the players

were just leaving the pitch. We made our way over to the south stand

anc we spoke to a police sergeant who was standing on the pitch by

the c o m e r of the six yard box. We told him about the crash barrier

which had collapsed from where I had been pulled out and he said,

"fuck off and sit down." We then walked over to the south stand and

sore people told us there were a couple of empty seats. We climbed

into the stands and sat down for a few minutes one of the people

around us who were Nottingham Forest fans, began saying that it was

the Liverpool supporters fault, for bringing so many I was still

shocked by what I had been through I didn't feel as if I wanted to

arcue the point so we just got out and onto the pitch. As we walked

over the pitch I saw a lad who had just been pulled through the

safety gate, this lad staggered towards the goal and then collasped
HOILINRAKE            ANTHONY   JOSEPH                                   5


onto the pitch and he was violently sick. It looked like a battle

field there were people everywhere. I could see that the St Johns,

anc the police were treating people and giving some the kiss of

life.   We walked over to the north stand where other people were

sitting on the pitch. We sat on an advertising board till at about

4.15pm( 1615) when we heard an announcement saying that the game had

been abandoned. We then made our way out of the ground and back to

the coach. My injuries are bruises to my ribs and scratches on my

shoulders. I want to mention that when I was standing on the terraces

before I got pushed down onto the barrier. It would be just before

kick off (1500). I saw that a young lad, about ten   years   of age,

weering a Liverpool red shirt had opened the    gate which   leads ontothe

pitch. I saw him standing in the gateway, I believe he was trying to

get out onto the pitch. A police officer who was standing on the pitch

side of the fence pushed the young lad back into the crowd and closed

the gate. The young lad immediately opened the gate again, and again

tried to get out. The same policeman then pushed him back into

the crowd again and closed the gate. I could    hear people shoutingat

hirr to open the gate, but he took no notice.

I attended Hillsborough football ground for the semi-final last

yeer(000088), and that appeared to be far better organised than this

years. We were stopped last year in Leppings Lane before we got to the

grcund and made to produce our tickets.



A Hoilinrake
        HOILINRAKE       ANTHONY     JOSEPH


                                          ANTHONY JOSEPH HOLLINRAKE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ILACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   300489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          JAMES
^              THOMAS

ADDRESS:
                        MERSEYSIDE.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                 J THOMAS (SIGNED)



           I am a single man living at the above address and I am currently

           employed

           At about 9.00am (0900) on Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) I left

           my home to go to BOOTLE to get a private coach belonging to Amberline

           Coeches to travel to Sheffield to see the football match between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Stadium.    I

           was with Giles HUTT and

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 1.30pm (1330) later and then waited

           after looking for a public house, but they were all closed.   We had a

           bite to eat and on the way to the ground I saw Jason KENWORTHY and

           Christopher DEVONSIDE.

           At about 2.30pm (1430) later we arrived at the Leppings Lane End of

           the ground where we saw the large disorderly crowd of supporters

           outside the turnstiles, all trying to get into the ground.    The queue

           was going down slowly and we got in through a turnstile pretty

           quickly. I saw a mounted police officer directly outside the turnstile,

           but he didn't appear to be doing very much, the crowd was so vast.       I

           went to the toilet first and then we all walked down through the
THCMAS                 JAMES                                               2

tunnel, and into the area behind the goal mouth.    We went into PEN 3

on the right hand side and stood about half way down with my back up

against an internal Pressure Barrier.    We stood there, but

Christopher DEVONSIDE and Simon BELL went further down the terrace

towards the front.    The pressure frcm the over crowding was worse

this time than on any other occasion I can remember.     As the time went

on and just before the players came onto the pitch I felt the surge

of force which forced all of us in the area close by, forward.     The

pressure was so great we went two or three yards (2 or 3 yds) down and

up against another internal Pressure Barrier which was across the

lower part of my chest.    Pressure was again building up on us against

this new barrier.    It was all caning frcm the rear.   I was standing

next to Gary CHURCH who was saying he couldn't breathe.     He asked me

to help him, but I couldn't move.

At about 3.00pn (1500) later or just after more pressure was applied

frcm the rear on to us, and the Pressure Barrier gave way and broke.

I was then propelled forward in the air with my feet about 12 inches

(12") off the ground.     I found myself about 3 feet (3') in frcm the

frcnt Perimeter Fence Gate.     I felt my stcraach being crushed and was

finding difficulty in breathing.     I looked around for Gary CHURCH,

but the last time I saw him was just before I got propelled forward,

anc he went under the crowd of spectators.     I never saw him again.

Whilst I was at the front near the perimeter gate, I put one of my

ants out straight in the direction of the gate, shouting to be pulled

out.     I then felt someone grasp hold of my hand and start to pull me

forward and over the spectators in front.     I then put my other arm

out which was also took hold of and I was forcibly pulled clear and

onto the pitch behind the Liverpool goal area.     When I got there I

was physically dazed and tired frcm exhaustion in the fight to climb
       THCMAS                  JAMES                                              3


       clear of the pressure.     Whilst I was sat down a police officer came

       anc told me to lie still and recover.

       After a few minutes I got up and went to look for anyone I might know

       whc had been pulled frcm the crowd and was on the playing area and

       also left in the West Stand Terraces, but after a little while I found

       Giles HUTT and                     both alright on the field.   I still

       refrained there looking for any others who I knew when I saw

                   who was lying on the pitch.   He later recovered.   I saw

       nurrerous people lying on the pitch with clothing over their faces, but

        nore I recognised.

       At about 5.00pm (1700) later I left the ground and returned to the

       coech that brought us and we then returned to Liverpool.




                                                                J THOMAS SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                     DC

1FFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                             STATION

NAME:          PATRICK   JAMES
£              SMITH

ADDRESS:
                         CHESHIRE.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150589                                                       P SMITH (SIGNED)


#          I cm a single person residing at the above address. On the

           afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the F. A.

           Cup Semi-Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at

           the Hillsborough Football Ground in Sheffield.     I attended the match

           as a Liverpool supporter.   I obtained my ticket via the post frcm

           Anfield.   The ticket was for the Lepping Lane standing area and cost

           six pounds.   I travelled to the game with a friend of mine,

                                                        His telephone number is

                      We travelled to the match in           car.    We left frcm

           Hycebank at about noon (1200).    On the way he was subjected to traffic

           delays on the M62 due to roadworks and the sheer volume of traffic.

           We made one stop on the way that was for a drink at a pub just

           outside Sheffield.    I think it was called the Windsor Castle.     We

           parked on the outskirts of Sheffield and walked to the ground.       I

           cart remember the exact name of the road, but it was the main road

           into Sheffield frcm Glossop.     It was about a twenty minute walk from

           the car to the ground.    Whilst walking to the ground I cannot

           renember seeing any people drinking.      Likewise I cannot remember
SMITH                 PATRICK   JAMES                                        2

seeing any disorder or fighting.    Everybody was happy and well

behaved.   We did not receive any Police directions on the way to

the ground, we did not need any as I knew the way to the ground from

having attended this league match between Liverpool and Sheffield

Wecnesday at Hillsborough earlier this season.     We arrived at the

Lepping Lane turnstiles at about quarter past two. (1415)     On arrival

there I could see there were orderly queues at each turnstile.     The

queues went back towards the road itself, but not quite reaching the

rosd. There was a Policeman on each turnstile, and one mounted

Policeman who was to the right of the turnstile.     It was about this

tiire that I parted from        because he did not have a ticket and was

going to try and get one from somewhere.    I joined one of the queues

anc it only took about five minutes to reach the turnstile.     I went

through the turnstile, handed my ticket in and retained the stub.        I

still have itry match ticket and would like to surrender the ticket to

the Police (Ref PJS1). Whilst outside the turnstile I do not

ren ember receiving or seeing any directions either from Police or

ground stewards.    I did not see any gates open apart from the

turnstiles, neither did I see any gates being opened.     There was no

unauthorised entry to the ground that I saw it was all orderly at that

tirre.   Once inside the ground I bought a programme and looked around

to see where to go.    I did not see any signs indicating where to go

anc all I could see was a tunnel straight ahead of me.     As far as I

could make out the tunnel was the only way in, as there was nothing to

indicate otherwise.    When I attended the league match at Hillsborough

earlier this season I was in the Lepping Lane seats, so this was my

first experience of the standing area.     Apart from there being no

sicns indicating where to go I did not see any stewards or Policemen

telling people where to go.     It appeared to me that the tunnel was
SMITH                 PATRICK   JAMES                                       3


the only way in and out.   From the time that I entered the ground I

do not remember any sort of disorder or fighting, neither did I see

anybody drinking inside the ground.      I went along the tunnel with a

large number of other people, but I was able to walk along it quite

freely.   When I got to the end of the tunnel I came into a mass of

pecple.   I do not remember seeing any Police or Stewards either at

this entrance to the tunnel or inside it.      Having got to the end of

the tunnel and seeing that it was obviously very full, I went to the

right hand side of the penned area.      I thought at the time that it

was one large section which ran across the terraces at the rear of the

goel, however I am now aware that it was in fact two separate pens

divided by a metal fence & that I went into pen three.      I managed

to push my way through the crowd and took up a position towards the

reer of pen three.   I have indicated this position on the attached

grid, using the figure one.     The time at this stage would have been

abcut twenty five to three (1435).      I remember trying to read my

programme, but couldn't due to the lack of space and also because the

fans were in good spirits and there were small crowd surges at this

tirre, both backwards and forwards.     I wasnt unduly worried at this

stage as I was having a good time.      By now the pen was full to

capacity.   I had restricted movement at this stage because each time

there was a backwards surge I was able to walk backwards up the

terraces.   As the minutes went by I was being pushed further and

further forwards with each surge.       I attempted to regain my original

position but couldn't due to the sheer numbers.       I remember during a

surge forwards, my right shoe came off and when the surge stopped I

was some three or four feet (4') further forwards.       I remember

shcuting out that I'd lost my shoe, fearing that I would have my right

 foct broken.   Very shortly after the shoe was handed to me by a man
SMITH                  PATRICK   JAMES                                      4


frcm behind.    I took the shoe in my right hand, because I could not

berd down to put it back on.     Things were getting tighter and tighter

all the time and it was obvious that there were still people coming

into the pen from behind me, even it though the pen was overcrowded.

The time by now was perhaps quarter to three (1445) or maybe ten to

three (1450).    Whilst being gradually pushed forward further down the

terraces, I saw a young boy on the terrace in front of me, to my left.

The boy was really squeezed in between other people and just seemed to

be slipping gradually between the people. Eventually he must have

collapsed downwards, I did not actually see him collapse, he just

disappeared.    I could see people try to help him, by trying to move to

help him up.    They couldn't do anything though, because of the crush.

I cid not see that boy again.     All I can remember of that boy is that

he would be aged about fourteen and had short light brown coloured

hair.   He was wearing a Liverpool team top. The crush and the surge

continued and I eventually ended up being pressed against a metal

barrier, much further down the terraces than my original position.      At

this stage I believe I was still in a central position in the pen,

towards the front.    I have marked where I think this position was with

the figure two on the attached grid.     I was crushed against this

barrier with my left hand side up against the left hand side of the

barrier.   Due to the fact that the left hand side of my body was

ageinst the barrier I was now facing towards the South Stand side of

the ground.     The barrier was pressing against the top of my left thigh

and because of this I feel now that the barrier had probably already

given way slightly, as it would normally be higher than my thigh.       I

could not say what the time would have been when I was crushed against

the barrier.     I would think it was probably about five past three

(1505).    Although I could not see the ground I remember hearing a
SMITH                  PATRICK    JAMES                                      5


large roar which was obviously the kick off and it was probably four

to five minutes after the kick off.       It was this time that I realised

something was seriously wrong.      I remember seeing fans being pulled up

frcm the back of pen three into the seats above.       Things continued to

get worse and ycu could not m ove one inch (1").      The pressure got so

intense.    I felt that I could not breathe.     At some stage my hand was

crushed against my stomach, and the pressure of it caused me to vomit.

All I could hear were people screaming in agony and screaming for

sorteone to open the gates.      By this I presumed there were gates at the

frcnt of the pens.    Whilst still side onto the barrier I could see a

lot of people were now on the pitch, and although I couldn't actually

see it I presumed the gate was now open.       All this happened in the

spece of perhaps a minute, two minutes at the most, because then I

felt the barrier begin to bend and gradually tilt forward.        Because of

the crush I went faward with it.      As the barrier started to go

forwards the crush turned me around and I was now frontwards onto the

barrier.     The barrier went forward, quite slowly for a very short time

anc then I just felt it had collapsed completely as it was no longer

there.     As the barrier started to go I remember people screaming and

shcuting for fans to move back, but they couldn't because of the crush.

After the barrier collapsed totally I fell forwards and went down

about two or three terraces.       Further towards the front I got a very

brief relief from the pressure as I went forwards.       The people who

wert forwards in front of me they would have been in front of the

barrier, all went down two or three steps as well.        It was just like

the falling domino effect.       Having fallen forwards I still had itry feet

on the terrace but my body was now forwards at an angle with a lot of

pressure.     From behind I was tilted forwards quite considerably and I

became conscious of a man below me.       This man was lying face upwards
SMITH                  PATRICK   JAMES                                       6

on top of other people.     I was on top of him, looking at him.    This

mar. was quite red in the face at that time.      I was crushed on top of

the man.     I could see the man gradually changing colour, from red to

blue and his pupils became dilated.       I know what was happening, he

was obviously dying, and I wanted to help him, but because of the

crush and the fact that I was exhausted myself, I just couldn't do

anything, not even speak.    By now I felt very short of breath and I

honestly thought that I was about to die.       I could feel the man

slipping further and further down the terraces, as was I, and he

was obviously dead.    The man was white, aged about twenty three, he

was about five feet nine tall (5'09).       He had short dark hair which

was slightly wavy.    He was wearing a maroon coloured jacket which I

think was nylon.     Its very hard to say what time it would have been

then as my only thoughts were that I may die soon.       I was still

gredually slipping forwards down the terraces, low down, when I felt

sarebody grab itry hair from behind, somebody also grabbed my shoulder

anc I was dragged back to my feet.       However, I could not stand up on

my own feet as I was totally exhausted and could not even keep my

eyes open.     I was dragged over towards the side of the pen where there

was a little more space and then I was lifted by some people over the

dividing fence with pen two.     They told me to jump, but I couldn't so

they threw me over the fence and I was caught by some people in pen

twc.    Once inside pen two I was pysically helped towards the gate at

the front and then I was physically assisted through the gate &

onto the pitch.     After I got onto     the pitch I was seated up against

on advertising hoarding which was still in position in front of a

per..   By now I was beginning to get my breath back.     A St Johns

Ambulance man came over to me and asked if I was alright I knew I had

no broken bones and was slowly coming round so I said yes.        He left
SMITH                  PATRICK   JAMES                                           7


me and eventually I was moved towards the right hand co m e r flag as

the hoarding that I was leaning on was taken down and used as a

stretcher.     I remained there until about four fifteen (1615) I

think.    I eventually left the ground at about quarter to five

(1645).    Whilst I was walking away from the ground I remember seeing a

grcup of Forest supporters running across a park which was on my way

back to the car.    They appeared to be attacking a group of Liverpool

supporters accusing than of starting the trouble.       There was a

verbal exchange and then they started fighting.       There were about

ter or fifteen youths altogether.        I did not wait around and carried

on walking back to the car.      When I eventually got back to the car,

         was waiting for me.         had got into the ground through an

open gate and I think he was standing in one of the other pens.

Throughout this incident I did not see anything that I would consider

a criminal offence.

It is impossible for me to comment on the way things were handled

after the game was stopped due to my experiences.

In my opinion there was a definite lack of organisation generally.           I

feel that whoever actually opened the gate did the right thing, but

the officer should have been told about this situation in pens three

and four.     I cannot understand why the standing area in the West Stand

has to be penned off, as this end is given to the away supporters,

does it really need to be penned off.        I feel that the police should

have checked people more closely for tickets as they were approaching

the ground, to prevent people without tickets from getting to the

turnstiles.     The tunnel should have been signposted or stewards

there to direct people to the sides and stewards or Police should

have monitored the situation in pens three and four more closely and

realised the seriousness of the situation in there.
         SMITH                 PATRICK    JAMES                                    8

         As a result of being crushed up against the barrier in pen three I

         sustained extensive bruising to the top of my left thigh.    During the

         ger.eral crush following when I lost my right shoe, I sustained

         bruising to my right heel and cuts and bruising to the top of my

         richt foot where people had stood on my foot.   On the Saturday

         evening after the match I had a severe headache.   On the Sunday the

         16th I had an obvious pain at the rear of my head and ringing in my

         ears.   Over the Monday and Tuesday 17th and 18th April 1989 (170489/

         18C489), I also had nose bleeds, some of which were quite heavy.     I




          I cid not attend the corresponding match last year.



                                                                P J SMITH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

            TIME:            DATE:

^ T N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC




                                                                                       1992
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          NIGEL FRANK
£              ABBOTT

ADDRESS:
               MIDDLESBOROUGH, CLEVELAND,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                               NIGEL ABBOTT (SIGNED)



           I em a single man living at the above address.    I used to live near

           Liverpool for about 12 years and I have supported Liverpool for about

           15 years.

           I have been to watch Liverpool play at Anfield many times, standing in

           the Kop, where you do not need tickets, but you pay at the turnstile.

           Scare weeks ago now I knew that Liverpool had got through to the FA cup

           Seni-Final and were playing Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough, the

           foctball ground of Sheffield Wednesday football club.    Because I was

           an avid supporter of Liverpool I wanted to go to the match.    As I knew

           it was an all ticket match I tried to purchase a ticket through

           Liverpool Football club but because they were so few in number I could

           not buy one.

           On Thursday 13 April 1989 (130489) I decided I would travel by train

           to Sheffield and try and buy a ticket to the match outside the ground.

           I telieved it would be fairly easy to buy a ticket outside the ground

           because last year two of my brothers went to the same semi final

           between the same two teams.                                       tiad a

           ticket to that ground, however                             didn't have a
ABEOTT               NIGEL   FRANK                                             2

ticket and apparently he got a     ticket very easily for about        10.

At 10.06 am (1006) on Saturday       15 April 1989 (150489) I caught a train

frcm Middlesborough which, after changing at Doncaster and Darlington

arrived at Sheffield at about 12.50 pm (1250).        The only other

foctball fans on the train was when about half a dozen Nottingham

Forest fans who got on the train at Doncaster.        At no   time did I see

anyone drinking alcohol on the train.

As soon as I got off the train on the platfcm I was directed by a

Policeman to one end of the platform where I could catch a bus to the

grcund.   Liverpool fans it appeared were being sent to one end of the

platform and Nottingham Forest fans to the other.

I boarded a double decker bus outside the train Station and it took me

directly to the football ground.      At no time did the bus stop off to

pick people up or drop people off.

At no time on the way to the ground was I asked if I had a ticket to

the match nor did I see anyone else being asked.

I eventually arrived at the ground at about 1.15 pm (1315) I

irrnediately began moving around trying to find a ticket to purchase.

On arriving at the ground there was people milling around some were

sitting on walls enjoying the sun and some were going into the ground.

The queues at the turnstiles were short and very orderly.

I began hunting around looking to buy a ticket to do this I walked

arcund slowly asking people.     If they had any spare tickets.        Whilst I

was doing this I saw about another 20-25 people trying to buy tickets.

After about one and half hours I saw a group of about 4 lads buy 2

tickets off some other lads for      15 each iirmediately afterwards

I saw a lad go up to this group and offer       20 for a ticket so I went

up and said, "Yeh I '11 buy the other for      20."

After buying this ticket I returned to the Leppings Lane end to get
ABEOTT                 NIGEL   FRANK                                      3


into the ground.   By this time it was about 2.40 pm (1440).From 2.00

pm (1400) I saw about 6 mounted Policemen moving people on if they

dicnt have tickets and asking those who did have tickets to make their

way into the ground.    There were plenty of foot officers standing

arcund on street comers, however at that time there appeared to be no

problems and the foot officers were just monitoring the situation.

When I returned to the Leppings Lane entrance I saw a mass of people,

prcbably between 3000-4000 in number.    These people were standing all

across the road all trying to get through a large set of iron gates,

which were open.   Once through these gates people have to find their

turnstiles.   This area between the gates (iron) and the turnstiles was

full of people.

To the right of these wrought iron gates is a bridge that runs over

the river Don standing by this bridge was a Policeman.    I approached

the Policeman and asked him which entrance I had to go into with my

ticket.   My ticket had entrance B on it but it also had LL2 on it, so

I didn't really know where to go the Policeman pointed out entrance B

thst I was to go through, however it was at the other end of the

turnstiles and there was no way I would have been able to get to that

entrance however I did aim to get to it.

After speaking to the officer I began to try and get into the ground.

As I got to the wrought iron gates they were closed by the Police.       In

my opinion this was to allow the fans who had got past the gates but

not through the turnstiles to get into the ground and to ease the

crush at the front.

I was standing by the gates and I could have touched these gates if I

wished.   There was a crowd behind me, however it was fairly orderly

anc there was no crush after approximately 7-8 minutes the wrought

irtn gates were opened.
ABEOTT                NIGEL    FRANK                                     4


May I add here that before these gates were opened I saw a blue steel

gate at the side of the turnstiles being opened.    At this all the fans

in the area by the turnstiles walked through this gate.    At the time

this gate was opened there were people by it but there didn't

seem to be a crush, though I was about 10-15 yards away from that

crtwd.   When the wrought iron gates were opened I along with several

hurdred fans went straight through the entrance where the gate had

been opened.   There was about 500 fans go through it before me and

they were still ccming through it after me.    No one at this entrance

was collecting tickets.

It was a great relief to me to see this gate open which allowed me

into the ground, not because I was being crushed, but merely because I

got into the ground quicker.     It was about 2.57 pm (1457).

As soon as I got through the gates the first sight that I saw was a

turnel going through a wall leading to the terraces through this

tur.nel I could see the Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar and Peter

Beerdesly warming up in the goal area.

My initial reaction was to follow the crowd and go down the tunnel.

May I add here that not knowing the ground I believed this tunnel was

the only way to the terrace as I saw no other sign posts directing the

far.s to other parts of the terrace.

As I went down the tunnel I realised that it was very dark and that

there was no lighting whatsoever.

At the end of the tunnel I made an attempt to get to my viewing point

to watch the game my favourite place to stand is at head height of the

crcss bar just to the right of the goals.

I can remember getting about 5 yards onto the terrace and thinking

I'll stay here.   After a short while the crowd became very heavy and I

car remember saying to someone "This is worse than the Kop."
ABEOOT                NIGEL   FRANK                                         5


Because of the volume of people I begem to move sideways because I

expected people over at the far side of the terrace would have had

more room and at this stage I didn't realise we were penned in with

fences.   As I begem to move sideways because of the volume of people

was turned round ernd ended up facing away from the pitch looking up at

the fans in the seats.   I cem also recall seeing the scoreboard and

the electronic clock it was about 3.02 pm (1502).

I was then pushed, due to the force of the people, backwards towards

the pitch.   I cem ranember looking up at the fans in the seats, at

this time they realised something serious was happening ernd the ones

at the front begem pulling people from the terraces into the seats.

As I was being pushed backwards I cem remember one of the metal crush

barriers breaking.   I didn't actually see it break but felt it go.

The barrier didn't actually break it just seemed to crumble.    As it

die so the crowd just seemed to carry on pushing towards the pitch.

As I went backwards to the pitch my left leg got caught over the

barrier with my right leg on the floor to the side of it.   As the

barrier crumbled my leg was freed from the barrier ernd I was able to

get it back on the floor.

After the barrier had fallen over the crowd must have relented

slightly because I was able to turn round to face the pitch.    As I was

turning round my leg got trapped under someone who had fallen over,

anc I was being physically held up by someone who was saying "Don't

fall over, don't fall over."

I could see people lying face down on the floor in front of me.      Some

where lying two or three deep with the help of sane other people I

maraged to turn over 1 or 2 of them to enable them to breath.     Both

these people had purple faces.    I cem remember one of these was a man

abcut 18-23 years old with short brown hair, I can't remember anything
ABEOIT               NIGEL   FRANK                                         6

else about him.

I then managed to free my leg from the person who was lying on it and

mace a jump from the cage to try and climb over it.    I had to jump to

get to the cage because there was a large number of people lying on

the floor, many of them motionless.   I can rananber having to stand

on at least one of these people to get to the cage.

There was a ladder against the cage on the pitch side but I was unable

to get my feet through the cage to use the ladder.    As I was trying to

climb the fence a woman Police Officer was standing either on the

ladder or on the fence she had discarded her tunic and tie and begem

to pull me over the fence.   She was gripping hold of my one arm but it

was so slippery with sweat that she couldn't get a grip she called a

policeman who helped ernd he grabbed hold of my other arm.    I was

trying to find a foothold but I couldn't get one and as soon as I did

so I had absolutely no strength whatsoever ernd just fell back in doing

so my green (principal make) jacket came off in the WPC's hand.       I saw

her just throw this onto the pitch.

Once back on the terrace I realised I had no strength at all so

decided not to attempt to climb it again but I could see the crowd

thinning out so I decided to leave the terraces by the tunnel I came

dovcn to enter the ground.

Before making the attempt to get to the back of the terrace I had to

rest for about 5 minutes to get sane air into my lungs.      I felt

physically exhausted for this 5 minutes I was leaning over a crash

barrier not looking about at all.

Once I had recovered I made my way out of the terraces through the

tur.nel into the area just between the stand emd the turnstiles.      I sat

dohn with my back against the stand for 10-15 minutes.     I then went to

the toilets to splash water on my face emd have a drink.      I then had
ABEorr                  NIGEL   FRANK                                       7


to sit down again and after a while I was physically sick.

After leaving the ground I phoned hcxne to tell ray mother that I was

alright and to see if               had phoned, who I knew was at the

gante.     I then made attempts to find            but to no avail and so

I irade my way to the train station.      At the train station once again I

phcned heme and found out that                was safe and well.




                         I can also remember hearing people in the ground

during the crush shouting open the gates, and then a short while later

I can remember seeing these gates were open.       The gate in question

being the one at the front of the cage at the right hand side of the

per., however this gate was quite narrow and because of the squeeze

only one person was being pulled through it every 20-30 seconds or

so.      Also inmediately the crush started at about 3.00 pm (1500) I can

rearember seeing a Policeman standing on the fence at the front

shcuting to us to move back.      He then a little later begem shouting "

Move back theres people dying here."       But by now there was no way

pecple could move back.

There were a few angry Liverpool fans later on calling the Police

murderers and saying that no doubt later on the fans would get the

bleme but I saw no physical violence on the Police.

On the day of the match I was wearing blue denim jeans a Liverpool

shirt and a Liverpool scarf and a green jacket.       I lost my scarf and

jacket but did however see on TV my scarf tied to one of the fences.

My jacket I've lost got ripped and now I don't want it back.

Because my ticket was not handed in I still have it, however I have

given it to the Police (PC                  The ticket (Ref No____

 (Ex No         ) is numbered 150489 LL2 2241.   I disclaim all ownership
       ABEOIT                        NIGEL   FRANK


       of it.

       Other people who I know went to the match are

                  (18 years)                                             Qieshire

        (Tel                   . He stood in the left hand pen of the terrace with

       his friend                   One of his friends            and his dad sat

       in the North stand.

       My observations and critisisms for that day are as follows

       When the late arrivals came to the ground at about 2.30 pm

        (1430) onwards the Police seemed unaware of their numbers and once

       they did arrive the Police seemed unable to cope with the crowds.

       Their conmunication did not apear adequate.        The mounted officers and

       the foot officers seemed to be looking for a ccrrmand off a more

       serior officer, but this ccarmand didn't come.

       There was no Police or Stewards giving directions once in the ground

       nor were there any direction signs.

       There was an under allocation of tickets for Liverpool fans.

       Once the disaster commenced there seemed no plan for coping with it.

       The stand was badly designed to hold so many people.

        (Signed)     Nigel Abbott



                                                              NIGEL ABBOTT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:                     DATE:    140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:            PC
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          NIGEL FRANK
               ABBOTT

ADDRESS:
                MIDDLESBOROUGH, CLEVELAND,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130789                                             NIGEL ABBOTT (SIGNED)



           With reference to my previous statement dated 14 May 1989 (140589) I

           have the following points to add to clarify points within my

           statement. I did state that before entering the ground I was stood

           outside blue wrought iron perimeter gates which had been closed to

           allow the area inside to clear.   I said that despite there being a

           large crowd behind me they were orderly and there was no crush.    As I

           stcod outside these closed gates there was a Mounted Police Officer

           next to me who appeared to be waiting for instructions.   There are two

           sets of blue gates outside B turnstiles and I was stood directly

^          between them which meant I could quite easily have gone through either

           set as they were opened.   I was watching the crowd in the courtyard

           area and noted that it didn't appear to be lessening, people didn't

           appear to be going through the turnstiles very quickly.   I did notice

           then a blue steel concertina gate which is to the right of turnstile B.

           I saw that there were a number of ground stewards outside this gate

           identified by orange bibs and the odd person, supporter, outside.

           The majority of the crowd were outside the turnstiles separated from

           the area of the concertina gate by a small barrier, because of this I




                                                                                     200
ABE C/IT                 NIGEL   FRANK                                          2

was able to see the steel concertina gate clearly.

At some time between 2.50pm (1450) and 2.55pm (1455) I saw this

concertina gate open and from where I was stood outside the outer

perimeter gates I saw a stream of people enter through this concertina

gate.      There were a lot of people but the area outside the turnstiles

die not clear significantly due to the fact that there had been such a

large crowd there already.

Abcut one minute after seeing the concertina gate open I saw that two

or three Police Officers stood holding the set of the perimeter gates

closed, opened the gates allowing myself and about 500 people before

me to enter.      These 500 people entered quickly, as I had been stood

at the front.      The set which opened of the two sets were to my left

locking at the turnstiles.       The other set to my right and nearest the

river were held closed by one Police Officer and I don't know whether

they were opened.      When we all got through we joined onto the side of

the people who had been entering the concertina gate prior to the

opening of the perimeter gates.          As we walked through we went through

the concertina gate and I have described previously my route along the

tunnel into the terraces.        I have provided a plan of the terraces

(Exh No          )(Ref NFA/3) and in my statement I described being turned

round to face an electronic clock the time being 15.02 (1502).          I have

marked a position (2) on this plan relating to my position on the

terraces at this time.      Frcm that position I was forced by the crowd

backwards, towards the field.       As I got to a position (3) on the plan

my left leg caught the end of a crush barrier but as I was near to the

enc the rest of my booty and my right leg continued past the barrier

leeving my leg suspended across the top rail of the crush barrier.            My

left leg was trapped against the barrier by the force of other people

but I then felt the barrier collapse.          I was panting and struggling



                                                                                    2002
       ABE COT                   NIGEL   FRANK                                         3


       for breath so did not look at the electronic clock at that time I

       would say that the barrier collapsed at some time between 15.05 (1505)

       anc 15.10 (1510).     I cannot be any closer than that as I could not

       relate it to events on the field at the time.          The barrier moved

       slcwly towards the field and down at its end allowing my leg to

       fall to the floor.        This barrier I could not see so I cannot say

       whether it actually broke.         My leg was over the end on the left as you

       lock at the pitch and I cannot say exactly how much of the barrier

       fell towards the floor.       I was stood with both legs on the floor in

       that position for a short while without any noticeable change in

       pressure from the crowd. Approximately 2 or 3 minutes later for seme

       reason unknown to me the crowd relented and I was able to turn around

       to face the field and saw that play had stopped and the field was a

       mass with supporters and police.           I have described in my previous

       statement events as I remember from that time onwards.

       May I add that when I got through the outer perimeter gates and joined

       pecple already entering the concertina gate it was an orderly stream

       of people and there was no need to push your way through.



                                                                     N.ABBOTT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:       130789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        Del
                                                                               STATION

                PHILLIP
                DUGGAN

ADDRESS:
                             BIRKENHEAD, LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160589                                                   P. DUGGAN (SIGNED)



           My name is Phillip Duggan and I live at the above address with my

           parents.   I am a life long Liverpool supporter and the holder of a

           see son ticket.    I got my ticket fran Anfield on the first day they

           went up for sale, I can't remember the exact date.     I paid #6.00

           for a ground ticket.     I had a seat booked on the Amberline Coach,

           Liverpool but we boarded it at Birkenhead.     I travelled with

           friends,

                                    they had ground tickets like me.    Also



                      they had West stand tickets.    We set off at 10.15 am (1015

           hrs) on Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489), we didn't stop

           anywhere on the way & didn't experience any traffic delays - we got

           into Sheffield about 1 o'clock (1300 hrs) and had to stop at a shop

           neer to the ground just of Leppings Lane because we had to get

           sorrething for                  because he had an upset stomach.

           We parked in a designated coach park area, same place as last year, in

           Wheels Lane.      The fans started walking towards the ground, I saw a few

           fans drinking from lager cans, but nobody was drunk.        We had asked




                                                                                         2004
DUGGAN                  PHILLIP                                              2


abcut 10 - 12 Policemen where a chemist was, but none of them knew

any, they said they weren't from around there.       I did see barriers &

cores on the side streets, there were Police on every com e r but they

dicn't direct or escort any of the fans.       There was no trouble walking

alcng to the ground.

When we were looking for a chemist we passed the Leppings Lane

entrance at about 1.30 pm (1330 hrs), there was hardly anyone around

but there were a lot of Police Officers.       We returned to the ground at

abcut 2.00 pm (1400 hrs), there were a lot more people about, a lot

of people were sitting on walls along the bridge away frcm the

turnstiles, people were moving through the main metal blue gates at

thet time. There were 3 or 4 people at each turnstile at the terrace

enc.     I went through a terrace turnstile without any problems.    Behind

these turnstiles, I noticed 2 stewards they wore those bib things, but

they didn't direct anyone.        I also saw a few Police Officers behind

the turnstiles and in the Courtyard, it surprised me because this year

I r.ever got searched once, but last year I got searched three times.

I stopped to buy a programme, there weren't many people there, I

dicn't have to queue for a programme and my mate didn't have to queue

for food.     I went towards the tunnel with                        There

were no stewards or Police at the entrance to the tunnel.       We had not

seen any gates open or being opened frcm the turnstiles to the tunnel

entry.    There were a few people around us in the tunnel.      I didn't see

any Police or Stewards in the tunnel.       At the end of the tunnel the

back of the terraces seemed       pretty packed.   This was about 2.05 pm

(1405 hrs). Normally at matches I like to take up my spec behind the

goel, quite central and quite high up to get a good view down onto the

garre.    But with the crowds packed right to the back of the pens I knew

I vould have trouble getting to my favourite spec.        I said to my two
DUGGAN                  PHILLIP                                              3


mates that we would have to go nearer the front because we wouldn't

have a chance back there.    We squeezed and shouldered our way into Pen

3, that took about a couple of minutes.      It was a bit easier in

there as there weren't as many people in the front as at the back,

so we had a little bit more room around us, at that time.      We moved

dov\n towards the front fence about 6 foot (6') from the front fence.

We got to the barier and stood in front of it, I wasn't leaning

agsinst it, there was no one between me and the barrier.

         stood by me,          to the right of me,         stood in front

of me.   There were a lot of young kids at the front fence to get a

better view, but there weren't that many people in front of us and not

toe many behind.    There were people standing on the dividing fencing

so I couldn't really see into Pen 4.             went to the back of the

per and stood on one of the crush barriers and passed a programme up

to our friends in the Stand.      Then at about 2.30 pm (1430 hrs)

wert to get seme food, he was away about 15 minutes, he didn't say

anything about the crowds in the ground.

I saw a couple of Police in the front of the perimeter fence and a

couple up in the stand patrolling, but I don't think there were any

actually in the Pen.     It was all very good - humoured in the Pen, a

beech ball was being headed around.       I didn't see any bad behaviour or

anyone drinking in the Pen.       Up until kick off everything seemed O.K.

I wasn't aware of the Pen getting any fuller, I wasn't uncomfortable

&   didn't fear for my personal safety.

I saw the players come out onto the pitch at about 2.55 pm (1455 hrs).

Everyone went forward then and people were coming under the barrier

behind me, they must have been getting crushed against it.       You

usually do go forward when the players come out, people find their

piece and then go back a bit, but we didn't go back, altough I was
DUGGAN                 PHILLIP                                              4


O.F. you could feel it getting gradually worse.      I took my position in

the surge about 3 foot (3') frcm the perimeter fence, within touching

distance of that fence and a little to the left.      The crowd just kept

going forward and forward.    A few of the young kids at the front were

getting helped over the fence by the dads, this was at or just before

kick-off.    I couldn't move my arms, they were at the side of me.

_______was in front of me and           was behind me, so I didn't

reelly see what had happened to him. There were people behind me

screaming.    I could hardly breathe myself and my feet weren't touching

the floor.    I was very hot and sweating.    People in front of me were

crushed into the front fence, I could see their faces white and their

eyes open and looking up, they were still, they looked dead to me.

There were men, boys and girls crushed like this against the fencing.

I couldn't recognize anyone frcm this group.      I could feel bodies on

the floor, but I couldn't actually see them.      People were grabbing at

my jeans trying to pull themselves up.       I could feel I was treading on

soreone's arm.    I could see people climbing over the crushed bodies to

get over the front perimeter fencing.     I had felt the barrier hit me

and it knocked me to the ground.    I was next to three dead people, one

was a young lad about 14, though he looked a lot younger then.       One of

them had a Liverpool cap on, I could only see the side of their faces.

A body fell across my legs, the head was across my feet and the legs

abcut 2 feet (2') away frcm my face.     He was about 25 years, he had

white trainers on he was about medium build, he was blue in the face

and was dead.    All I was trying to do was stand up.     People were

stending on bodies all around me.    The body across my legs kept me

dofcn.   The top half of my body was twisting but my feet were staying

 flet on the floor.   I kept thinking, I've got to get up.     I was just

panicking trying to get up.
DUGGAN               PHILLIP


I think I can recall that BEARDSLEY had struck the cross bar, a few

mirutes after kick-off, and that made matters worse, everyone trying

to go forward and see what was happening.    During this when a couple

of people had climbed over just before kick-off, the Police had put

them back into the pens.

I vas on the floor for about 2 - 3 minutes before I lost

unconciousness. Next thing I remember was coming round at the back of

the pen and fans held me round the legs and by my shoulders and I was

being lifted up into the West Stand.    At that time I didn't feel any

pain or know if I had got any injuries.     I was still in a bit of a

daze, they kept passing me further back into the stand.     I was aware

of people being killed in there but not how.     I know while I was in

there, when I started suffering that too many people were in that Pen.

I was put down on the floor, someone was asking if I was alright, he

was crouching next   to me, it was a fan. It was the fans who had

lifted me into the   stand.    I just didn't want to look down,        I knowin

my mind what I had   seen down thereand I didn't want to see it again.

I cidn't really know what had happened to                         |I just

war.ted to get out of the ground.   As I walked down the steps to the

exit, to the turnstiles, I went out of a side gate on the far side,

that was open.   As I was walking towards this,           came towards

me.   He said a big gap had opened up behind him and he managed to get

out back down the tunnel.     It was fairly busy, an ambulance was trying

to get in, there were lots of Police trying to make way for the

turnstile, there were lots of Stewards and St Johns Ambulancemen

abcut too.

There were lots of Police out on the streets too.     We waited to see if

we could find        . we stood in the courtyard section, by where we'd

bought the programme, waiting for           , It was nearly 3.30 pm (1530
DUGGAN                 PHILLIP                                              6


hrs) when we were in the Courtyard.    Nobody approached us.    I

could see dead bodies being brought out of the tunnel.      I could see

fars and Police trying to resuscitate them and covering their faces

with jackets.   We left then, there were a lot of fans outside voicing

their anger at the Police who appeared to be doing nothing.      After

that we went to the coach.

One definite cause of the injuries and deaths was they let everybody

go through the centre tunnel.     I do remember that the pen next to ours

on the right was quite empty before kick-off.     I didn't know if there

was a separate turnstile to get into there, I wasn't aware that after

getting into the Courtyard you could go right or left right round the

certre pens into the side pens.    There were no signs directing anyone

to the side pens.    I could see a gate at the back of the pen giving

access to the side pen.

I knew there was a front gate because I had seen Police putting people

back through it.    The disaster wouldn't have happened on that scale

but for being trapped in those pens.     I went last year and stood in

the same pen, but about 5 - 1 0 yards (yds) further back.      I had a

broken left arm when I went to that match the crowds in that pen were

nowhere near as packed as this year.     Last year the coach was stopped

anc checked for weapons or drinks.     When we got off the coach we were

checked for tickets.     Even along the road they were searching people

anc in the ground.     Last year as you got by the turnstile and you

dicn't have a ticket you were turned away.     Mounted Police were moving

these along by the bridge away from the turnstiles.

When things had spilled onto the floor from the bodies, fans were

holding things up and trying to find out whose they were.       They were

brilliant, they helped all they could.

When I got home about 8.30 pn (2030) I was lying down on the settee, I
DUGGAN                 PHILLIP                                               7




I think they, the Police should have seen that the pens were getting

crowded and acted upon it.       I think they should have had bigger gates

for the fans to be able to get onto the pitch.

I cid hand my ticket in and got the stub back.       I have since handed it

back to the club and got my refund so I could buy a ticket for Wembley.

White male, 5'11 tall, slim build, short dark brown wavy hair, clean

shaven, I wore blue stone washed jeans, white trainers, light blue

derim shirt with a Liverpool badge on the pocket.       Itnever   cameoff

in the trouble and it hasn't come off since.

         aided up with a bruised collar bone he hadsomehowmanaged      to

get onto the pitch and had helped the injured.

I vent over to Anfield about 3 days after the tragedy and left two

scarves and a bunch of flowers.       It was incredible what people had

left there, poems and that, I have no objection to my statement being

used in the Inquiry.
        DUGGAN            PHILLIP                            8

                                          P. DUGGAN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    160589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                                 20 i
                                                                         STATION

NAME:
•              |
               _________
ADDRESS:       _________
               LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 27

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160589                                                            (SIGNED)



           On the 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the Hillsborough Football

           Ground, Sheffield to watch the semi final game between Liverpool

           Foctball Club and Nottingham Forest Football Club.    I am a Liverpool

           supporter. I left my house at half past six (0630) in the morning to

           'hitch hike' to Sheffield.    I got my first lift in a private car just

           neer to the M62 motorway.    This person dropped me off at a service

           area on one of the motorways.    The car was a Cortina, white in colour,

           but I don't know who the man was.   At the Service area I met some lads

           whc were going to the game, they were in a beige coloured Ford Escort,

           there were four lads altogether but again I do not know who they

           were.   They dropped me off in Leppings Lane a few yards frcm the

           ground at about 9.30am (0930). I was in possession of a Leppings Lane

           standing ticket costing six pounds.    I bought the ticket off a man

           whcm I do not know in                                        Liverpool,

           he charged me five pounds for the ticket.

           I travelled alone to the game, I walked around Sheffield during the

           morning and arrived back in Leppings Lane at about 2.30pm (1430). On

           my way to Sheffield whilst I was hitching, I did not experience any




                                                                                      201 2
                                                                         2


delays or hold ups, we had a good run throughout ray journey.   I did

not witness any fans drinking alcohol, it was too early in the day,

also I did not see any fighting, drunkeness or Hisnrrfcyr of any kind.

As I say I eventually arrived at the ground at about 2.30prn (1430). I

wert towards the standing turnstiles in Lappings Lane.   There were

plenty of fans in that area at this time but nothing out of the

ordinary.   I saw a few policemen near to the entrance to the

turnstiles but I was not searched, I also saw some stewards OUTSIDE

the turnstiles, they were just standing around.

I had no difficulty in finding ray turnstile, or entering the ground.

I cid not see, or witness any other gates open, just the turnstiles.

I cid not see any unauthorised entry to the ground.   As I entered the

turnstile I handed ray ticket in as normal.

When I got into the yard area of the ground I did not know which way

to go.   I did not see any signs so I just followed the rest of the

fans who headed across the yard to a tunnel.    I entered the tunnel

tocether with many other fans, but I did not have any particular

difficulty in going through the tunnel.   As I entered the tunnel I did

not see any Policemen or Stewards but I must admit I wasn't really

locking for any.   As I got to the end of the tunnel I went to ray right

into the pen on the right (Pen No. 3).    At this stage it was just like

a normal match, everybody was happy and I did not see anyone drinking

alcohol or fighting.

As I entered the ground area I moved through the fans and managed to

get near to the front, it would be about 2 .40pm (1440) at this time.

Even at this time it was beginning to get tight all around me.     I

reirember there was a barrier about one step in front of me, there was

also a couple of fans between me and this barrier.

Just after the kick off at about two minutes past three (1502) I saw a
                                                                            3


barrier slightly to my right suddenly buckle over just as though it

was a piece of aluminium.     I saw a lot of fans fall forwards as the

barrier collapsed.    Within a few seconds of this barrier collapsing to

my right I felt a terrific pressure frcm the fans behind me.     I went

uncontrollably forward, my head above my right eye struck a corner

section of the barrier.     As I went over I remember that this was at a

point after Peter BEARDSLEY had struck the crossbar of the Notts

Forest goal posts.    I went unconscious, it may have been for a few

seconds but I don't really know, all the fans seemed to be helping

each other.     I was somehow helped onto the pitch but I don't know how

I got there.    I was so dazed I can't remember if I was taken through a

gate or any other way.     I remember when I started to ccme round

properly I was lying on the pitch.     Someone asked me if I was alright,

I rodded yes.     I remember looking towards the fencing and seeing

people being helped over the perimeter fencing behind the goal mouth.

I eventually stood up and started to walk around to see if I could

help anyone.     I asked a few people if I could help them but they

seemed OK.     I saw seme people lying dead on the pitch, but they had

died before I saw them.     I cannot recall or describe any particular

person.   After a while I went to look for

who I knew had gone to the game with his mates but I could not find

hirt . After about a half an hour I went back into the pen, there were

people's belongings lying around and also seme people were lying dead

still in the pen.     I walked straight to the tunnel and left the ground

the same direction I came in.     I left the ground of my own accord.

During my time at the game I did not witness anyone stealing, and I

die not see anyone fighting or indeed get assaulted.     I have no

particular views on the way the incident was handled after the game

was stopped, everyone tried to do their best and did their own thing.
__________________________                                               4


I feel that the Police in general should have taken far more CAUTION

in controlling all fans at this match because it was obvious there

were going to be many fans in attendance.

When I left the ground I did not seek medical attention, I just

started to hitch hike home.   It took about three lifts before I got

hoite, I arrived back in Liverpool at about 10.30pm (2230) on the same

nicht. At about 11.0pm (2300) the same night I went to my friends

house.   He is

Liverpool.




Sir.ce this day I have had the occasional dizzy spiell, but it is less

often now,



I have considered all the questions you have asked me but I have

nothing else to say really.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   160589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                  2 0 i6
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              LANCASHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 016 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 190589                                                               SIGNED)



           I era a single man and my home address is

           Lar.cs, however at the present time I




           I remember Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), this being the date of

           the F A Cup Semi Final football match to be played between Liverpool

           FC and Nottingham Forest F C at the Hillsborough football ground in

           Sheffield.   I am a regular supporter of Liverpool F C having been so

           all my life and I attend the majority of their matches.

           As stated                                          I am in constant

           cortact with my family.    In the past I have travelled to all of the

           bic matches and when I am unable to obtain tickets for these matches

           my                        obtains the tickets.     I remember that a few

           days before the 15th April (150489), my ___        rang me up and told me

           he had got rrty tickets for this game.   I arranged to meet him and my

                                 at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, Sheffield.

           On Friday 14th of April 1989 (140489) I came across a regular

           supporter of Liverpool, who I know as            who lives




                                                                                       2017
                                                                           2




Hull.   I arranged with        to travel with him in his vehicle to

SHEFFIELD the following day.     I knew at this time that my ticket was

a six pound standing ticket for the uncovered enclosure in Leppings

Lare, giving the entrance point as turnstile 'B'.

At about 12 midday (1200) I met        and we travelled in his Ford

Escort van to SHEFFIELD.   This journey was without incident, without

any major traffic delays, and during the journey I did not notice any

other football supporters going to the ground.

We arrived in SHEFFIELD at about 2.00 pn (1400) and we parked the

vehicle on a grassed area in PENISTONE ROAD.     This area was marked up

for Nottingham Forest supporters vehicles.     I did not notice any

Police presence at this location and nobody was directing or escorting

us to the ground.   At this time there was quite a large volume of

Nottingham supporters and they were walking freely and singing the

normal songs.   I did not notice any persons drinking alcohol and there

were no instances of violence or fighting.     I personally was

dressed casually and I was not sporting any football regalia.

I walked with       ilong PENISTONE ROAD and it was our intention to go

to Leppings Lane and meet our respective parents.     We turned left down

one of the side streets, I think it was possibly VERE ROAD, and at

this location there were about a hundred and fifty supporters in the

street walking in both directions and again there were no instances of

note. We walked into LEPPINGS LANE and there were inrnediate increases

in the volume of supporters going to the ground, although I was still

able to walk freely amongst than.     We continued along leppings LANE to

the bridge outside the ground and there met my father and sister.

During the short journey I had not witnessed any spectators consuming

alcohol or indeed carrying cans of beer.     I had not seen any public
houses open on the route I took.

This is the first time I had been to Hillsborough and I was not aware

of its layout.   As I stood talking to             at a point Al on the

plen of Hillsborough I could see clearly the entrance to the Leppings

Lare turnstile area.    I saw that at the approach to the turnstiles

there were masses of the supporters present and there were no queues

as such to the respective turnstiles.

I saw that there was a Police officer on horseback present but he was

uneble to do anything with the crowd.     There appeared to be a total

lack of organisation and there were no signs of any crowd control.

We saw that there was a big blue sign indicating the turnstile

entrance 'B' and we decided to try and make our way through the crowds

to it.   We joined the masses and we were immediately swallowed up into

the crowd.   We were virtually carried along by the crowd and had no

say in which way we were to travel.      The scene was one of total panic

anc I could hear and see supporters screaming for help.      There were

only a few Police Officers present at this location and by this time

they had lost control of the situation and didn't appear interested in

the cries for help from the supporters.      I can say there were no

stewards present at this location and this fact surprised me somewhat

as they could have served some useful purpose there.

We eventually approached the turnstile 'B' and at this location there

were masses of supporters who were in a state of sheer confusion.         In

fact I was forced against the wall leading to the turnstiles and

although I was squashed against it I did not receive any injuries.         I

seem to remember one young lad climbing up the outer wall of the

turnstiles and looking over the top but I did not see him enter the

grcund by this means.    When we got to turnstile 'B' there were groups

of some six or seven people being forced, by the volume of the crowd,
through the turnstile when only one should have been going through.

The supporters were trying to be helpful but were prevented by the

masses of people present.     I handed my ticket over and eventually got

through the turnstile.   Prior to this point I did not see any of the

bic blue gates being opened and I did not notice any other

unauthorised entry.

Once in the uncovered area inside the turnstiles I stood and waited

for                         [to come through (marked A/G on the plan).

The crowds had thinned out considerably at this location and I was

able to move about fairly freely.

I vas joined inside by                         and it was then that I saw

twc young lads, aged about 19 yrs standing on top of the turnstile

building. They started shouting to two police officers in particular

one being male and one female, and they were showing their tickets to

the officers and asked if they could enter over the building.     There

were about eight other police officers present at this location and

the two lads eventually dropped inside the ground and went to the two

officers and offered them their tickets.     I then noticed another ten

or twelve people enter the ground in this way.     Everybody was telling

the Police that crushing was taking place outside and asked them to go

out but they remained on their post.

Whilst stood at this location I saw a Police officer and a steward in

a tib, walk up to the gate marked (C) on the plan.      There were about

three or four other people, not spectators, in this area at the time

 anc the police officer appeared to be exchanging heated words with

 the steward.   I am unable to describe either the Police officer or the

 steward and I don't think I could recognise either again.     I didn't

 pay any particular attention to the police officer and the steward

 until I saw the steward open the gate (C). This seemed very strange
to me having regard to the large masses of supporters waiting to get

in.   The gate opened more or less to its full extent and I saw a

steady flow of supporters gaining entry to the ground.   I would say

there were three hundred people entering the ground in this way.      I

die not see any of these people handing over tickets and they all went

in a group direct to the tunnel which runs under the West stand.      I

die not see any of these people go off to the side of the stand.

At this time it was about 2.40 pn/2.45 pn (1440)/(1445) and I could

heer the fans singing inside the ground. Although I couldn't see the

pitch through the tunnel.

After a few minutes I saw the gate (C) closed, I don't know who by,

anc the crowd seoned to decrease as they all went down the tunnel.

We then decided to make our way into the ground, and as I did not see

any signs directing us to other parts of the ground we went directly

to the tunnel.   At the entrance to the tunnel there was a noticeable

lack of Police officers or stewards present.   We walked down the

turnel quite freely although there were large groups of supporters

present. As we reached the end of the tunnel my family got seperated

anc I waited near to the end of the tunnel just inside the area marked

3.    I could see from this point that pens 3 and 4 were packed although

in my opinion not over packed.   The supporters did not appear to be

being crushed and were able to stand still.    ____________________

eventually joined me and we made our way down a couple of steps with

the intention of finding a suitable viewing point.    Just as we did

this there was a major surge forward of the crowd from the direction

of the tunnel and the volume of the crowd increased dramatically.         We

were forced forward a few steps and there appeared to be a swirl of

the crowd and I was forced across pen three to the centre of the pen,

marked A2 on the plan.    During this surge I was carried along and my
feet were not touching the floor and suddenly due to the volume of the

crcwd present we came to a sudden stop.     I could hear people

screaming out for help.     There were cries for the gates to be opened,

anc people were shouting us to move back but I personally couldn't

move any direction.    My arms and legs were pinned still.    I could see

pecple fighting for their lives and I found it very hard to breath.         I

also saw a couple of lads who had fainted but who were being held up

in the mass of the crowd.     I am unable to describe these lads as I was

struggling to survive myself.

There was then another surge forward which amazed me because there

appeared nowhere to go and I was again carried forward.      This stopped

marentarily and then we surged forward again and I found myself across

a iretal barrier.   The top of this barrier was across my stanach and

hips and I was being crushed against it.     My attention was then drawn

to an old school friend I knew, Colin 'Andrew' Hugh William SEPTON who

is 23 years of age.    He was directly next to me and he was doubled up

over the metal barrier. His face was very red and he appeared to be

gasping for breathe.    He was shouting out "Fucking hell, fucking hell,

        which is my nickname.   I told him not to worry as it would be

okay.    The pain in my stomach increased intensely.   I found it very

hard to breath and I started screaming for help and yelping with pain.

I did not pay any more particular attention to my friend 'Andrew'

because of the pain and suffering I was receiving.     I believed that I

was about to faint and pass out.     There were supporters in front of me

and I was screaming at them to push me and Andrew back but they tried

to get us off the barrier by pushing us but it was without result.

Although I was experiencing severe pain at this time there was nothing

I could do about it and as I looked forward I could see people

climbing up the fence at the front of the pen, these people were
_________________________                                                    7


being prevented from getting out by Police officers who were standing

on the other side of the fence.    I feel now that the Police didn't

knew what was happening and that they didn't want them on the pitch.

Whilst I was being crushed the pressure from the crowd didn't appear

to be increasing or decreasing it was just constant.     There was a

smell gap between the bar and the people in front of me and they

didn't appear to be being forced back into the bar.     I can't remember

how long I was against the bar and I did not see whether or not the

garre had started,   I did not even remember seeing any of the players

on the pitch.

The next thing I remember was being raised forcibly over this bar and

I vas hung over it with my trunk and legs either side of it.       I could

see that either side of me there were other supporters in similar

positions to myself.    I am unable to recollect what any of these other

supporters were wearing except for 'Andrew' SEPTON who was wearing a

thick black good quality casual leather jacket.

At this time I felt the bar move forward about five inches and it

regained there momentarily and then it collapsed completely.       Somehow

my legs went underneath the bar and we hit the floor.      I was doubled

up on the floor again with the bar on top of my stomach.      My head was

face down into the c o m e r of a step and the small space in the co m e r

of the step allowed me to breathe.    I could hear screams all

around me and I could feel people dropping on top of me.      The pressure

on me was again intense.    I was having trouble breathing and I firmly

believed I was going to die.     I thought the end had come so I

accepted it and just lay there.     I kept drifting away and everything

kept going black.

I don't remember anything else until I came round and I heard people

talking around me.     The were people on top of me and I heard scmeone
                                                                          8


say "Leave them they're dead."    I then felt someone pulling me with

their hands under my arms.   They were unable to move me because I was

still trapped by the bar and I whispered this fact to than.

I then saw that there were about four to six people on top of me and

they all appeared lifeless and were white in the face.    I heard one of

the other persons say "Move them out of the way" (referring to those

whc were apparently dead). These four or six people were then moved

off me and the others were just looking for anybody who was alive.

The barrier was eventually lifted slightly and somebody pulled me from

uneer it.   This person was slim about 24 yrs with short ginger crew

cut hair wearing a claret coloured leather jacket.    I remember this

well because he remained with me throughout the events that followed.

I vas then carried up the steps a short distance and when someone

tried to stand me up I collapsed onto the floor.     I was then given

mecical assistance by what I believed to be an ambulanceman who was

abcut 45 years, black hair, going grey, wearing a black uniform with a

yellow reflective jacket.    He tested my pulse and I was conscious, so

he suggested that I should go to hospital.

I vas then carried through the tunnel by two people, one of which

being the ginger haired lad and the other being of a similar age group

with a mass of dark hair going grey.    I was placed flat on my back at

a point I have marked A3 on the plan.     The lads who took me there

then went and got a couple of police coats from a nearby Police

officer and one was used as a pillow and one as a blanket.     There were

a number of other injured persons lying near to me but I not pay then

any particular attention.

Shertly after this a Police officer came over and suggested that I

sheuld be moved as I was in the way and I was taken to a point A4 on

the plan.   They put me on the floor and as I looked round I saw there
were about fifteen dead bodies alongside of me.   I couldn't see the

faces of these people because their heads were covered and they were

lifeless.   There was a man about 35 yrs of age, heavy build with fair

hair kneeling over the body next to me.   This man was grief stricken

anc was crying and I learnt that the body was that of his father and

thet he was dead.




I referred earlier to my old school friend Andrew SEPTON and my

observations of him at that time was that he was on the verge of dying

anc I firmly believed he had no hope, although at that time he was

conscious and screaming out. I have since read in the TODAY newspaper

thet he did in fact die at the ground.

I have also referred to other dead bodies at various stages but I am

uneble to assist with their descriptions any more than I have done.

There are two other points of note that I observed and one was that

the police were frisking a large number of supporters as they passed

through the turnstiles but they did not frisk me.   The other point is

thet during the whole of the journey to the ground I did not see any

ticket touts.

In conclusion my only criticism is that there were a distinct lack of
                                                                                10
       police personnel in Lappings Lane, although there were officers in the

        grcund doing nothing.   In my opinion there appeared to be a total lack

        of organisation.

        There should have been stewards and Police at the entrance to the

        tunnel diverting supporters to the outer pen enclosures and if this

        had happened there wouldn't have been the crushes in Pens 3 and 4.

        On the day in question I was wearing

        jeens, light brown suede shoes.   I am 23 yrs of age, 5'8" (5'8) slim

        build,



                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                     2026
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                        LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100689                                                           (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and I live at the above address with my mother and

           my two brothers aged,                           and a sister aged

           years.

           I em a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and I go to most of their

           hare games I am not a season ticket holder.

           On Saturday April, 15th, 1989 (150489) Liverpool were to play

           Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, in the semi­

           final of the FA cup competition.   I had only visited this ground once

           before and that was in 1988 (000088), when Liverpool and Notts Forest

           were again playing in the semi-final of the FA cup.   On that occasion

           I had stood on the terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      I

           was at that time to the left of the goal, standing in a high area of

           terracing close to the North Stand.

           On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I did not have a ticket for the

           garre and I was just going to watch the game at home on the television.

           I knew that some of my mates already had tickets for the game, for the

           Lefpings Lane terrace area.   At about 10.30 (1030) to 11 am (1100 hrs)

           on the match day one of my mates came to my house in a car driven by




                                                                                       202 7
another of my mates.     The mate who came to my door was

aged 18 years he lives local but I don't know his address, but I do

knew how to get there.          asked me if I wanted to go to the game

at Hillsborough, I was still half asleep and didn't know what to do as

I cid not have a ticket.     Eventually I said I would go and I thought

if I don't get a ticket, I'll just listen to it on his car radio.          I

just got my clothes on and left without any breakfast, I did not have

a watch on.

In the car outside was                                they are 19 years

old.            was driving his Ford Orion car.     I don't know their

addresses, they live quite local, and I know how to get to their

houses but I don't know their addresses.

The four of us set off in the car for Sheffield from my house about 11

am (1100 hrs). We stopped at a local garage and I bought my

breakfast, something to eat and a drink.     We set off and stopped once

more at a motorway service station and I never bought anything there

but the others bought ice-cream there.     We got held up a bit on the

motorway due to a crash involving a motor bike.     I don't know the name

of this motorway.

We arrived in Sheffield about 1.30 pm (1330 hrs) and                 parked

the car near a factory.     It took vis a ten (10) minute walk to get to

the football ground.     It was quite busy with fans at this tune.     I

never saw and heard of any trouble.     There was lads drinking and

sitting near the hill on the way to the ground.     There was Policemen

present as we walked towards the ground.     I think they were pointing

out the way to go to the ground.

On the approach to the ground near to some shops, I saw some roads

were blocked off.      I saw a man standing there with other men, these

mer were holding tickets in their hands.      I approached one of these
mer and I asked him how much the tickets were and I paid        10 to this

mar for a     6 ticket to stand at the Lappings Lane end of    the ground.

This was the end of the ground for the Liverpool fans and this is

where my 3 mates all had tickets for.

The four of us went to a McDonalds or a place like McDonalds       and

bought chips.     I never bought anything as I had bought food earlier at

the petrol station.

The four of us made our way to the terrace at the Leppings Lane end of

the ground.     I saw Police on horses there.

There was a large crowd at the entrance.        There was no queues that you

could join, it was just a mass of people all crowded about outside.

It would be about 2.30 pm (1430 hrs) by now.

I con't know how long it took me to get inside I didn't want to get

squashed in this crowd, so I stood to the side, I had by now been

separated from my 3 friends that I had travelled to Sheffield with.

After a while I saw a set of gates being opened, I don't know who

opened them.     These gates seemed to fold back.     I was one of the first

few to get into the ground through these gates, certainly in the first

20 or so.     There was a bit of pushing as we went into the ground

through these gates.     It must have been about 2.45 pm (1445 hrs) by

now, it seemed like I had been standing there about 15 minutes, but I

car't really be sure as I do not wear a watch.

Once inside I walked down a tunnel leading to the terrace.        The tunnel

was busy but only what I expected for the semi-final of the cup.

There was no problem inside the tunnel as I walked along it.        I

thought that once inside behind the goal I could get access along the

 entire width of the terracing behind this goal.       When I got to the end

 of the terracing at the tunnel exit, I went to my right into Pen

 no 3.



                                                                               2029
                                                                          4


I stood near the back of the teracing, the teams were not yet out on

the field.   It was busy, some fella fell over at the back because it

was so busy, he was a coloured fella wearing a leather coat and he got

back up again without any problem.

The pressure of the crowd pushed me down the terracing.

I wasn't too bothered at this time.    I stopped quite near to the front

of the terracing directly against a metal barrier.    I couldn't see the

barrier properly for the crowd but I could feel the metal bar across

the front of my body just below my stomach.    This was hurting but I

couldn't move back because of the crowd behind.    There was a fella in

front of the barrier who put his hands on ray chest in an effort to

push me back and so take the pressure off me, but it didn't do any

good.   I was being squashed.

To my left was a young fella, about my age, or a big younger, I think

he had blondish hair, I can't remember his clothing, this person was

also against the barrier and he was screaming out in pain.    I do not

know what happened to this person afterwards.

It was a nice day, dry and sunny.     It was becoming warmer and I was by

now sweating.   I was finding it harder to breath in the crowd.

I think I heard the names of the players announced while I was still

stending at the back of the terracing.     It is hard to remember

exectly, as I was getting squashed and I wasn't paying too much

attention to other events.

The barrier was still digging into me and my arms were extended with

my hands over the barrier and in a vacant bit of space.

Just as the teams came onto the field, the barrier began to move

forward, almost as if in slow motion.     The barrier continued to bend

 forwards towards the ground, and I reached out my left hand to try to

grsb hold of the fella in front, to stop myself from going down, but I
                                                                              5


still went down.

I fell on the ground, I was directly on the ground and I was not on

top of anyone else.     My left arm was extended in the air, it felt like

a cead arm as if I didn't have a left arm, it went numb and I

couldn't feel it.

tty right arm, I could move, it was on the ground but I lifted it up

anc tried to get up by grabbing onto the back pocket of someone's

trousers, it was a pair of jeans I think.     I couldn't get up so I put

my right arm down next I had hold of someone's ankle, who was standing

up.      There was a lot of screaming and crying going on.   I was

shcuting out for help.     Everyone was in the same boat, all getting

squashed.

There was a lot of people had fallen on top of me and I was pinned

dovcn by their weight.    I could move my head only slightly.I found it

difficult to breath.

I know that as the barrier went down my shoes had both ccme off.        The

barrier had come down, my shins on both legs had cone to rest against

the barrier and the weight of the people on top of me was forcing my

shins into the metal.

It was very dark under all the people.      I could not see any light.    I

could not hear anything either,      it seemed like I was lying there like

this for ages.      I was sweating heavily by now.   I felt a foot against

my throat.     My head was stuck beside the feet of people standing up.

 I began to see a bit of light as people were moved away frcm me.        Fans

were moving people off the top of me.      I heard a shout of "Give us

your arm" from a fan, I couldn't give him an arm as I couldn't feel

 them.    He grabbed me by my coat and I couldn't even feel it as he

 moved me a few yards back and sat me dewn.     A wanan came over and

 began to look after me.     I was still behind the broken barrier.
In front and slightly to ray left lay a white man, who was bare

chested.    He was about late 20's early 30's he had a moustache I

think.     He wore no jeans.   I don't think he had shoes on.   This man's

face was blue coloured and a man who was crying and saying "No, no"

over and over was trying to give him the kiss of life.      I think this

mar was dead.

There appeared to be loads of people lying on the terrace that

appeared to me to be dead.      I never saw any players on the field.

A few Policemen carried me, not on a stretcher, back through the

tunnel out the back area at the rear of the West stand.



I saw on a grass area people lying covered with blankets, about 15 in

all.     I knew that these people must all be dead.



she HiH not get in the ambulance.      Inside this ambulance was 3 or 4

other injured persons, all male.      I spoke to a man who told me he had

just identified his Dad, his surname was Anderson, I think he also

mentioned the name Brian or John.      I recognised a lad about 15 years

ole suffering from shock, I think he goes to a school near my house
                                                     The area where the

barrier was pressing into ray body was bruised.




On the day of the match I was wearing a pair of lace up green shoes,

these have been returned to me just this week.    I wore a pair of very

licht blue denim jeans, a blue T shirt and brown leather jacket, dark

brcwn.   I did not have on a hat.

M y jeans were ripped at the turn-ups.   tty coat was scratched and tom.




I con't know what happened to the ticket I bought.    I had it in ray

hard as I went through the gate but after that I don't know what

happened to it.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          HME:          DATE:   100689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                PC




                                                  2034
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 33

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I era                                  of the above address where I

           live with ray wife and children.

           At approximately 10.15 am(1015) on Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489)

           I vent to the Hillsborough football stadium at Sheffield for the semi-

           fir,al between Liverpool football club and Nottingham Forest.

           I vent in ray           car with our                                They

           were                                                     Liverpool,

                                                  Liverpool    and his

           It was organised by ourselves,         in fact got ray ticket frcm a

           friend at the Liverpool ground.    It was for the lappings Lane standing

           area and cost #6.00p.   We did not stop anywhere except when we took a

           wrong turning off the motorway and had to stop for directions.      We

           only experienced a small amount of traffic congestion and that was in

           the Sheffield area.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 11.50 am (1150) and went to a pub

           called 'The Fox' which I think is in Foxhills Road.    The pub was

           quite busy with I suppose an equal proportion of Liverpool fans and

            locals. Because of the limited room in the pub seme of the lads were




                                                                                      2035
visiting a nearby off licence for some cans of beer.      They were

drinking them on or near the pub car park.    I didn't see any walking

towards the ground drinking.    We actually parked the car somewhere

adjacent to Browning Drive and walked to the pub.      Although we saw

Police officers about we didn't need directions or an escort.         My

          knew the way to the ground.

At about 1.55 pm (1355 hrs) we arrived at the       ground we   knew whereour

turnstiles were and made our way through the crowd.      There were no

queues at all just one big mass of people.    With the crowd arriving

anc the mass of people in front of the turnstiles I would say there

were a few thousand people.    It was just chaos.    I did not see any

ground stewards about outside the ground, I did see seme mounted

Police.    There were 3 or 4 outside the main gates in the lappings Lane

area and I recall two near the turnstiles. Having joined this crowd it

appeared that the two by the turnstiles were trying to get a bit of

order in the crowd but they were not having much luck.

I think they gave up eventually and walked their horses away from the

turnstiles through the crowd.    When they'd moved off the crowd surged

towards the turnstiles and everything seemed        toget worse with people

pushing and shoving to get into the turnstiles.       After about 40

mixutes I found myself going through the turnstiles with people

 outside calling for the gates to be opened because people were getting

 squashed. I did see some fans on the road to the turnstiles who I

 thought had got in legally, they were calling to someone to get the

 gates opened.

 When I got into the ground me and              went to the toilet.        When

 I came out I saw a Police officer making his way towards the gates and

 open then I don't know where he actually came from or who he was I

 seem to recall seeing other officers by or near to the stairway to the
West stand.   I don't recall how many there was.   I didn't see any

sicns telling us where to go or any police or stewards giving

directions.   From where I stood I saw the gate opening and the fans

rush in.   Some ran into the tunnel singing and chanting, most of the

others went through quite quickly we joined in and went through the

turnel fairly quickly but without any harm.    We weren't really very

restricted in the tunnel.    At this point we had not seen any signs of

disorder or drunkeness or even any one drinking.    This was just a good

hurroured semi-final celebration.

When I got into the pen I went to the left side of the goal I was

alnost being sort of pushed forward.     I didn't really have much to say

abcut where I went.     I remember ducking under a crush barrier and

eventually stopping adjacent to the small gate near to the left hand

post of the goal.     There was children and youngsters in front of me.

Being in pen 4 I couldn't see what was going on in pen 3 the crowd

just seemed to get thicker and thicker.

I recall looking at the clock in the ground as we got to the front of

the pen it was 2.48 pm (1448 hrs). At that time it was fairly

confortable but as time went on more and more people came into the

corrpound we were slowly being pushed onto the kids in front of us.

Eventually we had to brace ourselves against the fence in front of us

 to try to avoid squashing the kids.               was in front on my

 left and I was left of the gate.    It was getting harder and harder

 trying to keep off the fence, people were calling to the Police on the

 edge of the pitch to come and help by opening the gate others were

 calling to push back.    I did not experience any sort of surge

 sensation only a steady crush.

 Eventually I managed to get a policewoman to ccme near.     I called to

 her to get the gate opened, kids were getting crushed.     She stated the
gate was locked and they didn't have a key.    She and other policemen

continued to walk up and down the end of the ground in front of us.

The crush continued to get harder and harder until it was too much and

the kids in front were being squashed.    I can't say if they were hurt

or squashed but with all the noise you couldn't tell if they were

crying, screaming or shouting for help.    I don't know tow long it went

on for but eventually someone came and opened the gate.

Other people were already on the pitch I believe from the other side

but after a few seconds or so after a few approximately 15 - 20 got

out, we managed to make room by pushing back and helped out 3 or 4 of

these kids.   The Police officer then pulled at me to get me out.   When

he let go of me I reached back and got hold of              and pulled

hirr out.   We were then told to go and sit down behind the hoardings at

the edge of the pitch and watch the game from there, we went over to

anc regained our breath.

Whilst sitting down I could hear people calling them to stop the game.

I remember Nottingham Forest having a co m e r kick at that time I was

still in the pen when Peter BEARDSLEY hit the crossbar at the other

enc of the ground I recall I was actually on the fence helping the

far.s out of the crush.    From being helped out to when I was on the

fence it seemed like ages but it all happened very quickly in a couple

of minutes.                was also on the fence with me pulling people

out.

 I can't say who or how many or in what order we got people out I know

we pulled one kid out he was about 8 or 10 yrs old.

 got hold of his hand and tried to pull him out.    Unfortunately we lost

 hie grip but leaned further over and reached in for him.    His hands

 seemed to appear from beneath the crush so me and______ got hold of

 him and hauled him out.    I could see his face was very red and marked
by the mesh of the fence.     I would describe him as being about 8 or 10

yrs old, blonde or fair straight hair, short.      He was wearing a

silver short sleeved Liverpool shirt.    We kept hold of him by the

touch line and he asked us to get his dad out.      Me and______ leaned

back over the fence to get the dad.          did the pulling whilst I

leaned over and lifted.     When we got him out we put him on the pitch

to recover, I don't know if dad was injured.

We went back to the fence and started lifting other people out.        We

helped out a lad about 20 yrs old as we lifted him his training

shces came off, he was very upset, distressed as a result of the

crush.   I don't think he was injured but we put him on the touchline

to recover.

Whilst we were helping out the lad and his dad we also tried to pull

out another about 20 - 28 . He had dark hair and I recall a beard or

moustache and was wearing I thought a light coloured shirt or jacket.

We reached down and had hold of this man, but we lost his grip and he

slipped back, under the crowd.     To tell the truth I can't recall at

what stage we pulled who out, because everything seemed unreal.        I

car.'t say how many we helped out I just never considered keeping

count, there were quite a few.

As we continued to get people out a space had developed and I saw

three lads grey/blue/black coloured some sort of sliding down the

terracing as soon as I saw it I saw Police jump in and try to revive

them.    I don't know if they were already dead.    One had long dark

curly hair, well built, about 13 - 14 stone.       The other was about the

 saite build.   I can't think of anything else to describe them.

After this it was just utter confusion people were standing about

 catching their breath, recovering, crying, in various states of shock.

 Pecpie were having mouth to mouth and heart massage.      Fans were
rurning about with hoardings being used as stretchers.          and

myself went round some of the upset people trying to comfort them.

With all this going on with people trying, all over the place, to

revive others it was chaos.    It was obvious to me from the colour of

sate of the poeple that they were dead but efforts were still made to

revive them.

We carried one lad who was alive and stretchered him to the far end of

the ground where we saw other bodies covered with Police jackets,

scerves and fans hats, it was unbelievable.    I went back to the pitch

where I found a Policeman who asked me to give him a hand with a lad

with a broken leg.   I took this lad to a passage under the North stand

where we had left the other lad on the stretcher.    I then saw that lad

hac a coat over his head.     I only know him as             he was

early 20 's late teens, I can't recall his description, I do recall

slapping his face to keep him awake, it was a shock to see him with

his coat over his head.     I eventually joined up with            and

found the others in the North stand.     We left the ground at about 4.45

pm (1645 hrs).   I'd been helping out on the pitch up to about 4.10pn

 (1610) I'd been helping for an hour or so and it seemed like 10

minutes. So many died.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:               PC




                                                  2041
                                                                           STATION

^E:

ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 16

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior. if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 051C89                                                              (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 I went to the Semi Final Football Match

           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough.      I am a

           Liverpool Supporter.   I got my ticket from my friends Father.       It was

           a   6 Standing ticket for Leppings Lane.

           I travelled to the game with (1)                                       Phone

                                                                      Liverpool Phone

                         and                   and one of his friends from work

           narred

           We travelled to Sheffield by car we did not stop on the way and we

           were not delayed.   We arrived in Sheffield at about 1300 hrs.       We

           parked in a side street about 10 minutes walk frcm the ground.         We had

           a walk around and had some chips. When we eventually went to the

           ground I do not remember seeing many Police Officers about.      I

           do not remember seeing anyone drinking in the streets. Everyone was

           happy walking to the ground.   I did not see any fighting or anyone

           drunk I had been talking to a Notts Forrest fan in the Chip Shop.

           We arrived at the ground at about 1400 hrs.      There were no queues we

            just went straight in to the ground.      I went in through a turnstile
                                                                             2

anc handed my ticket in.     There were Police inside the ground and I

was searched.    I do not remember seeing any outside.     I do not

reirember any Stewards outside.

I did not see anyone climbing over the walls to get in.        I did not see

any of the big gates open.

Once inside the ground I did not see any signs telling me where to go.

All I could see was the tunnel and I went that way. I went down the

turnel it was not crowded I had free passage.

I do not remember seeing any Stewards or Police Officers by the

turnel entrance.

Once through the tunnel.     We went into Pen 4.    I was stood with

                      It would be about 2pm (1400) when I got into

there.    It was not packed I could stand where I wanted.

I did not see any fighting or drunkenness inside the ground.

The crowd in the pen gradually built up.     I remsriber seeing the

Players come out and go off again after a warm up.       The crowd still

built up and I was being moved about in the pen.        I had beccme

separated from the other two.     The crowd continued to build up and I

could not move.     At one time a young lad was by the side of me and my

eltow was in his face.     He was crying and screaming.     I could not move

 to help him.    The crowd was still pushing and I was moved away from

 hiir.   I saw a big man aainst one of the barriers he was screaming.        I

 thcught if he was in trouble then I would have no chance.

 I co not remember what he was wearing but he had a Beard.        I could

 hear people screaming for help and others singing.       I did not see the

 match begin the only thing I saw was the ball hitting the bar as I was

 pushed about.     That was the only bit of the match I saw.

 I was pushed nearly to the front and I remember seeing a hand between

 the people trying to grab hold of someone.        I know it was a woman s
_____________________________________                                       3


hard because it had nail varnish on it.     I was still being pushed

abcut and I did not seewhat happened to her.      I was really crushed I

was having trouble breathing and I thought I was going to die.

The next thing I remember I was stood on the pitch at the back of the

goal.    I do not know how I got there.   The players were still on the

pitch.    Someone stood by me said "You are lucky you've got long hair".

 He said I was pulled out by it.     I looked into the pen to see if I

could see the other two.     I could not see them I was dazed and was

having trouble breathing.    A Policeman told me to get back into the

per.     I was gasping for breath and coughing.   I thought to my self I

was not going back in there.     I do not even know how many people were

on the pitch.     I saw a Policeman walking towards me, I don't know if

it was the same one who told me to get back into the pen or not.        I

thcught he was coning to put me into the pen.      I have been told that

there were lots of fans standing about, near to me.      I do not remember

seeing them I was still in a daze.     I just saw the Policeman walking

towards me, so I just ran.

I ran right down the pitch to the other end.      I looked back and I saw

loeds of people at the other end.     I thought to myself that I did not

have to run down this end.     The Forrest fans started to throw coins at

me.     I gave them the 'V' sign.

Seeing all the people at the other end I thought I would be alright if

 I went back to the Leppings Lane end again and I started to run back.

 I had reached the halfway line; when I saw a Policeman running

 towards me and I was Rugby tackled and I fell to the ground.

 I was being walked off the pitch. By two Police Officers.     I was

 shcuting that there were people dying at the other end.     One of the

 Police Officers was laughing and told me to shut up.

 I was taken out through the Players entrance.     As I was going off the
_____________________________________                                          4


pitch there were photographers taking photographs of me.

I vent past the Forest dressing room and I saw Neil WEBB     I shouted

out "There is people dying out there".    I remember him looking at me.

I vas taken outside and walked all around the ground.     I remember

seeing Forest Supporters queuing to get in.     Someone asked me for my

ticket.    I was shouting that there were people dying in there.

I vas taken into a room and my property was taken off me.     I was put

into a cell with 4 other people.    There was blood on one of the bench.

There were 2 Liverpool supporters and 2 Forrest supporters, they

were all drunk.    One of them was saying You can not do this to me.       I

have got a degree.    I was brought out and I was photographed with the

Policeman that arrested me.

I vas then put in to a Van with all little cells in.      I was in one

on my own.

I vas sat there thinking about different things.      There was a window

thet I could look out of.     I could see people being brought in on

stretchers.    Supporters were bringing them, there were supporters

trying to revive them.    There were some Police Officers just standing

around doing nothing.

I vas in there for a long time.

Eventually someone said that we could all let out and could go home

unless we did something else.

A vhile later I was let out my property was given back to me and I

left.     I went back to where the car had been parked and it was not

there.     I then heard someone shout me and the car came past.    I got

into it.     Some fans were running after me.   They were shouting that I

was the one that ran onto the pitch.     They ran alongside the car and

were trying to get in. They hit my mates dad because the window was

open.     We drove down a side street and got away.
           _______________________________________             5


m                                                    [signed

    STATEMENT 1AKEN
              fLACE:

              1IME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




*




                                                                   2046
                                                                       STATION




ADDRESS:
                       MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 016 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                          SIGNED)



                                                                        I live at

           the above address with my parents.

           I sm a supporter of Liverpool Football Club, whom I have followed

           through all my life.

           I used to go to every home game but I started a Saturday job last

           October(001088) and now I go when I can.

           When I go to Anfield Liverpool's ground, I always go into the "Kop"

           standing terrace and although I've been on my own, I usually go with

           my father and sister

                            Cheshire (            |
                                                  ).

           On Saturday 15 April 1989(150489) I attended the FA Cup semi final at

           Hillsborough Football Stadium in Sheffield with____________________

           We both had #6 Leppings Lane standing tickets which we obtained from

           Anfield approximately two weeks before the game was due to be played.

           I cot my ticket via my father's season ticket book whilst              is

           a season ticket holder in her own right.

           On the day before the semi-final, which was been played between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, I went to              house where I




                                                                                       2047
stepped the night.

On Saturday 15 April 1989(150489) we left                house at about

H e m (1100) to travel to the game in her car.

We travelled to Sheffield via the M63, A616 and the A628 into

Sheffield.

The journey was slow from the M63 onwards due to the volume of traffic

and the journey which should take about an hour took about 2 1/2 hours

making our arrival time in Sheffield about 1.30pn(1330) that day.     We

didn't stop en-route and we parked our car on arrival in Sheffield

abcut a mile from the ground.      I don't know what road it was on but

it was near a "Gateway" store.

Frcm this point             m d I walked to the ground which took about

15 minutes whilst walking to the ground we received no police

direction but just followed the crowd, although I did see a couple of

officers en-route there was no trouble what so ever and I only saw a

few youths drinking out of cans.      I didn't see anybody drunk.

We got to our ground entrance point, which is the Leppings Lane

turnstiles 'B' at about 1.45pm (1345).

On arrival at the turnstiles there was no excessive crowd and there

was no queuing, just it seemed people milling around there was no rush

to get in the ground and there was no crushing.

It stated on our tickets that we had to enter via turnstiles 'B',

which were situated at the right of the row of turnstiles as you look

at them from Leppings Lane and set back.

              I went straight through the turnstiles having the

counterfoil of my ticket taken by a steward.

I could see police officers searching at both sides of the turnstiles

as we went in but neither              or I were searched.

Once through the turnstiles there was no police or steward directions
as to where we should go nor was there any visible signposting.           I

saw 2 stewards selling programmes.

I looked over towards the stand where I saw the entrance to the

tur.nel which runs under the West Stand into the terrace, and could see

the letter 'B' at the entrance.

Once out of the turnstiles there is a large open a r e a .

There was no disorder nor drinking in this a r e a and we made our way to

the tunnel, assuming that the letter 'B' on our tickets also referred

to this tunnel.

We made our way into the tunnel, which was clear and into the terrace.

At this point there is a dividing fence running down the width of the

terraces and we went over to the left hand terrace (pen 4), the back

quarter of this terrace was full of people so                and I went

dofcn to the front of the terrace and stood in front of the bottom

cresh barrier towards the bottom left of this terrace, after at first

being behind it.    At this time there was no crushing whatsoever

where I was standing.

Once in the terrace I didn't see any police or stewards in this

enclosure.

We got into the terrace at about 1.50pm (1350).

Far.s kept coming into the terrace and by about 2.30pm (1430) it was

alttost full and at about 2.40pm (1440) I felt that that was enough

pecple inside, but people still kept coming in and over the next 5

mirutes or so the crush began to be excessive but it didn't ease up

anc got worse.

At about 2.50pm (1450) the teams came onto the pitch and there was a

surge forward in the terrace.      This surge eased off a little and I

was able to regain my footing as I was being pushed forward by the

pecple behind the barrier.
I remember listening to the team been announced but when it got as far

as Alan Hansons, who was no. 6, the crowd again surged forward and

this time there was no easing of any pressure.

There were people leaning and pushing on my back from behind the

barrier, whilst others in front of me were still trying to push back

which was pushing the small of my back into the crash barrier.     I

would think the time by now is about 2.55pm (1455).    The crushing

continued to get worse both from in front and behind me and I could

see people in front of me trying to climb out over the fence at the

frcnt of the terraces on to the pitch but they were been prevented by

police officers along the fence who were throwing them back into the

terrace and shouting 'push back, you'll be alright', but it was not

possible.

Pecple all around me, i n c l u d i n g w h o was hysterical, were

shcuting and panicking and the men who were trapped on the barrier

behind us were grabbing hold of us and telling us to turn around and

push back but we just couldn't move.

The next thing that I recall is a surge coming from the back, down the

terrace and then across to the left of the pen and into the side

fencing as it rebounded the force carried me to my right and

separated

I could hear           shouting for me so I started to call back and

the youth between us must have realized that we were together and

pulled me back to my left to where           was.     I saw that she was

being pulled up by a lad who I didn't know but now know him to be

               Ercm Mold in Wales

At this point the pressure   on me eased and I was able to turn to face

the barrier and the back of the stand.

I could see a man pinned to the barrier who was shouting for help.      I
told him to push back with his arms and bend his knees, which he did

anc I put my hand under the barrier, took hold of his jumper and

pulled him under.     He thanked roe and then disappeared.

I turned back to                       and all 3 of us put our arms

arcand each other for support and protection.

For the next 15-20 minutes we were jostled about but I was aware of

whet was going on around roe.

I remember seeing a boy of about 14 been pinned on the barrier behind

us.   He said, 'For God's sake help roe I'm dying'.     All I can recall

abcut him is that he had dark hair.     I couldn't believe what was

going on and I turned my head towards the pitch.      I remember the

first thing I saw was Bruce GROBBELAAR, the Liverpool goal keeper,

with the ball in his hands.     He turned towards us and the colour

drained from his face and his jaw just dropped, he froze.

I could also see a body on the track on the other side of the safety

ferce with Liverpool fans trying to give him the kiss of life and pump

his chest.   I also saw people climbing over the fence and onto the

pitch and were by now been helped over by the police and fans on the

ferce.

I also saw a press photographer knock a fan out of his way and start

taking photographs.

Bocies, whether dead or alive were been passed over the heads of

pecple in our terrace and handed up to people on the fence.

Throughout all this we all 3 remained together and refused offers to

be helped out as we weren't going out with out each other.      Everybody

was shouting to open the gate, although I didn't see one in our pen,

anc to get the fences down.      I couldn't see if anyone was trying to

get the fences down due to the mass of people against them.

We remained in our group till about 3.25pm (1525), reassuring each
other and all the time people were still been passed from the back to

the front and at one stage a body of a lad in his early teens and

wearing a white shirt was dropped onto             on his way to the

frcnt.     I think he was dead as his eyes were open and his skin looked

grey.

I also recall people been under our feet, although I didn't see any of

them and someone grabbing hold of my leg but I didn't see what

happened to him.

At about 3.25pm (1525) the crush both in front and behind us eased

suddenly and I was aware of two persons on the ground in front of us

been resuscitated by other fans.

I saw ambulance men climbing into the pen and police and fans pulling

at the front fence till it came away in one c o m e r and they were able

to peel it back to allow the police and ambulance men in whilst fans

climbed out.

         assisted with an injured man in the pen who had blood coning

frcm his ear and who was struggling for breath.

I also saw when the fans behind me eased off the crush barrier one man

whc didn't move and who was slumped forward over the barrier.     This

mar. was white, well built, about 40 yrs, sandy coloured hair,

wearing a sweatshirt and a cardigan and a dark coloured coat.

I saw some other man take him off the barrier and check his breathing

and heart before one of them said he's dead.

After this I was able to get out of the ground via the fence which had

been pulled open, and we were directed by the police onto the centre

circle.     The time by the ground's electronic clock it was 3.40pm

(1540).

I roticed that adverts were still been flashed across the electronic

board and I felt that this could have been used to give messages or
directions to the fans.

I elso saw an ambulance behind the goal.

We moved to the side of the pitch where we were joined by someone who

I know from my old school,

        who couldn't find two of his friends.

We stood there for a while not really believing what was going on and

I could see some friends of a lad called                    po my right

helping a dark haired man.     These were Giles HUTT,

Anthony OWEN, a youth who I know to be           all from Fontiby.   I

was also aware of the Notts Forest fans taunting us and about 30

Liverpool supporters running towards them telling them that there were

pecple dead, and after this I saw fans from all sides of the ground

pulling down the advertising hoardings and using them as stretchers to

carry away the injured.      I heard Kenny DALGLISH giving his message

over the tannoy system before a policeman came over and someone asked

hiir what was going to happen, he said that we would have to play the

garre like at Heysel and at that about 4 or 5 lads ran to the leppings

Lare end goal and pulled the net down saying 'You're not playing the

match today'.

We told him it was a ridiculous situation and asked where the fans off

the pitch would go and he told us back in the terracing.

I could see that the ambulance was now inside the track around the

pitch and we went back to the centre circle.      I also saw the fireman

arrive with oxygen on the pitch.      We spent till about 4.55pm (1655)

locking for other friends and at one point went back to the Leppings

Lare end where I saw a policeman push a Liverpool fan back into the

terrace, telling him to get back and he wasn't helping matters.      When

we left the ground we hadn't found any of the people we were looking

for but found out later that they were alright, and I remember looking



                                                                            2 05 3
back into the terrace and seeing that the crush barrier by where we

were standing was bent.     We left the ground via the West End terrace

anc back out into the yard and out of the gates.

Whilst walking away from the crowd I heard that the death toll was 74

anc it had been caused by rioting Liverpool fans on a car radio.

We walked back to the cars where we found            friend and we were

able to phone home from someone's house.

I eventually got back to               house at 8.10pm (2010) that same

day.

My own thoughts about the causes of the events on 15 April 1989

(150489) and how to prevent them in the future are as follows:

1.     Liverpool supporters should have been allocated the larger of

the two ends at Hillsborough as the average Liverpool gate is approx.

38,000    - 39,000.

2.     More tickets should have been allocated to Liverpool FC to

reduce people without tickets attending the game.

3.     Should have been more police and stewards outside the ground to

organise and control the supporters.

4.     The Leppings Lane terrace should not have been penned off thus

enabling people to spread outwards.

5.     Officers or stewards should be on every gate with akey.

6.     Mare stewards to direct fans in ground.

7.     More written directions in ground.

On Monday the 17 April 1989(170489) I obtained the                  and on

paces            I can identify the positioning of                   as I

car pick out                                and I was stood within feet

of her (Ref           I have circled both in pencil.
                                                  9


#



                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:         DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




4
                                                      20   Db
                                                                           STATION

N pE:


ADDRESS:
               BIRKENHEAD, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                                              (SIGNED)


*          I etn a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.        I

           am a Liverpool supporter since my early years.

           On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I went to the Hillsborough

           foctball ground to see the match Liverpool v's Nottingham Forest,

           seiri-cup final match.   I am a cup seasonal ticket holder.   On the day,

           I had a ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace with me, I paid six

           pounds for the tickt from the season ticket office.

           On the day of the match, I left home at around half nine       orten

           o'clock (0930 - 1000 hrs) in the morning, some of ny mates called for

           me in a transit van.     We then drove around and picked up seme of our

           other mates, there were a dozen of us all together.     Due to traffic

           hold ups and road works, we were delayed up to two hours before we got

           to Sheffield at around one o'clock (1300 hrs) or just after.      We

           parked the van on a pub car park near to the football ground, this pub

           was called the 'Blue Boar'. Just as we pulled onto the        carpark, we

           saw some Police Officers checking other vehicles on the       carpark. When

           these officers came to our van, they saw several empty cans inside the

           van, there was about twenty four cans. The Police spoke to __________




                                                                                          2056
                                                                         2

because he was the driver regarding the cans, I think since then he

has been fined.    We all then went into the pub, for a drink.   There

were not many inside the pub, there were just locals and Liverpool

supporters.    We left the pub around 2.30 pm (1430 hrs).   We parked

near the ground, on a road.    As we got nearer to the ground we saw

Police Officers but we did not speak to them as we knew where to go.

I cid not see any kind of disorder outside the ground and I did not

see any one drunk.

At around 2.40 pm (1440 hrs) I walked to the Leppings Lane end, I saw

a large crowd outside the entrance.    As I walked towards the large

blue gates I got split up from some of my mates, the crowds were

stretched into the road.    The tall nine foot, blue gates were closed

as we got near to them, these are the gates that lead onto the road.

I saw three or four Police horses on the road trying to control the

crcwd, but were facing difficulties because there was no room for them

to move to, and to sort the crowd into queues.    It took a long time

for the queues to go down because it was such a tight area.      I did

not see any stewards.    On my entrance into the ground I did not find

any difficulty in finding the Leppings Lane terraces as I had been to

the ground before, however, I do not remember seeing any signs.

After a few minutes, the tall blue gates were suddenly opened and the

crcwd pushed through because it had been building up, I fell over

because   I was pushed by the crowd and when I was on the floor people

accidently walked over.    I started to shout for help and was helped by

a stranger to get me back onto my feet.

The next thing I knew that a gate near to the turnstiles was open, I

started to walk towards this gate because the crowd was heading that

way.   As I went through this gate, I could see the pitch ahead through

the tunnel .   I did not hand my ticket in because I did not see any one
______________________________                                              3


whc was collecting them, there were no stewards there, nearby the

tur.nel telling anyone not to go into it.    The crowd headed towards the

turnel, I was in the middle of this crowd.     I had no choice but to go

ahead with the crowd.    I could not turn around, it was just packed.

We just all headed towards the tunnel as we could see the pitch and

there was no signs showing other directions, this must have been about

ter. minutes before the match kick off.     I walked down the tunnel and

onto the terraces without too much difficulty.     When I got to the

terraces I went left into the pen, somewhere towards the back.     There

were more people coming in from the tunnel onto the terrace and I was

pushed towards the left hand side, at this point some one stood on my

feet, this caused me to loose my balance so I fell on top of someone

but I was helped back up onto my feet, this was due to the fact that

crcwds of people were still coming through the tunnel.     When I fell

dofcn my both brown coloured shoes came off and I was bare footed, and

I was unable to find them.    As more crowds came onto the terraces,

everyone was gradually moving forward, I was near halfway down the

terraces, and finding it very difficult to move as the place was just

packed, and from then on I just could not move.      I found it difficult

to move, my arms were stretched out and they were trapped by the

pecple around me, I later managed to free my arms.      There were Police

Officers standing on the pitch and shouting towards the crowds to get

back, but this was impossible to do.

The people around me were distressed but there were just no way we

could get them out.     There were other poeple passing bodies down, I do

not know if they were alive or dead.      I noticed that there were a few

lacs trying to climb over the front railings but the Police would not

let them get over until things started to get worse.      I saw a lad get

over the railings and he started to pull at the fence when he was
                                                                           4


stepped by a Police Officer, who went up to him and pulled him off the

rails and hit him, I then saw an Officer go and speak to this Officer

anc then the Officers started to pull the fences together with other

supporters, they managed to get a few of these fences down and started

to get the people through the fence.    I saw that there a gate open at

the front, through which the injured people got out of.    As   more

pecple got out it got less congested on the terraces, by the end I was

able to walk around to see where my mates were, but I could not find

them.

Then someone shouted out my name and I went onto the pitch and found

thiee of my friends.    On the pitch I saw a lot of people lying on the

flcor, some of these were dead and others were receiving medical

treatment, my mates and I just walked around looking for the rest of

our group.

Eventually, when we all got back together we went back to the mini bus

anc went home.    On the whole, once the Police and other people

realised what was happening at the Leppings Ln end, everyone was very

helpful.     There is a question that I would like to see answered, that

is why did they keep the gate by the side open because in my opinion

that gate should not have been open when such a crowd was outside.     I

feel that there were not enough Police Officers outside the ground and

thet there should have been several stewards near to the tunnels

telling the crowds to filter to the left or the right side of the

tur.nel, so that the ground was kept balanced.




On the day of the match I was wearing a
                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   240589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                    POL W PCl

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




*




4
                                                              2060
                                                                            STATION

NAME:          COLIN KERBOTSON
               FLENLEY

ADDRESS:
                             WALSALL.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31

OCCUPATION:    GENERAL PRACTITIONER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                  C K FLENLEY (SIGNED)



           I em Colin Kerbotson FLENLEY, I am a married man with two children. I

           am a General practioner

           have been a General practitioner for 4 years.

           I em a Liverpool football club supporter.      A week before the FA cup

           seiri final myself and my friend

                          Staffs,        decided that we would be going to the match

           together.          already knew he had a   ticket but I was relying

           an another friend                 who lives in Runcorn, Merseyside and

           whc is a Liverpool Season ticket holder, to get my ticket.

           On Friday 14th April 1989 (190489)|~           rang me and left a message

           thet I had got a ticket for the Leppings Lane, terrace for the FA cup

           seiri final.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I drove over t o ___        house in

                          from where we set off we began the journey at 11am (1100)

                irove us up there. We went up the A38 and onto the Ml.       We carried

           on passed the exits where the Forest fans were directed off and went

           arcund the outside of Sheffield until we joined the route used by the

           Liverpool fans.




                                                                                          2061
FLENLEY               COLIN   KERBOTSON                                   2

We stopped at a pub in a small village about 10 miles outside

Sheffield at about 1.15pm (1315).    This was where we met our friends

at the corresponding fixture last year, although last year the pub was

packed out, this year there was only us and another small group of

Liverpool fans.   My friend                and four of his friends were

already waiting for us.   I don't know any of his friends names.   We

left the pub at about 2.00pn (1400) and drove to the ground. We parked

the car at about 2.10pm (1410).     We parked on the main road to the

grcund.   We were about a mile to a mile and half away to the ground.

We left the cars and walked to the ground.    We arrived at the ground

at about 2.20pm (1420).   My friends all had tickets for the North

stend so I made my way to the turnstiles for the Leppings Lane

terrace. I immediately noticed a mass of people outside the turnstiles,

there were far more there than last year, I remember last year the

police had set up a barrier before the gates to the turnstiles where

they were checking tickets.

There were no queues so I just joined the back of the crowd. People

kept filling in behind me and after a while I was caught up in the

middle.   I would say that the crushing pressure on me was the worse

thst I had ever encountered.    The man beside me began to feel faint.

Far.s began to shout to the police asking them to do something about

the crush.   After about 10 minutes it became apparent to me that the

police officers appeared to be arguing with each other, their voices

were raised and they were gesturing to each other.

The officers then pushed their horses backwards through the crowd and

made their way to the big gates behind us.     The next time I looked,

the gates were closed.

Pecple were beginning to panic at this point, the heat was intense and

I began to feel faint, but because I am quite tall I was able to
FLENLEY               COLIN   KERBOTSON                                      3


breathe.

I looked at my watch and noticed the time was about 2.50pn (1450).      At

this point I saw a blue concertina gate to my right start to open.      I

saw a police officer standing behind it.   All of a sudden I was

forced into a running pace towards the now open gate.    There were

abcut 200 of us who ran through the gate, as we had just got through

the gate a nan infront of me fell over - but he was immediately

dragged up again.   Once we were eventually in the area behind the

stand everybody calmed down. I looked around for a programme seller

but could not see one.

I saw no stewards or police in this area at all, only one steward on

each of the stairways up to the seats.
                                                               t

The only entrance to the terraces appeared to be the tunnel

uncer the stand.    I went into the tunnel, it as not crowded but there

were people in there, the tunnel was quite long, not very wide and the

rocf was low, I also remember it was dark.   Towards the end of the

tur.nel I could see the pitch but the crowd were crushed in front of me

and about 4-5 yards (4-5 yds) back up the tunnel.    At this point I

re-entered my friends telling me not to use the centre area as it was

packed last year.    I walked back along the tunnel and into the area

behind the stand.    This area was still quite clear, I looked around

for a sign to say how to get onto the terraces but could not see one.

I turned to the left and followed the back of the stand round.     There

was a gap between the stand and the grounds perimeter wall which I

wer.t through and then arrived on the terraces, I stood quite close to

the Police control box.    As I looked towards the pitch I looked across

to my left and saw a hugh crush of people in the middle pens.      I could

see people being pulled out of the back of the centre pens into the

stand above, dozens were pulled out one by one.     My immediate thought
FLENLEY              COLIN    KERBOTSON                                    4


was that the stand might collapse at the front due to the sheer

nuirbers of people on it.    I said to the chap next to me "THERE'S GONNA

BE ANOTHER HEYSEL HERE!" People around me were saying that there were

going to be problems in the centre of the terraces and they were

shcuting at the police in the control box asking if they could see

whet was going on in there. I could see people starting to climb over

the front fence and onto the area behind the goal.    The match by this

tine had kicked off, but I was too busy watching the terraces in

horror to have any interest on the field.    As I saw the people

climbing over the fence     I saw a police officer run on to the pitch

anc approach the referee.    The referee immediately stopped the game

anc the players were off the pitch within minutes. I continued to

watch what was happening on the terrace, I didn't realise how bad the

situation was until I saw two police officers carry a young boy of

abcut 12 years of age, from the area behind the goal to the side

of the pitch directly in front of the South Stand.     They laid the lad

on the pitch and started resuscitating him.     At this point, I knew

thet I could help so I made my way to a gate at the front of the

terraces, the gate was locked but I shouted to a police officer nearby

that I was a doctor and he opened the gate to allow me onto the pitch.

When I was on the pitch I noticed that the Forest fans were getting

agitated shouting for us to get off the pitch, they obviously did not

knew what was going on.

I irade my to the penalty area to a 20 year old man who was lying on

his back, his face was blue, myself and a police officer attempted to

revive him.   We managed to get his heart going again, at this point I

left him, he was wearing a Liverpool home shirt with Candy on it and

jeans.

I then made my way to behind the goal. As I saw a girl who was
FLENLEY              COLIN   KERBOTSON                                   5


nineteen years of age, I now know this girl as Sarah HICKS, Trevor

HICKS her father was standing behind her shouting "COME ON SARAH" I

also saw Victoria HICKS lying there as well, she was being

resuscitated by another G.P. from Nottingham. Sarah was blue in the

face and I could see pinpoint spots of blood around her throat and

neck where the blood vessels had broken.   I looked at Sarah's eyes the

pupils were fixed and dilated, that is a sign of brain death.

Myself Trevor HICKS and an off duty police officer were all attempting

to revive her but to no avail, and after about ten minutes we gave up.

I remember seeing both Sarah and Victoria being carried away, both

deed, but I know now that Sarah was taken to the gymnasium and

Victoria was taken to hospital where she was pronounced dead.    I

renember shouting in the direction of an ambulance for oxygen to

assist me in reviving Sarah but they had no equipment.

After Sarah and Victoria had been removed I moved onto another man who

was about 50-60 years old with   quite a large beer belly, he was

obviously dead so I didn't spend much time with him.     All of the

bodies that were left were being treated by other people so

I ran down to the opposite end of the ground where I saw a body in the

corner between the Spion Kop and the North stand, he was a white lad,

abcut 25 years old, he was tanned with black hair and a black

moustache. This man was already being worked on by a doctor and a

nurse who were both Notts Forest supporters so I left them.

At this point everybody who was either dead or injured appeared to

have been cleared.   The majority of the crowd were still in the

grcund but I noticed that some had began to leave.     I was given a

drink of water by a woman who had a large jug and seme plastic cups.

She was handing it out to the fans and the police.     At this point

Ker ny DALGLISH made an announcement over the loudspeaker
FLENLEY                COLIN    KERBOTSON                                   6

system, this was the first announcement I had heard all day.      DALGLISH

said that the game was obviously not going be re started, he said that

we all knew something terrible had happened and that to assist the

serivices would we all remain in our positions.

I remember seeing piles of clothes, shoes and other personal

belongings behind the Liverpool goal.       I remember looking on the

terraces and seeing the barrier bent and broken, it looked to me as if

there had been a clean cut as I was looking on the left hand side.       It

was all bent and broken.       I saw the fans and the police tidying up the

hoardings piling them up in the Liverpool penalty area.       I would say

thet once the scale of the tragedy was realised that both the

police and the fans worked well together with what little resources

they had.    I think the police were just as devastated as the fans.

I looked around the ground for my friends but could not find them, I

left the ground and knocked the first door I could to telephone my

wife.     I then walked back towards where we had parked the car but I

was picked up by them on the way as they were looking for me.       We then

drcve back hone, only stopping once for a cup of tea.

On the Monday night after the disaster I wrote to Trevor HICKS

to convey my condolances, he and his wife Jennifer visited me on

Thursday 4th May 1989 (040589) and I reassured them that neither of

their daughters had died in pain.

I am willing to attend court and give evidence if I am required.
        FLENLEY           COLIN   KERBOTSON                        7


                                              C K FLENLEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC




                                                                       2067
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           LEICESTERSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 48

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am                                                     and I live at

                                                         Leicestershire.

           I em a life long supporter of Liverpool Football Club and have been

           attending matches involving the team for many years.   I am quite well

           experienced in crowd conditions at football matches of this standard.

           I sm in fact, a season ticket holder at the Kop at Anfield.

           On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I travelled up

           frcm my heme address to Sheffield with

           aged 21 years of the given address and

                                   Surrey, (tel no.               I). We were

           travelling up to see the sard-final of this years F.A. Cup between

           Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. at Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

           's ground at Hillsborough.

                          I are season ticket holders and we were all in

           possession of tickets for the Leppings Lane standing area with access

           through gate 'B' in Leppings Lane.   The cost of the tickets was #6.00

           each and we had applied for them to the Liverpool ground.

           We travelled up in my car on the Ml motorway and at about midday




                                                                                    2068
                                                                             2

(1200) we turned off the motorway and stopped at a village called

Cattcliffe for a drink.     This village is about eight miles from the

ground.     There were no other supporters in this pub.

At about 12.30pm (1230) we left that pub and rejoined the motorway.

On doing so traffic congestion was evidently quite bad due to other

foctball traffic attending the match.     I took us approximately one

hour to travel to the ground and we arrived in Sheffield at about 1.

45pm. (1345) I parked my car in a road which I think was called

Shirecliff Road, about twenty minutes on foot from the ground.     There

was a steady flow of people heading towards the ground and we joined

these people. On our way to the ground we passed two pubs which were

quite crowded sufficiently for people to be standing outside

drinking,     these persons were mainly Nottingham Forest supporters.    I

die not witness any disorder, fighting or drunkeness on my way to the

ground nor did I see any police direction to the ground, really this

would not be necessary as the ground is easily visible on our approach

to it. We approached the ground from the south and walked passed the

rear of the south stand in order to enter the ground via the Leppings

Lare gate.     We arrived at that entrance at about 2.05pm (1405) and I

was surprised that even at this time there was heavy congestion

outside the gate (B) which gives access to the turnstiles.     No efforts

hac been made to make supporters form a proper queue(s) and there were

no crowd control measures evident.     Fans could approach from any

direction to this gate. I joined the crowd in order to pass through

the turnstiles and the area of the courtyard just in front of those

turnstiles was very heavily congested.     It was so congested that I

considered it to be dangerous.

I saw that there was a police officer outside each turnstile who

appeared to be conducting cursory body searches on supporters entering
                                                                               3


the gate turnstiles.       The weight of numbers eventually forced the

officers to abandon these searches, although they remained outside.

The only other police officers I saw outside was a mounted officer who

appeared to have been summoned by an officer at the turnstiles.         Hie

suirmoning officer was obviously concerned at this stage about the

crcwd congestion, the worst I had ever seen particularly so because of

the time.

There were no stewards evident at the turnstiles.          This was a ticket

only game but I did see one person at the turnstiles, directly in

frcnt of me p>ay cash, two #10 notes, to enter.      He was admitted

through the turnstile that I also eventually entered through,

           turnstile.    I surrended my ticket on entry.

I saw no gates other than the turnstiles open and I did not witness

the opening of any other gates.

Once through the turnstiles there was no congestion and freedom of

movement.    We approached the central tunnel, looked down it, and after

soire thought decided not to enter the pens at the far end of the

turnel. We wanted a higher viewing point and so made our way to pen

nuirber six by walking across the rear of the West Stand.

There were no police or stewards engaged in directing fans once

through the turnstiles or at the entrance to the central tunnel, as

far as I recall.        I did not see any signs directing fans to match

viewing points, and I did not witness any disorder or other incidents

between my entry point to the ground and when I took up my match

viewing point at about 2.40pm.(1440) I saw no consumption of alcohol

in the ground.     I stood at my match viewing point with my son and my

brother. I paid no further attention to the pens in front of the West

Stend and waited for the game to start, which it did promptly at 3pm.

 (1500).    At about 3.05pm (1505) a Liverpool player called BEARDSLEY
hac kicked the ball towards the Nottingham Forest goal, hitting the

crcssbar.   This caused great excitement to the Liverpool crowd, and at

this time I noticed that                     were paying more attention

to the pens in front of the West Stand than to the match.

I looked down tc the pens in the centre of the West Stand and saw a

surge of people which was forcing people at the front up against the

perimeter fence.    I was not aware of any division in the pens and I

could not see any barriers within them.

I noticed that people were trying to climb the perimeter fence onto

the pitch and saw a police officer push at least one person back into

the pen.    He was obviously unaware of what was happening in that pen

area.

The flow of people gaining entry to the pitch-side steadily increased,

theugh, I am not certain from which pens they were coming, but it

would have been from the West Stand end of the pitch.    The game

continued for a short while with people packing behind the Liverpool

goel.

The match was stopped a short while later after a police officer

hac attracted the referee's attention.    After this the number of

pec pie on the pitch grew until it rapidly became hundreds, packed into

the penalty area at the Liverpool end.

I realised that people must have been seriously injured and I could

see some people being handed over the perimeter fence onto the pitch.

A large number of police officers entered the ground fron between the

Spion Kop and North Stand, and formed a cordon across the centre line

arcund this time.    Seme other police officers at the West Stand end

appeared to be helping injured people, but others were standing around

anc did not appear to know what was going on.

Supporters began trying to pull the fence mesh down helped by one
____________________________________                                     5


policeman, and I eventually saw seme of it pulled down just behind the

Liverpool goal.

I could see at this time numerous people lying on the pitch apparently

seriously injured and hundreds of other supporters milling around.

They had presumably exited the pen for their own safety, and this was

making it difficult to see where the injured were.

There appeared to be a complete lack of organisation on the part of

the official parties or bodies.    I was amazed that there was an

announcement over the ground tannoy telling people to keep off the

pitch, it was made at about 3.15pm (1515).

I saw a man who was:- white, about 60 years of age, I am not able to

say how tall he was, but he was very heavily built, not muscular but

fat, he had light brown short hair, was cleanshaven, and was wearing a

pale blue t-shirt.   I cannot really describe him further.   He was

lying on the pitch in front of pen five about 2 yards (yds)onto

the pitch from the touchline. His feet were facing the West Stand and

he was lying face uppermost.

Initially I think his arm had moved but I saw no further movement from

hiir.   He apparantly received no first-aid treatment, presumably

because he was thought to be dead.    I saw a number of people lying

just on the pitch with their heads covered by coats but I cannot

describe these persons, and I am unable to say where they had died.

The ambulances took a long time to arrive, the first arriving at about

3.25pm. (1525).

 I witnessed nothing which I consider to be a criminal offence during

this time.    We remained in the stand and saw supporters tearing down

 advertising hoardings to use as makeshift stretchers to ferry the

 injured and dead off the pitch.

 The police cordon across the centre of pitch remained and, of the
         fifty or so police officers at the Liverpool end of the pitch, I'd say

         that about twelve were helping whilst the others stood around.    The

         latter policemen seemed to show no interest in helping the injured.

         The next announcement I heard over the speakers was at about 4.lOpn

         (1610) when Kenny DALGLISH announced that there had been one or two

         problems, and asked for people to cooperate with the emergency

         services.    I also heard another announcement at 4.25pn (1625) to the

         effect that the game had been abandoned, it advised people to retain

         their ticket stubs but, not to leave the stadium immediately.

         I eventually left the ground at about 4.30pn (1630) of my own accord.

         In my opinion the main factors which contributed to the tragedy were:-

         (i)   the lack of disciplined queueing at the entrance to the lappings

         Lare gate.

         (ii) the amount of people allowed into the pens 3 and 4 of the

         stending area in front of the West Stand.



                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          FLACE:

           IIME:              DATE:   010589

( I t NESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                            ?C
                                                                            STATION

t^lE:

ADDRESS:
                          MIDDLESEX,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 30

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I em                                            Middlesex.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to Hillsborough

           Foctball Ground, Sheffield.    I am not a supporter of either

           Liverpool or Nottingham Forest.

           I travelled on ray own by train I had obtained ray ticket from

                    who is a Liverpool Football Club Scout _________

           I paid     12 for the ticket and I also purchased a further ticket for a

           sirrilar amount.

           I arrived at Sheffield Railway Station at about 1.45 pm and made ray

           w ay   to the football ground by bus.   Also on the bus were a large

           nurrber of Liveprool supporters.    Three of the men behind me didn't

           have tickets and I offered to sell one of them ray ticket which was

           spere for     12 the price I had purchased it for.

           As soon as the other Liverpool supporters realised I had a spare

           ticket they all got out of there seats and were asking me if I had any

           more tickets.

           These supporters were in an apprehensive mood, obviously they were

           wondering if they were going to get into the match.
                                                                            2


The bus was a football "special" from the railway Station to the

foctball ground.     The bus didn't stop anywhere en route, it dropped us

at the Leppings Lane end of the football ground.The double decker bus

was full, I didn't see any of the supporters

drinking alcohol on the bus.

The bus arrived at the ground at about 1.45 pn(1345) I then went to a

fish and chip shop just across from the ground.     There were a large

nuirber of Liverpool Football supporters in the area some were sitting

on walls, eating fish and chips and some were drinking alcohol from

cars, I didn't see any drunken behaviour from them.

After I had eaten my fish and chips I went for a walk down Leppings

Lare I could see that probably about one in twenty (5%) of the

supporters walking towards the ground was carrying cans of alcohol the

majority being "four packs".     The supporters that I saw were all

Liverpool fans. As I was walking round I saw an off licence shop which

was open. There was a queue of poeple outside the shop as the people

left I could see they had purchased cans of alcohol.

I had passed a number of public houses which were closed.     I went into

the off licence shop and I asked the man behind the counter why he was

selling the football fans alcohol.     He told me that his garage

business had gone broke and that the shop was his only way of making

money.    The man didn't have a local accent it sounded like an Irish

accent.   The shop itself sold mainly groceries.

One of the major factors of why I attended the football match is that

having not ever attended a Cup Semi Final before I was interested in

the socialogical experience.

I eventually walked back to the Leppings Lane entrance arriving back

at 2.30 pn( 1430).    There were large numbers of fans in the area most

of the fans were in the turnstile queues.
                                                                               3


I don't recall seeing any Police Officers outside the turnstiles.      I

entered the ground through about turnstile no 12.    Part of my ticket

ticket was ripped off by the turnstile attendant.    I then walked into

the ground.    There was a steward just the other side there was another

steward, who was standing at the bottom of the stairs leading to the

seating area of the West Stand.

I showed my ticket to the steward and I then walked up the stairs.         I

then showed my ticket to another steward at the top of the stairs who

directed me to my seat in row H which was about a third of the way

alcng.    I had not seen any Police officers in the area between the

turnstiles and the seating area.

I had not seen any disorder, fighting or drunkeness on the way to the

grcund.    I didn't experience any difficulty in entering the ground.          I

didn't see any gates open other than the turnstiles.    I didn't

witness any unauthorised entry to the ground.    I didn't have any

difficulty in finding my match viewing point.    I did not witness any

disorder between the entry point and my match viewing point.       I didn't

witness any consumption of alcohol inside the ground.

I didn't see a barrier break in Pen 3.

I cot to my seat at about 2.33 pm(1433) the man who had bought my

spare ticket did not get to his seat (which was next to mine) until

abcut 2.55 pm(1455).     I didn't have any conversation with him when he

sat down.     I had struck up a conversation with another person in the

other seat next to me who was a Liverpool football club offical,____

          I didn't see any crowd surge until Peter Beardsley hit the

Nottingham Forest cross bar I then saw the middle part of the crowd on

the terraces below us surge forward.     The said terraces was very

crowded. Following the surge forward the crowd recovered itself and

moved backwards towards the original position, although because of the
___________________________________                                       4


crush of people it wasn't able to go back all the way, only about two

thirds. When the original surge took place the press of people forced

the people at the front into the wall and perimeter fence and because

of the pressure of the people behind they were being continaully

pressed against the wall and fence.

A number of people did manage to climb up on top of the wall in an

effort to escape the crush.    These people then climbed over the

perimeter fence onto the pitch.

There had been a small number of Police Officers along the perimeter

fence.    A larger number arrived shortly after the first fans had

climbed the perimeter fence.

When the match was abandoned there was six to eight police officers

alcng the perimeter fence in front of the West Stand three of these

policemen were helping people over the fence, however it apeared to me

thet they weren't confident in what they were doing.

Shortly after they were joined by other officers sore of whom assisted

pecple over the fence, the others stood around as if they were waiting

for orders they were standing back away from the fence by the

goalmouth, just to my right.

Sore 3 or 4 minutes after the match had been stopped, I saw a

Police Officer open a gate in the perimeter fence to my left.       The

gate was very narrow and opened inwards.    The officer opened the gate

with seme difficulty because of the press of people behind it.

Having opened the gate the police pulled people through the gate one

by one.

Twc or three minutes after the gate had been opened (3.12 pm) (1512)

the bottom of the perimeter fence was pulled up by the fans on the

one side and police officers on the other side.    The fence was tied up

by string or something similar.
                                                                         5


I didn't see who tied it up.   It looked very dangerous as if it was

going to spring back down again.   This was quite close to the gate.

I wasn't aware at this stage that people had died I then saw that

pecple were lying on the pitch and it was then obvious to me that they

hac died.

A number of the fans who had escaped through the gate assisted other

fans who were climbing over the fence to my right.

I remained in my seat until 4.15 pm(1615).   I didn't actually witness

any deaths nor did I assit anyone who was dead or injured.

I consider that a factor in the deaths was the overcrowding of the

centre of the terracing whereas there were gaps in the terracing to

the left and to the right of me.

Other factors were the Perimeter fencing, the lack of a suitable gate

imrrediately behind the goal mouth.   The fact that the gate in the

perimeter fence opened inwards.

At 4.15 pm(1615) or 4.20 pm(1620) a loud speaker announcement was made

requesting that the ground be cleared.

I did not witness anything that I considered to be a criminal offence.

My views and observations in respect of the way the incident was

handled after 3.06 pm(1506) are:

The lack of Police initiative in respect of assisting the people

behind the perimeter fence.

The lack of equipment to force entry through the perimeter fence.

The Police didn't appear to have the freedom to act on their own

initiative.

Apparent lack of communication between the Police.

Apparent lack of medical equipment stretchers etc.

Following the announcement at 4.20 pm( 1620) over the tannoy system I

mace my way to the football pitch and offered my services to the
       Police. Eventally I was directed to the gymnasium, which was the

       temporary mortuary, where I gave comfort to            Joseph THOMPSON,

       whc were brothers of Patrick THOMPSON who had died.   The family heme

        is                         Liverpool 25.

        I returned to Liverpool and stayed with the THOMPSON family for two

       weeks helping them in their bereavement.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

£            1IME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     DS




                                                                                 20/9
                                                                         STATION

^E:
ADDRESS:
                SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 40

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                            SIGNED)



           I em a married man living at the above address together with my wife

           anc family.

                                                       I am a football supporter,

           anc I support Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. I attended the F A

           Cup Semi-Final match held at Hillsborough Football Ground last year.

           My wife, being an employee at this club, is allowed to purchase two

           tickets for these occasions.

           My wife was able to purchase tickets from the Club Secretary at

           Hillsborough for the Semi-Final match between Nottingham Forest and

           Liverpool Football Clubs on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), and these

           tickets were for the West Stand. I went to the match with a friend,

                         who is a colleague at work also. My ticket was for the

           West Stand, Gangway W, Row 18,                  sat next to me, but I can

           not be sure what number his seat was.

           Although I have returned the original half of the ticket I retained on

           the day of the match to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for a

           refund, I first photocopied the ticket. I have handed this photocopy

           to                of the West Midlands Police Force acting on behalf of




                                                                                       2080
Lord Justice TAYLOR in the Hillsborough Inquiry. I now produce the

phctocopy of the ticket under identification, reference number (         )

Exh ibit number (        ).

I net                                   Sheffield at about 1.00pm

(1200) on the afternoon of the match. We then drove down to my heme

address at                    Sheffield, where we remained until about

2.15pm (1415). We then walked towards Hillsborough Football Ground,

and into Leppings Lane from the Penis tone Road end. It took 15

mirutes. As we walked into Leppings Lane, about 20 yards from the

junction with Penistone Road, I saw two lads who were drinking, both

had red and white scarves on, and were leaning against a low wall, I

assumed that they were supporters of one of the competing teams. I

could not say which team they supported. One was drinking beer frcsn a

piestic bottle, the other from a can.         and I continued walking

down Leppings Lane towards the ground, on the nearside path going

towards the ground. About 50 yards ahead of us and on the same side, I

saw what appeared to be a small collapsable stall displaying Liverpool

Foctball Club, Scarves, hats and paraphenalia knocked over. The goods

spilled onto the floor, and I saw at least two, perhaps three lads,

pick up some things up off the floor and run off towards the ground. I

could not say if they were football supporters, or for which team.

They went into the crowd of people which was forming along lappings

Lare. I would estimate that there were hundreds of people in this

crcwd, which had spilled out of the entrance to the ground, and spread

into the road on Leppings Lane at least 100 yards towards the

Peristone Road end. I did not at any time see the street trader; the

volume of people obstructed my view of him.

Although the crowd of supporters outside the Lappings Lane turnstiles

were behaving generally in an orderly manner, there was a certain
amount of confusion. There would be different turnstiles for the

different stand areas inside the ground. Supporters approaching the

entrance to the ground from the direction furthest from their

turnstile entry points, were having to cross through those supporters

already waiting to go in.

As we walked towards the ground, I noticed some Liverpool supporters

walking away from the ground entrance. They were asking other people

in the street if they had any tickets for sale.

At about 2.30pm (1430),         andI got into a queue for our

turnstile. I noticed at least one mounted Police Officer outside the

ground, and two Officers on foot at the entrance to my turnstile.

There were other Officers present at the turnstiles, but I could not

say how many.

I had noticed a Police presence on my way to the ground from a point

in Herries Road, where fans were getting off coaches down into

Per.istone Road and also along Leppings Lane.

It only took a couple of minutes in my queue to get to the turnstile.

I cid notice that it was busier outside the turnstiles to the standing

areas of the West Stand, but I did not see any sign of disorderly

behaviour. The crowd was large, as is usual at this type of match, but

there were no problems at this point.______ who was standing next to

me, pointed out a supporter who he thought had only got a photostat

copy of a ticket, in the turnstile in front of him. This supporter was

refused entry and turned away from the turnstile. He then made his way

back into the crowd with no difficulty, and walked away from the

turnstiles.

Again, it was only a very short time before I got through the

turnstile. Inside I saw several Police Officers who appeared to be

carrying out body searches. I only saw one Steward by the turnstiles.
                                                                        4


         and I made our way over to the stairs leading to the seating

area of the West Stand. There were several Stewards at the bottom of

these stairs. My ticket was checked there, and again by a second

Steward immediately afterwards. We then made our way to our seats,

arriving there at about 2.40pm (1440).

While we were waiting for the match to start, I noticed that some

supporters at the front of the seating area had leaned over the

balcony and had pulled up two or three supporters from the terracing

below.

I elso noticed that the two seats immediately in front of me, which

were already occupied by two lads in their late teens, when another

twc people arrived. These two people said they had tickets for those

twc particular seats, and asked the lads to move. The lads did so

imrrediately and without any bother.

Frcm my seat, I was able to see the front part of the West Stand

terracing. When I took up my seat I was not aware of any problems in

the terracing there.

At about the same time as the players came onto the field to begin

warming up, I became aware of some problem in the terracing below. I

sav a surge of supporters moving towards the fencing at the front of

the terracing. This is not in my view, an unusual occurrence at

foctball matches, but I noticed that immediately following this surge,

pecple on the terracing were attempting to climb over the fencing onto

the side of the pitch.

There were a number of Police Officers and Stewards on the track in

frcnt of the fencing. Their initial reaction was to try to stop the

supporters frcm climbing over the fencing. I did see two or three who

succeeded being chased and caught by the Police. I do not know what

happened to these supporters.
__________________________________                                      5


The game then started. I had expected the surge in the terracing below

me to ease off, as it normally does at football matches, but just

after kick off, I noticed that instead of this, the situation appeared

to be worsening. The front of the terracing by the fencing was really

tichtly packed with supporters, and a lot more were trying to climb

over the fence onto the pitch.

Again there was some confusion on the part of the Police and Stewards

on the pitchside of the fence, but after a short while when they

attempted to stop people climbing over, it must have become apparent

that the situation was very severe.

The gate leading frcm Pen 3 onto the pitch was opened. I believe that

it was a Police Officer who opened the gate, but I could not be sure.

By this time a fair number of fans had managed to climb over the

fence, and there would be dozens of them. Seme appeared to be trying

the show the players and referee what was happening.

The people in Pen 3 were being allowed out through the gate and onto

the pitch, but at this time at a reasonably slow rate. It was about

this time that the match was stopped.

In my view it was at this time that the people in authority on the

pitch-side realised the serious extent of the problem on the

terracing. The Police and Stewards now began to actively help the

supporters to get out of the terracing, by pulling them through the

gate, and helping them over the fence. Other groundstaff also came

over to assist.

As more and more people were helped onto the pitch, the situation

appeared to become very confused and chaotic. I noticed that a lot of

Police re-inforcements had arrived.

At this point I noticed that at least two separate incidents of

 supporters who were already on the pitch, lashing out at Police
Officers. The Police Officers were trying to help people over the

fencing at the time, when a supporter struck them with their fists.

The supporters ran off into the crowd on the pitch immediately

afterwards. I also saw two supporters lashing out at each other, but

this was only a minor occurrence.

One of the supporters on the pitch went to the goalposts, and I saw

hiir swinging frcm the crossbar. He appeared to be trying to break it,

but failed to do so.

On the pitch, I could see among the crowd of supporters that there

were people lying down. They were being tended by some St Johns

Amfculance Staff, and by other supporters. I saw several people

adiT inistering   first aid. Seme were using cardiac massage and mouth to

mouth resuscitation. I could see that people were injured, and I think

sorre were dead, but I cannot describe any of these people in any way.

The situation in front of me was so confused that I cannot describe

any details of what may have occurred between about 3.10 (1510) and

3.50pm (1550). My recollection of this period is very blurred. Two

incidents I can remember, however, are firstly some sort of

announcement being made over the tannoy, of which I could understand

not one word. Secondly I can remember an ambulance driving onto the

pitch frcm the Penistone Road end of the ground.

At about 3.50pm (1550),               I decided to leave the ground. We

left through the Leppings Lane entrance and in leppings Lane itself I

noticed a Fire Brigade vehicle and Officers.

The person I went with to the match is

         Sheffield S8
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:               ?C
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
               LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260489                                                              (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the football match at

           Hillsborough I am a Liverpool supporter and I went with six mates on

           an AMBERLINE coach from Woodend Avenue, Speke.

           I em a season ticket holder and I paid #14 for a ticket in the North

           Stand - a seat.   We had no problons on the way to Sheffield.    The

           Police searched our coach but no alcohol was on the coach.

           We got to Sheffield at about ten minutes to two (1350) and parked in a

           coach park about half a mile from the ground.    I have been there about

           six times.   There was no trouble on the way to the ground and we got

           there about two thirty five (1435).   The queues outside the turnstiles

           were unbelieveable - there were so many people trying to get in I only

           sav four Policemen outside - two on foot and two on horses.      I saw one

           horse actually get lifted up in the crush at least 4 to 6 (4 to 6")

           inches. I got knocked to the floor - stayed down and crawled through

           everyones legs.   I managed to get up just by the turnstile. The man

           on the turnstile didn't take my ticket - he kept his foot on the pedal

           anc it kept rotating letting people in.   I had my ticket in my hand -

           he didnt ask for it and I just got pushed in.
                                                                            2


I saw a Policeman inside - there were a few of them standing inside

the blue gates - I said to one of them 'Theres going to be murder

there - you've got to get out and do something' They never budged -

they just stood there.

I had no problem, getting to the North Stand but people were sitting in

everyone elses seat.     I went down to the front and sat by an old man

anc woman.     I had a good view.   I sat down about ten minutes to three

(14 50).    I could see that the Leppings Lane end two middle pens were

packed.    There was seme room at either end - especially in pen 6. I

save a surge of the crowd in pens 3 and 4 this happened as

socn as Alan HANSON touched the ball.     They all cheered I saw people

caring over the top of the fence onto the pitch.      Some were just lying

there.     The old fella said to me, "go over and give them a hand'.

I cot over the low wall and walked around to try and help.      I leant

over the fence to try and pull people out, but I got dragged over the

fence.     I managed to keep hold of the wire mesh to keep myself out and

I cot back onto the pitch.

I saw a lad lying on the grass between the goal and the twenty five

yard (25 yds) box.     He was lying on his side - I rolled him over and

asked if he was alright - but he was dead.      I picked him up and put

hirr over my shoulder and carried him towards the c o m e r where the

first ambulance had come from.      A policeman pushed me and said, 'What

are you doing?' I said, 'This lads dead'.

The policeman took his coat off and put it over the lads head.          I

think the policeman then realised what had happened and ran off

towards the goal.

I carried the lad out to the gymnasium - I put him down and seen all

the others just lying there.

I collapsed with shock
       The lad I carried was only about 14 or 15 years old, he had

       either jeans or canvas trousers on.   He was wearing trainers. He had

       a shirt on - light or dark blue.

       When I was helping to pull people out there were only about six

       policemen doing the same, including a policewoman.    I saw her get

       pulled in. There rest of the police were stood along the halfway line.

       The Liverpool fans did everything.    Liverpool fans should not have

       been in the Leppings Lane end they should have been in the Spion Kop

       where there was much more room.



                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   260489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PS
                                                                           STATION

^E:

ADDRESS:
                               LONDON, GT LONDON,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 55

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I em a married man & I live at the above address.   I am an

           avid Liverpool F.C. fan & I go to every match they are playing.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended the F.A. Cup Semi

           Final at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, between Liverpool &

           Nottingham Forest F.C.

           I         vas in the North Stand with my wife & I took a reel of Photographs.

           At 11.20 hrs (1120) Saturday 13th May 1989 (130589) I handed to WPC

                        of the West Midlands Police 25 Colour Prints (Ref No

           1/1-25) (Exh No     ) and the corresponding 25 negatives      (Ref No

®          1-25 ) (Exh No     ).




                                                                                     2090
                                                   2


                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:          DATE:   130589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     PC




                                                       2091
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                              (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended Hillsborough

           Foctball Ground to watch the F.A. Cup Semi Final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest Football Clubs.   I was sitting in the North Stand.

           Frcm there I took a set of 26 photographs of the incidents that

           occurred there. I had the photographs developed at Photo Processing in

           Lord Street Liverpool 19-4-89 (190489).

           On Thursday 20th April 1989 (200489) I handed over the 26 colour

           negatives, which I produce in evidence (Exhibit        ) (Ref

           to                Df the Liverpool Echo.




                                                                                      2092
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                  2093
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:
                                    N YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060689                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am 34 years old, employed



                                          I regard myself as a respectable member

           of both my business and social communities.

           I have been a keen supporter of Liverpool Football Club for over 20

           years having attended hundreds of football matches both at Anfield,

           Liverpool or in various parts of the UK.

           I have attended an FA Cup semi-final before at Hillsborough between

           Liverpool and Leicester City in April 1974 (000474).

           I stood on the Leppings Lane terraces to the left of the goal frcm

           behind.    At that time there was no discomfort at all watching the

           gaire.    However I must record that for the last 10 years or so I have

           never attended a football match without a guarantee of a seat.

           Despite many attempts to obtain tickets frcm contacts in Liverpool

           including a Liverpool footballer there were none available.

           I used a business contact,

                       Nottingham, to obtain tickets for me.   These were bought

           frcm Nottingham Forest FC and I paid the face value of    14.00 for four




                                                                                      2094
tickets.

I vas accompanied to the game by              aged 7 yrs) and two

colleagues,                                     I remember commenting

on the allocation of tickets for the game as being ridiculous since

Nottingham were given more tickets than their average home league gate

with Liverpool receiving less than half of their average gate.

The ticket allocation resulted in perhaps thousands of fans being left

behind in Liverpool and hundreds travelling to the ground in the hope

of buying frcm a tout.

Having said that, at the time I arrived at my parking spot at

approximately 1.30pm (1330) I did not get asked the usual questions by

ticketless fans of 'Any spares'.

I row know that thousands of fans were still on their way from

Liverpool.

On the day of the game              met me at my house at approximately

mic-day.

The journey being approximately one hour 20 minutes frcm Harrogate to

Sheffield, it was plenty of time.

We picked up               at                              I^eds at

12.30pm (1230) and left immediately.

We estimated that it would take 30/40 minutes to drive frcm

      Leeds, down the Ml to the turn off for Sheffield.

We had pre-determined to leave the motorway at Junction 35.

This we had observed was the most southerly exit but still being to

the north of the ground.

Traffic on the motorway was light, driving conditions were good.

We spotted directions to the ground prior to junction 36 and was

surprised to see that the route signs, which were black and white and

placed by the police (not the distinctive yellow AA signs) instructed
traffic for Hillsborough to leave the motorway at Junction 36, not 35.

I vvas tempted to ignore the signs but didn't and left at Junction 36

at approximately 1pm (1300).     It may have been 1.05 to 1.10 (1305

1310).

Very soon we slewed up hitting a heavy traffic queue.

As we edged along (feeling frustrated) I was amazed to see traffic

converging on our queue from the right.

I knew that this traffic was from Liverpool from the flags etc., and

it has been a traditional route over the Pennines for many Liverpool

supporters who don't like travelling over the M62 and Ml.

In fact I recall that as long ago as 1963 (000063) when Liverpool

pleyed Leicester in an F A Cup Semi final at Hillsborough my own

father and his friends had to travel this way because the M62 didn't

exist. There is no doubt that it is more scenic and cheaper on petrol,

twe considerations which would weigh heavily in its favour.

I believe an extraordinary number of fans travelled this way because

of warnings in the local Liverpool press about M62 roadworks also.

At this road junction near     Chapeltown I cannot recall any police

directing the two sets of traffic into the main route in an orderly

way.

In fact the Pennine traffic had to wait for gaps in our queue to

join.    Even though it was only 1.15pm (1315) I began to worry about

getting to the game on time.

The ground was probably less than 10 miles away.

I row regretted not staying on the motorway until Junction 35.         I was

feeling frustrated and wondered why the Police had done this seemingly

stupid plan.

As we edged nearer an industrial estate the road was reduced by cones

 to single file (no roadworks were evident).



                                                                               2096
___________________________________                                     4


Police activity grew and all vans/coaches were being stopped and

boarded by Police.   Alcohol and weapons being the main objective.

This made the traffic speed slow.   A bottleneck was deliberately

created by the Police.   I now believe to ensure all vehicles to go

through one point.

I can remember thinking that if anybody had left later than us (from

Liverpool it is a two hour journey) then it would be touch and go

whether they would get to the ground in time.

             assured me that it would be no problem for us but added

thet it was a good job we left when we did.

I studied the map at home the next day and cannot understand why we

were not directed off at 35 or even coaches/vans at 36, cars at 35.

I believe from other people who attended from Liverpool that the

tailbacks up to and after two o'clock (1400) were miles long

stretching back to the motorway sliproad.

In try opinion this caused many thousands of Liverpool fans to arrive

late at the ground and it was total miscalculation by the Police.

I con't know whether the same routes were used in 1988 (000088).

After going through the inspection point (we were not stopped) we

travelled quite freely to the ground.   We assumed the correct route

was to go straight, following the flow. On the basis that we wanted to

be away after the match reasonably quickly we parked two/three miles

frcm the ground on a service road for a housing estate.

We were careful not to block a residential driveway and moved the car

once to ensure it was not a hindrance to anybody.

The walk to the ground was downhill. We passed a pub, shops and

supermarkets.

There were hundreds of Liverpool fans walking the same way.

The atmosphere was terrific with the general conversation amongst
                                                                        5


pec pie was about the great weather and the great game we were about

the watch.

Although some fans were drinking I saw no obvious drunkenness, loutish

behaviour, but plenty of high spirits.

The usual chanting broke out from time to time.

There were no Nottingham Forest fans in evidence at all.

Queues for fish and chips were orderly, fans sitting in the pub car

park were enjoying a drink from cans and sunbathing.

I rrust record that I thought the pub to the left of the route was open

for regular users, there were some people inside other pubs were

boarded up and closed.

Abcut 500 yards (500 yds) from the ground some Police were directing

fans to the appropriate parts of the stadium.

The majority walking along our route were Liverpool fans but we were

questioned by two Police Officers about our tickets.

They expressed some hurrerous surprise that we were going to the

Nottingham end but made no attempt to stop us.

At this point, purely as a precaution I turned my sons red Liverpool

jurrper inside out as we were about to join the throng of Nottingham

supporters arriving at the ground from the south of the city.

It was during this period that I realised the logic in the police,

decision to have the Nottingham supporters in the south stand and Kop

terracing and Liverpool fans at Leppings Lane and north stand.

It suited the geography of the city with respect to the direction that

supporters would travel to the ground.

As we approached our entrance area I did not witness any fans being

stepped or searched although this may have been happening at the Kop

turnstiles and not for the stand supporters.

I vould describe the policing around the south stand as being relaxed
                                                                            6

and casual.

We found our entrance quite easily and were at our seats at

approximately 1.40pm-1.50pm (1340 - 1350).

The scene inside was typical of a big match.

However, even at this early stage there were a lot more Forest fans in

their allocated areas than Liverpool.

As KO time approached I became very aware of the huge gaps in the

stend opposite (     stand) and on the terraces to the left (Leppings

Lar.e).

We commented that with half an hour to kick off time there must have

been at least half, if not more of the 20,000 or so Liverpool fans

still outside.

We irrmediately concluded that there must have been traffic delays with

our own slow progress to the ground.

The central area behind the goal in Leppings Lane was filling quite

rapidly and I guess that at 2.40pm (1440) it was completely full but

the other pens were almost empty.

At 2.50 I remember commenting about the empty seats opposite, worried

thst my own team would miss a lot of local support at kick off time.

The Leppings Lane central pens looked full to bursting point at this

tirre with huge gaps to the left and right pens.      As the match kicked

off fans were still rushing to their seats opposite.

I couldn't concentrate on the game because very soon after kick off I

saw   fans trying to climb out of the central p)en.

I vias distracted from looking at the problems in lappings Lane by a

shct by Peter BEARDSLEY which hit the bar.

I i[mediately looked back at Leppings Lane to see fans running frcm

behind the back of the stand into the pen to the far left frcm my

vartage point.
I row assume that the fans I saw running were doing so because they

hac tried to run down that central tunnel but that it was already full.

Alirost like water they found the next quickest route in their rush to

see what was happening on the pitch.

I then became very anxious and said to      that 'There's a problem

behind that goal'.

Fans were climbing over the fence and the Forest fans started

heckling, shouting scouse hooligans.

A policeman pushed one fan back into the crowd.

The fans were not invading the pitch.

It was obvious within seconds that it was a major crush problem.

The gate was opened.     Bruce GRDBELAAR had pointed to a   policemanto

open the gate but by   now the fans were on the pitch, pleading with

Liverpool players to stop the game.

I then saw a police officer run to the   referee and stop   the game.

There didn't seem to   be any urgency by the police for a   couple of

mirutes.

The Forest crowd became agitated and one supporter ran the length of

the pitch gesticulating to the Forest fans his anger.

The police started in earnest to help the fans at about 3.10 (1510).

As hundreds of police marched onto the pitch I was amazed to see them

lire up across the pitch and not help in the rescue operation.

The Forest fans were now aware of the seriousness of the problem and

quietened down.

I saw                  calming the Forest section.

There were no announcements to tell people of the problem except a

couple of times fans were told to clear the pitch.

This infuriated everybody on the pitch and made feelings run high.

The net was taken down and I could see policemen trying to tear down
the grilling with their bare hands.

Fans were now lying all over the pitch, one laid in front of us.

Twc or three people trying to revive him.      A policeman tried.

They all stopped the kid died before me.      He was put on an ambulance

stretcher and taken away.      Fans were using adverts as stretchers.

They were fantastic.

The Forest fans applauded.      However with the general atmosphere of

'Lets help'.    The police across the pitch stayed and did not break

rank.

To this day I cannot understand this.

An ambulance arrived and also the fire brigade.

During the mounting chaos I screamed out 'Why don't they relieve the

pressure by taking the fans out back through the tunnel.

It seemed ages before this happened.       I can only assume the tunnel

was blocked.

Far.s were being lifted up to the stand above.

Emergency services were non existent, ladders, cutting equipment,

oxygen would have saved lives.

I began to feel nervous and upset there were tears in all our eyes

except for                 who did not understand, thank God.

However, fearing the abandonment of the game and potential chaos on

the streets I grabbed            telling him to hold on and I left the

grcund.

I carried him for the whole journey back to the car.

Fans were streaming out of the Forest end very quiet and subdued.

A Liverpool fan we were walking with couldn't find his son.         Another

told of dead bodies, we thought he exaggerated at 20.

Having a car phone I was able to ring my mother and wife to tell her

             taere safe.
_________________________________                                          9


                 did the same.    We travelled home very subdued listening

to the radio reports of the mounting dead.

At home I went through the problems with my wife.

I was determined to let everybody know why the fans arrived so late, I

renain convinced that this was a major factor and should be brought

out in the enquiry.

I phoned 'Newsnight', the BBC, the Sunday Times.

I was horrified that all the news reports were concentrating on the

decision to open the gate.

That poor policeman picked up the tab for everybody elses

incompetence.     The fans were late.      Its as simple as that.

They are keen supporters.        They wanted to see a football match not

fight or drink or wreck.

The arrangements to get them to the ground were bad.

Pecple died as a result.

My summary is:

1.   Ticket allocation - wrong

2.   Ground choice - wrong

     (Liverpool canplained prior)

3.   Terracing arrangements - wrong

4.   Ground control inside - none.

     Leppings Ln was not filled properly

5.   Traffic delays - wrong

6.   Emergency facilities - none

7.   Opening the gate - the man had no choice.
                                                  10
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   060689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 PC




                                                       21 03
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                RUNCORN,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior. if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my mother.       I

           am employed by                                Runcorn, as a

                         I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and for the

           past two years I have held a season ticket for the Kop End.

           On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) my friend,

                       who is my workmate, rang me at hone to say that he had a

           spare ticket to the F.A. Cup semi final match at Hillsborough

           Foctball Stadium, Sheffield.     He said that one of his friends had the

           ticket but couldn't go so I could have the ticket for its face value,

           six pounds.    As far as I know the ticket was bought fran Liverpool

           Foctball Club by the lad who couldn't go, I don't know his name at all.

           I iret                  it the TRICORN PUB, RUNCORN at eleven o'clock

           (1100) that morning.

                    was with his brother,                 and another seven lads who

           I don't know.     They had all arranged to meet at the TRICORN PUB and one

           of the lads who I don't know was driving a mini bus that I believe he

           had borrowed frcjn his work.

           We all met in the car park of the pub and left straight away at




                                                                                        21 04
                                                                             2

eleven o'clock (1100).    None of us had a drink at the Tricorn.    We

all went to a shop near to the Tricorn Pub and bought four cans of

beer each, some of the lads said that when they had travelled to

Sheffield for the 1988 (000088) Semi final they were stopped by the

Police on the way and had to pour about twenty cans of beer away, that

was why we only got four each.

1'ir not sure what route we took to Sheffield but I do remember that

we got stuck in road works for about half an hour on a motorway.         I

dor/t remember any other major traffic delays on the journey.      We

stepped once at some motorway services to go to the toilet and to

throw away the empty cans.    We didn't buy or drink any more drink at

the services.   There were some other coaches and mini buses that

stepped at the services but I didn't see any fans drunk or causing

any trouble.

We arrived at Sheffield at about half past one (1330) that afternoon.

We parked the mini bus once in a side road about a mile frcm the

ground at the West Stand end of the area but some Policemen told us to

park in a car park that was about a hundred yards down the road.

We had got to that road on our own initiative because we knew the

rough lay out of the area frcm visiting Hillsborough before.       When

the Police told us to park in the car park that was the first positive

direction we had been given by the Police.

After we had parked the mini bus, all of us began to walk towards the

grcund.   Frcm where we had parked we could see the ground and had no

problems walking to it.    On the way to the ground I saw a number of

far.s drinking beer frcm cans.   The pubs were all boarded up but the

off licences were open and that was where people were getting the

drinks frcm.    I had no more to drink before the match.

There were four of us who had tickets to the LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE and
_______________________________                                             3


the rest had tickets for the seats in both the West Stand and North

Stend.   We all split up as we got to ground and the four of us with

tickets to LEPPINGS LANE made our way towards the that end.     Both

                  lad tickets to the North Stand and I don't know the

narres of the three lads who had tickets to LEPPINGS LANE.    When we got

to the area in front of the turnstiles to LEPPINGS LANE, one of the

lacs waited for seme mates and the remaining three of us carried on.

In front of the turnstiles, in an area where fans wait before going

through into the ground, this area was full of fans who were in one

bic mass with no organised queues at all.     I saw seme Policemen

standing immediately by the turnstiles and one mounted policeman in

amcngst the crowd, trying to get the fans into lines, but he had no

success.   Other than these, I didn't see any other Policemen in that

area organising the fans.

I cot to that area at about a quarter past two (1415) and it took

abcut ten minutes to get to the turnstiles.    There was no pushing at

that time and I had no difficulty getting to the turnstiles.     At the

turnstiles I handed the whole of my ticket to the steward who seemed

to run an electric pen on the ticket.    I think to test if the ticket

was forged or not.    He handed me half of the ticket back and I

carried on into the ground and met up with the tvro lads again.

When we all met up we walked straight through the middle tunnel and

into Pen 3.   I saw about ten policemen in the area between the

turnstiles and the tunnel and I think there were two stewards at both

encs of the tunnel.    There were no signs telling us where to go but I

could see the pitch through the tunnel so we went in that way.       When

we got into Pen 3 I was amazed that it was so empty at half past two

 (1430) because the year before it was full by that time.    Almost

imrediately I went back up the tunnel to get a hot dog from the area
by the turnstiles.   I saw about ten fans climbing over the wall by

the turnstiles and the Police inside that area didn't seem to react at

all. While I was getting my hot dog I went for a walk around and

walked round the side of the stand into Pen 1 and then 2.    Both of

these pens were quite empty but I prefer to stand behind the goal

because you get more atmosphere.    I saw three of my mates standing at

the front of Pen 3 and so I climbed over the fence between Pens 2 and

3 end went to see them.   They were stood up against the front fence

richt in the c o m e r up against the fence separating Pens 2 and 3.

The names of my mates are:_______________________________

             RUNCORN)               p don't know his address) and

             I don't know his address.    I would say I joined them at

abcut a quarter to three (1445) or ten to three (1450).     It was

artund this time that the pen began to fill up more but it was still

like a normal game at the Kop.

As the players began to run out, all the fans began to shout out the

pleyers names and I remember that just as we began to shout out Alan

HAKSEN's name that was when there was a massive surge from the back,

that was a lot worse than normal.

Just as this happened a lad jumped over from Pen 2 into Pen 3 and my

arrr got caught around him.   With the combination of the crush and me

panicking, because I couldn't get free from that lad, I fainted.       I

didn't see the game kick off because I was unconscious and when I

regained consciousness I was on the floor wedged against the side

fence and the wall at the foot of the front fence.

I was sitting on a metal drainage grid.     Immediately on regaining

consciousness I instinctively sat with my head between my knees with

my back against the side fence.     As I looked up I saw a man who

locked about 30 years old lying on the terrace with people walking
_______________________________                                           5


over him.   He looked quite a fat man and I could see his face.   His

face was very pale and he had spit round his mouth.   His eyes were

open but they were just staring at me.    I believe he was dead at this

tirre because he didn't move at all while people walked over him and

his expression never changed.

While I sat there people were walking over my back using me as a step

to get over the fences.    I could hear stewards and fans who had got

over the fence shouting to me through the fence asking if I was

alright.    I looked up to tell them that I was and I saw the police

standing by the gate in the front fence trying to push people back

into the pen.   The people were trying to tell the police what was

happening but they didn't seem to listen.    I saw a number of fans on

top of the front fence pulling pieople out and after a time the police

and stewards started doing the same.

After a time people stopped standing on me and I was able to get up

and I just ran up the terrace along the side fence between pens 2 and

3, across the back of pen 3 and back along the tunnel.

As I ran out I saw people crying everywhere and I saw a couple of

bodies lying on the floor but I can't say whereabouts exactly they

were or give any description of them.

In the tunnel I saw people standing up crying but I didn't see any

bodies lying down actually in the tunnel.    In the area between the

tur.nell and turnstiles I saw people standing around crying and when I

got to outside the ground, in front of the turnstile I saw a number

of bodies lying on the ground in the recovery position and a couple

of bodies lying with coats over their heads.

I went and sat on a wall for a short time and then began to walk back

towards the turnstiles.    As I got to the turnstiles I saw a body

lying down on the floor with a blue kagool coat covering his head.
                                                                          6

He was wearing a red tee shirt and blue jeans

                             When I saw him I was physically sick.

I began to walk back towards our mini bus and I saw about a hundred

policemen standing on the c o m e r by the bridge over the river DON,

they didn't seem to be doing anything.

As I walked back to our mini bus, local residents were allowing fans

into their houses to phone home and let any families know we were

all right.   One shop owner, a white lady, who owned a general store

was charging people two pounds for the use of her phone but the

residents didn't want anything.   One lad who had to pay the woman tvro

pounds told her to close the shop because people were upset by her

charging for the use of the phone and might cause damage.    The lady

didn't close the shop and a couple of lads went into the shop and

becan to smash things inside the shop and then the phone flew

through the window of the shop.   This was the only incident of its

nature I saw all day.




I vent to the 1988 (000088) Semi Final and the Liverpool fans were

allocated the same stands this year as then.    Last year there were

more policemen organising the fans queueing by the turnstiles and

there were proper queues, whereas this year there was no organisation

at all. I know that fans travelled without tickets, I would say about

twc thousand, and I know that people got in without having to show

their tickets.

I know a couple of lads who went without tickets and got into the
       grcund.     I don't know their names but I know they're from the local

       area.

       The Police in the ground seemed to react as though there was a pitch

        invasion and wouldn't listen to the fans who knew how bad it was.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

£         TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                               MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 161189                                                                 ®D)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.

           I support Liverpool Football Club and have held a season ticket for

        the Kop at Anfield, for the last 4 seasons.

        On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) Liverpool were to play Nottingham

        Forrest in the semi-final of the F.A. Cup.       I had obtained a #6 ticket

           for the Leppings Lane terrace, at the Hillsborough Football Ground,

           frcm Anfield.    I had been once before to Hillsborough stadium and

           that was an F.A. Cup semi-final, the previous year, involving the

           sarre teams.

           On that occassion I was on the Leppings Lane terrace, high up on the

           sice, between the West Stand and the North Stand.

           I had experienced no problems in the ground that year.

           On 15th April 1989 (150489), I left my heme on my own at about 7.20

           pm.(1920).     I caught the train to Hampton Square, Birkenhead.   Once

           there I met a friend                    Our football supporters coaches

           were due to leave from Woodside Bus Station, attached to this railway

           station, to travel to Sheffield.     At the bus station ____________

           went off to buy a newspaper and I never saw him again, until the
following day. I got onto one of the supporters club buses, which mast

have left at about 10.30 am(1030) for the journey to Sheffield.

I can't remember if our bus stopped on the journey or not.       Hie Police

did not stop or board our bus at any time.

The bus arrived in Sheffield at about 1.15 pm (1315). This       bus parked

on Herries Road, Sheffield, amongst other supporters buses.

I valked directly to the football ground.       I saw police officers

positioned along the route, although I was not escorted.

There was no disorder on the walk to the ground, it just seemed

perfectly normal.    The atmosphere was good.    People were all enjoying

themselves.   It was quite sunny, and dry.      I was dressed in blue

jeens, grey trainers and a red Liverpool top, with the word 'CANDY'

accross the chest.    I am a white male, slim build,               tall,

                          and I was clean shaven.

Just before 2 pm (1400) I arrived outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.   I joined a queue and entered the ground through a

turnstile, within 5 minutes.    I can't remember seeing policemen,

either on foot or on horses outside.    I had no problem getting inside.

Once inside the ground a policeman walked over to give me a body

check.   It was pretty quiet in this area.

I then walked down the tunnel leading to the Leppings Lane terrace.         I

had a free passage along the tunnel.    I remember about 5 people

walking out of the tunnel.

Once on the terrace, I moved towards my left, into pen 4. There was a

wall of fans at the back of pen 4.     I managed to squeeze my way past

these people onto the terrace into a position in Pen 4 identified on

the grid plan as K2.    It vrould be about 2.05 pm (1405) by now.       I did

not have a very good view as it was so packed.       I couldn't stand it in

the crowd.    As I was so near the tunnel, as others entered the
                                                                            3


terracing from the tunnel, they were continually pushing past me.       I

then decided after about 20 minutes to move.

I then moved to my left and further forward on the terracing, stopping

at a position L4, as shown on the grid index.     It would by now be

abcut 2.25 pm (1425) to 2.30 pm (1430).

I row had a good view, I was still subject to crowd pressure but not

particularly uncomfortable.     I was still in this position as the teams

were announced. When I heard Alan Hansen was playing, this caused

quite a stir in the crowd.

The terracing was tight.     I could see people behind me in Pen 4 and

then they were in the pen to my left.     I realised that they mast have

more room at the side of me.     I did not know how these people had got

into the area on my left.

I then decided to move to my left and climb the fence separating my

per. from the one on my left.    I was on my own and started to climb

over the railing.    One of my feet got stuck as I tried to get over and

pecple behind me then pushed my foot free and I managed to land on my

feet, in pen 5.     This would be about 2.50pm (1450)

I again climbed another fence on my left into pen 6.     I moved up to

nesr the back of this area.     The steps were shallow and I had to move

well back to get a good view.

In this position, I saw the teams come out and the game start at

this time, I saw a lad being passed overhead in the terrace, I only

caught a glimpse of this, I thought someone perhaps had fainted, and

was being passed to the front.

I saw fans spill onto the track over the fence.     I never thought a lot

of it, and it was only when I saw the policeman run on the pitch to

step the game, that I realised something was wrong.

My attention was now directed towards the crowd behind the Liverpool
                                                                                 4


goel.     I saw people, like a wave coming over the fence.

I thought the game would re-start once the fans were re-situated.

After about 5 minutes of the players leaving the pitch, I saw people

lying on the pitch.    A lad standing beside me, I don't know who he

was, he was on his own saying "Oh God, that's my mate out there what's

going on?"     This lad was upset and tugging at my shirt.     I'm not sure

if he thought he knew me, he was really freaking out.        Hie lad started

to walk down the terrace towards the perimeter fence.        He stopped,

locked around and said to me, "Help me over the fence" or similar

vrords.

I vent to the fence with the lad.     He climbed over the perimeter fence

hiirself.    I followed him over, onto the pitch.

We went behind the goal, but there was people arriving on the pitch

all the time.     It'was very busy we walked towards the penalty box.

I looked around and the man had gone.

I was just walking around.     I was aware of an announcement asking

pecple to leave the pitch.     I then walked in front of the North Stand

towards the Kop to leave the ground.

I remember the Forrest fans jeering.     I saw fans ripping at the

hoardings, I did not realise why they were doing this.

It would be about 3.40 pm (1540) when I left the ground.        I did lose

track of time.     I walked back to Herries Road, towards the coaches.        I

stepped to rest on Herries Rd.     I saw people queuing to use

telephones. I walked about to locate a phone, and I managed to use a

phene in someones house in Herrries Road, and I telephoned my parents

to let them know I was well.     I got heme around 10 pm (2200).     Our

coech was one of the last to leave.     It stopped at Sheffield Boy's

club where I think they took some of the bodies.     There was 2 lads who

were seated behind me on the way to Sheffield, who were missing.           One
       of the boys was called            he had red hair and wore black track

        suit bottoms.   I never heard anymore about him.

        I cid not lose any property that day.

        I cot slight scrapes getting over the railings, but nothing requiring

       medical treatment.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

^         TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                  PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                2115
                                                                            STATION

NAME:
•              I           I
ADDRESS:
                        ~~| SURREY

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I have lived at the above address

           I originally come from



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I travelled with 2 of my friends

           to Sheffield to go to the football match at Hillsborough.

           These friends' names are                and another man called

                                            the day before especially to go to

           Sheffield.    I do not know any further details about their names or

           addresses.

0 }        I had earlier purchased a ticket for the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest

           foctball match from Liverpool football club for #6.00.    This ticket

           was for the Leppings Lane end of the football ground, standing.

           Myself and my 2 friends caught a train at

           railway station, and we travelled to the main Sheffield railway

           station, arriving at 1.20pm (1320).    I am a Liverpool supporter and we

           were shown by police officers outside the station to a bus, which

           conveyed us to the Hillsborough football ground.

           We were not delayed on our journey at all to Sheffield although the




                                                                                       2116
bus journey from the station to the football ground took over an hour,

due to the volume of traffic on the road.

Before arriving at the ground, I saw a few people drinking beer,

although there was only a small minority that were drunk, and they

were drinking these outside on the road.    At this time I did not see

anyone fighting or any disorderly behaviour.

The bus dropped us off outside the football ground, by the river in

Leppings Lane, at about 2.25pm (1425), and we walked a short distance

to the Leppings Lane stand.     During this short walk, I noticed that

it was beginning to get very busy with supporters, although it was

not jam- packed at this stage.

When we arrived outside the ground, we walked into the area outside

the turnstiles.   This area was packed with people and I remember they

were not displaying any particular football colours.     For this reason

I was not sure if I was in the right place.     There were no directions

displayed telling us where to go, and the directions on my football

ticket were not clear either.

I could not see any stewards, wearing bibs, although I saw 4 police

officers on horses, and 2 officers on foot, who were outside the

turnstile, we eventually went through.

Eventually, because of the crowd pushing, the mounted policemen began

shouting to people to stand back and to stop pushing.     They were

directing people and trying to block their paths to stop too many

pecple pushing at once.

In order to find our entrance,                 approached a ginger-haired

mar. who was holding a handful of tickets trying to sell them to

pecple, and he asked the way.

He directed us, and we attempted to make our way towards the

turnstiles.   There was a lot of pushing and shoving, but we were not
crushed at all.   When I got to the t u r n s t i l e , | l think, after

managing to get to the front, because there was no queuing I asked the

steward on the turnstile if I could keep my ticket as a souvenir.

He said I would either have to climb over the turnstile or double up

with another person.   There was a small boy behind me who was with his

father.   I got hold of him, put him in front of me, and we went

through the turnstile together.   As a result, I managed to keep hold

of my full ticket, although I do not have this any longer.    I have

since sent it off to Liverpool supporters club for an enquiry that

they are conducting.

I did not see any gates open, or witness the opening of any gates

other than the turnstiles.

I did not see anyone climbing any perimeter walls to the ground or any

other unauthorised entry.

As I went through the turnstiles a policeman outside searched me.

Upcn my entry into the compound through the turnstiles, I did not see

any signs or directions displayed, to direct me to the stand.      I saw

no stewards or police officers either.

Directly in front of me I saw a tunnel and at the end of this I could

see the football pitch and the goals.    I wished to stand directly

behind the goals, so I began heading that way.    It seemed to me at

this time, that everyone else was also going the same way.

As I walked through the tunnel the standing area appeared packed.

There were a large number of people walking through the tunnel with

me, although I did not feel cramped.

As I walked through the tunnel and saw the standing area, I realised

that it would be too full and me and my friends discussed turning

round, but we soon realised that it would be impossible to go back,

due to the sheer volume of people.     Other than the volume of people, I
__________________________                                                4


die not experience any difficulties in getting through the tunnel.

I cid not see any stewards or police officers either in the tunnel or

in the pens.

AT the end of the tunnel, I walked to my right, into, pen 3.   It would

be about 2.45pm (1445) at this time, as I remember looking at a clock

displayed inside the ground.

I iranaged to push my way through the crowd inside the pen to take up

my standing position.    My eventual position was seme 15 feet (15')

awey from the perimeter fence on the pitch, and I was just right of

the centre of the pen.   When I took up my position with my friends,

and also with the young boy and his father, whom I entered the

turnstiles with, we had a reasonable space around us.    At this time,

the football teams were on the pitch, wanning up.

By 2.55pm (1455) the teams had come out, ready to play, and were given

a rapturous applause by the fans.    By this time, the pen was really

jarr packed.   We were pinned against the crash barrier, which was in

front of us.    My arms were down by my side, and I was unable to move

them, however, I was alright at this stage.

As the game began the Liverpool supporters in the standing area began

shouting for the players to stop the game, because not everybody was

in the ground, ready.    The Liverpool goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar mast

have thought that the fans were just cheering, because he turned round

briefly and acknowledged us.

Shortly after this, Nottingham Forest conceded a corner, and as a

result Peter Beardsley struck the bar with the ball.

This caused the crowd to surge forward, and pushed me against the

barrier, together with my friends, who were to my left and right.

After this happened, I saw many people lying on the ground, including

a large number of children.    There appeared to be people falling on
top of one another.     I just held onto the barrier, and tried to push

pecple back.   I felt a great sense of despair, seeing this, and I

began to help people to stand up.     By this time, I had lost my friends

whc had disappeared in the surge.

I helped approximately 6 people to stand up and would be about 2

feet (2') away from the pitch fence by now.

I then saw a young lad of about 12 years who was trapped ureter a

nurrber of other people on the floor.    I managed to pull him free,

however, he appeared lifeless.     I picked him up in my arms, and took

hiir over to the fence to try and pass him over.    I passed him to

another girl to hold, and I climbed over.      I shouted to a nearby first

aic man, who came over towards me.      I then helped the girl over the

ferce, who had been holding the boy.     By this time she had passed the

boy to a m an called            who was from Sheffield.   After helping

the lady over the fence, I noticed that the jeans she was wearing were

torn, and she had an injury to her left leg, which was bleeding.

        then passed the 12 year old boy over the fence to me, and I

carried him onto the pitch, to the back of the goals, and left him

with the first aid m an .

I remember that the young lad had fairish hair, and he was wearing a

Liverpool shirt which had a name on the back.      I noticed that his face

was blue, and his hand felt clammy.      I knew he was dead.

Myself and             and this girl must have been the first people over

the fence.

After leaving the young lad, I went over to Bruce Grobbelaar, because

the match was still being played, and grabbed him by the arms, and

tried to say to him, 'Brucie, it's Heysel all over again' although the

words would not come out properly.

He just looked at me, as if to say 'What's going on.'      Then 2 police
officers grabbed me and I explained to them what was going on and they

then appeared to understand what was going on.       They let go of me,

tock their coats off and ran off from the edge of the pitch towards

the police control room.

I inmediately ran back towards the fence where I had climbed over, and

I glanced back.    I saw then a police officer with braiding on his

shculder running onto the pitch, and he grabbed the referee.

I then climbed onto the top of the fence, and sat there, while other

fans passed me pieces of advertising boards.     I realised they would be

of little use in the pens, because of the volume of people crushed

against the fence.     I looked at the faces of people pressed against

the railings and saw that they were blue.

I then assisted 3 or 4 lads, with              help to climb the fence.

After this I looked across and saw 2 girls whcm I recognised as being

stcod in front of me at the start of the match.        I now know them to be

                                       They were pressed right up against

the fence, just a short distance away from me.        I climbed back into

the pen and            followed me

When I got to them I saw the girls' faces were completely chalk-white,

a n c w a s       pointing to her leg, as if to tell me it was hurting,

although she was unable to say anything to me, and she passed out.

I somehow managed to drag            over the fence, and carried her over

to the pitch where         was lying and            was standing over her.

By this time there was a number of bodies on the pitch.

I saw a woman first aider approaching and grabbed hold of her.        She

then assisted                    and I left them.

I vent across the fence again and back into the pen.        I had to go into

per. 4 because of the advertising hoardings by pen 3.       I climbed the

ferce which separates the 2 pens into pen 3 with the help of people in
per 3.    Inside pen 3 I saw many people lying on the floor and the

pecple left standing appeared to be motionless as if in shock.    I saw

there were persons moving slightly on the floor, who had lifeless

bodies on top of them, and together with another policeman we started

to move bodies to assist and free those alive underneath.

We then placed them onto advertising hoardings that had been placed on

top of the perimeter fence and the injured persons would slide down

the board to awaiting help the other side.    We did this for about 8

pecple and myself and another policeman climbed back over the fence,

onto the pitch side.    By this time I was physically shaking through

both exhaustion and shock.

It was then that a policewoman grabbed hold of me.     She stopped me

going back into the pen, saying that I'd done everything I could.        I

car remember feeling very angry and frustrated, because she was

stepping me and remember the numbers on the uniform as being

I then sat on the floor and think I went into shock.     I sat with my

heed in my hands and cannot remember much after then.

Then the next thing I remember a first aider come up to me and looked

at tty right ankle which had been injured.   It was swollen and badly

bruised. He gave me a tubi-grip to put on my ankle.

The next thing I remember is that I looked at my watch, which was

broken.    I noticed the time on it was 4.55pm (1655).

Then I left the ground of my own accord with a few other Liverpool

fars, and outside the ground we caught a bus back to the railway

station.

On the way back              on the train, a weman started saying to me

that fans had been looting people's pockets.     She obviously hadn't

been to the match, and I remember feeling angry towards her because at

no time did anything like this go on.     I never saw anything that you
                                                                                8

       could call a criminal offence and there was no drinking or disorder

       before the game.

       Locking back, I think that there was only one thing that I would

       criticize in the way the incident was handled.   I think that there was

       a lack of communication, in that there were no stewards visible to me,

       and there could have been better communication between the police.

        I think that once people realised what was happening the incident was

       har.dled adequately although it initially took too long for them to

       realise what was going on.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                    2 i 23
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                           NORTH ALLERTON, NORTH YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130789                                                                SIGNED)



           I am a married man,

           North Allerton, North Yorkshire.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the Football Association

           Challenge Cup Semi-Final match at Sheffield Wednesday football ground

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I have been a supporter of Liverpool Football Club most of my life,

           until                                  January 1987 I was a frequent

           supporter attending both heme and away matches.

           I travelled to the match with

                   (26 yrs) both of _____________________

                   and a young lad called           who lives in         Liverpool,

           but I don't know this lad's last name or address,

           will know more about the lad.      We all travelled together in

           car.

                   got my ticket for me from Liverpool Football Club, it was a six

           pound ticket for the Leppings Lane terraces.

           We left Aughton in Lancashire at 11am (1100) and travelled by motorway

           to Manchester, when we had passed Manchester we went on an 'A' road
which took us to Hillsborough via Stockbridge, we never stopped

anywhere on route to Sheffield.

We were held up at a large traffic island by the end of the M67

motorway, the traffic was very heavy,          commented that last year

there were a lot of police in the area at the end of the M67 motorway

to control the traffic, but this year I couldn't see any police at the

location, we were delayed in that area for between 30 and 40 minutes.

We arrived in Sheffield at 2pm (1400) and parked our car by a park

just off a main road, I don't know the name of the road, but it was

abcut a mile and a half from the football ground.

We walked frcm where we had parked the car down the main road towards

the football ground, we joined a large number of other Liverpool

supporters who were also making there way towards the ground, we never

received any directions or escort frcm the police.

The only police directions I saw was a wcman police officer stopping

cars and turning them around.     I did notice that there didn't appear

to be a very large police presence on the route towards the ground,

certainly not the amount you would expect at a semi-final.

Whilst walking towards the ground I saw a few supporters drinking beer

frcm cans, but I never saw any signs of drunkeness, or any disorder or

fighting.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground at about 2.20pm

(1420) my dad who had a seating ticket for the West Stand had stopped

at a public toilet on the way and we had carried on to the ground

without him.

On arriving at the Leppings Lane entrance, I wasn't sure which

turnstiles we had to go to, the signs weren't very clear but luckily

                had been to the ground before and he pointed out which

turnstiles we had to go to.
                                                                           3


There were a large number of people at this time about 2.20pn( 1420) in

frcnt of the turnstiles, they weren't in orderley queues just in a

mass in front of the turnstiles.

I can remember seeing I think two mounted policemen outside of the

outer perimeter gates which were open, we walked through the outer

perimeter gates and joined onto the mass of people a few feet inside

the outer gates.

We moved forwards quite quickly towards the turnstiles, I can remember

seeing either one or two mounted policemen in amongst the supporters

in the area inside the outer perimeter gates.

As I recall the mounted officers inside were moving their horses about

trying to organise the supporters into some assemblance of queues, but

it was obvious that because of the large numbers of people present

they could do nothing to control or organise people into queues.

At about 2.30pm (1430) we had moved forwards to within a few yards of

the turnstiles.    The crowd although disorganised was moving forward

anc getting through the turnstiles, When all of a sudden I looked

behind me and I saw a huge mass of people approaching from behind, I

was amazed at where such a large amount of people had suddenly come

frcm.

As this mass of people joined on behind us a crush began I could feel

the pressure around me increasing and the situation was becoming

frightening.

I can remember three policemen standing over to my right hand side by

the corner of the terrace turnstiles, they were shouting at people to

get into queues, but people were singing behind and you could barely

hear them.

As the situation got worse, with the crush increasing in intensity one

or two mounted policemen got amongst the supporters behind me.      They
were moving the horses about obviously in an attempt to organise the

mass into queues, but this action just frightened the supporters more

anc caused a lot of angry reaction, I can remember supporters shouting

at the police to be careful because of the youngsters in the crowd.

I can't remember- seeing any stewards present outside the ground.

At about 2.35pm (1435) myself,                    managed to enter the

grcund through a turnstile, we had all managed to keep together, we

had to hold o n t o b o      protect him from the crush outside,



I handed my ticket into the turnstile operator.

I hadn't seen any gates open whilst outside the turnstiles, I never

saw anyone closing the outer perimeter gates.      I did not witness any

unauthorised entry to the ground although I had seen a few young lads

climbing up on the wall which separates the area outside the West

Stand and terrace turnstiles.

After going through the turnstiles I purchased a programme and myself

anc          went to the toilet.

I rever saw any signs directing me to the terracing,                told

me we had to go down the tunnel to get to the terraces and I presumed

that the tunnel was the the only entrance, I saw no signs to

indicate any other entrance points.

I rever saw any policemen or stewards in the area of the entrance to

the tunnel.

All three of us walked through the tunnel we had free passage

alcng the tunnel and entered onto the back of the terraces into

per. number four at a time I would estimate to be about 2.38pm. (1438).

Myself and        had decided that we would work our way over the back

of the pen, to the left to get across into the next pen (pen number 6)

because pen number 4 was too packed.
The three of us started to work our way over towards the left, there

were some lads jumping about hitting what I think was a beach ball

abcut, the terraces were very packed.

As we were moving across to the left towards pen number six it was

getting very uncomfortable so I held onto young          who was getting

frightened.

As we moved across the terraces the pressure of the crush was

gradually increasing and I kept hold of        but got separated from



At about 2.45pm (1445) myself and         ended up in a position which

I believe to be about the position I have indicated on   the separate

scele plan of pen number 4, this position I have marked as number one

(1) on that plan (Ex No      )(Rsf no

I could see lads climbing over the dividing       fence intopen     number 5,

the pressure was gradually increasing and we were being moved forwards

down the terraces towards the pitch.

We were being moved forwards and then I remember the players running

onto the pitch as they were announcing the players names there was a

sudden severe increase in pressure and I was pushed forwards to a

position I have marked as number two (2) on the plan.

I had lost my grip on        and I could hear him shouting, he was a

few feet away to my left and slightly to the rear.

After I got to position (2) at about 2.55pm (1455) just as the players

ran onto the pitch the crush pressure was very severe I had pains in

my chest and I was gasping for breath.

I was stuck in position number two (2) I couldn't move, my arms were

stuck down by my side, I was just stuck there I can remember there

were people panicking all around me.

I could hear         shouting and I was shouting to him to keep calm.
I was concentrating on what was happening to          and I never saw

anything of what was going on, on the pitch.

I knew the game had kicked off because of the roar from the

Liverpool fans, occasionally I saw glimpses of the game going on,

after this I remember a big roar from the crowd. I didn't know

at the time what caused the roar but now I believe it was as a result

of Peter BEARDSLEY hitting the cross bar.

When this big roar occurred, when I believe BEARDSLEY hit the cross

bar there was another increase in pressure, it was a sudden increase

in pressure.     I wouldn't say it was a surge, although we were that

tichtly packed together there was no room for any surge to be felt.

Just after this big roar went up I saw through a gap in the people in

frcnt of me a policeman wearing a flat cap run onto the pitch.

I started to take more notice then about what was going on around me,

I could see people trying to climb up over the perimeter fence.

Inmrediately in front of me there was a bloke with red hair and I think

he was wearing a red shirt.      I heard him say something like, 'She's

gone, she's gone'.

I then saw in front of this bloke a girl, she was a white girl, aged

I vvould say in her late teens, no older than twenty, she had as far as

I can remember mousey coloured hair which was brushed back, with a bit

of a fringe I think she may have had a quiff in her hair at the front.

I can't describe the girl's face other than the colour was drained

frcm her face and I could see her lips were blue, I believe this girl

was dead.      I can't describe her anymore.

Suddenly this girl disappeared from my view I believe she had dropped

down onto the terraces, as she dropped down a gap appeared in front

and I saw that the girl had been up against a crush barrier.      Me and

another lad put our legs up and put our feet on the barrier to push
backwards.

We held ourselves back from the barrier in this way for a short time,

we helped a young lad up who had just suddenly appeared on the floor

below the barrier.

When this girl I have previously described fell away from ray view it

was just shortly after I had seen the policeman run on the pitch, the

policeman in the flat cap who I now know had run on the pitch to stop

the game.    After a while I can't be sure exactly how long I managed

to climb up onto the barrier in front of me and I climbed over the

dividing fence into the narrow pen (number 5).    I went down towards

the front of the pen and went out through the gate onto the pitch.

I eventually after wandering about on the pitch found both           and

      ;hey were both okay neither of them had been injured.

The only injuries I sustained was internal muscular bruising




All four of our party eventually got together and left the ground of

our own accord at about 4pm (1600).




The only observations I can offer in regards to the way the incident

was handled after the match was stopped is that I consider that there

was a severe lack of cortmunication between the police amongst

thereselves and a lack of camnunication between the police and

everyone else.



                                                                           2130
                                                                                 8
          There was a total lack of understanding by the police of what was

          occurring, the performance of the police totally destroyed their

          reputation on that day in my opinion.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

            TIME:            DATE:   130789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^ F I C E R S SIGNATURE:             POL PC




                                                                                     2131
                                                                             STATION

NAME:
•
ADDRESS:
                  |
                  _________
                  I
                            LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 301189                                                                SIGNED)



           I am a single person and the above address is that of my parents.




           Tel No

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA

           Cup Semi-Final Football Match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           at the Hillsborough Ground in Sheffield.

           I attended as a Liverpool supporter and have supported them all my

           life.       I attend heme and away matches whenever possible.

           At the time of the Hillsborough disaster,

           anc I travelled to Hillsborough                   by bus.   I travelled to

           the ground with the following person:

           (1 )

                      East Sussex.



                        Sheffield.   Tel No

           At the time of travelling to the ground, neither             or myself had

           match tickets.       I had previously tried to obtain a match ticket but




                                                                                        2132
                                                                            2


had been unable to do so and it was my intention to try and buy

tickets at the ground.

       and myself caught a bus from the main railway station in

Sheffield to the ground.     The bus was specially laid on for Liverpool

supporters.   The bus dropped us off by the traffic island at the end of

lappings Lane by Penistone Road.      We got off the bus at about one

o'clock (1300).     Even at that time, it was very busy around the area

of the ground, with a lot of Liverpool and Forest supporters at their

respective ends of the ground.     After leaving the bus, we had a walk

around the general area of the ground to see if there was anybody

offering match tickets.    We walked around for quite a bit without

seeing anybody offering tickets.     We then started asking people if

they had tickets.    We were asking at both ends of the ground.

At about half past one (1330), I saw three of my friends

talking to a man near to the traffic island where we had got off the

bus.   The friends that I saw were:


(1)
(2 )

(3 )



I vent over to them and saw that they were buying tickets frcm the

person.   The person was selling standing tickets for the Kop end of

the ground at ten pounds each.                               each bought a

ticket and I paid the person twenty pounds for two Kop tickets.         I did

not know the person who was selling the tickets nor had I seen him

before.   He did not speak with any noticeable accent and I assumed

that he was a Nottingham lad because he was only selling Kop tickets.

After buying the tickets we all stayed together and again walked

arcund the area of the ground to see if we could swap the Kop tickets
_____________________________                                               3


for lappings Lane tickets.    We were still looking to swap the tickets

when we came round to the Liverpool end of the ground in Leppings

Lane.   We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about quarter-to-

twc (1345).    The reason why we went to the Leppings Lane turnstiles

was to try and swap our Kop tickets.

During the time that we spent walking around the area of the ground I

did see several supporters drinking cans of beer in the street, both

Forest and Liverpool supporters.     Some supporters were carrying crates

of drink.     I did see some supporters who were drunk both Liverpool and

Forest supporters, but there was no real disorder or fighting.

There were quite a few people in the area of the turnstiles at

querter-to-two (1345).      It was quiet in the turnstile area itself

with just a few people entering the ground.    There were Policemen by

the outer iron gates who were telling people to enter the ground or

move away from the turnstile area.     There were two mounted Policemen

outside the perimeter gates who were also moving people away frcm the

gates if they weren't making their way to the turnstiles.     While we

were in the area of the outer gates I heard two supporters talking

abcut entering the Leppings Lane turnstiles using Kop tickets.      I did

not know the supporters but I watched them go to a turnstile and they

both entered the ground using their Kop tickets.     Having seen this, we

all decided to try and do the same thing.     We all approached the twin

turnstiles on the right hand side of the block as you look from the

street.     We each went through one of those two turnstiles and handed

in our Kop tickets.     The turnstile operator did not say anything and

let us all through.     I was given the stub portion back, which I have

sir.ce disposed of.    I suppose that our entry to the Leppings Lane end

was unauthorised, but apart from that I did not see any unauthorised

entry into the ground.     I did not see any stewards outside the
                                                                         4


turnstiles.

Once inside the ground, I did not see any signs giving directions to

the terraces, all I saw was the central tunnel that runs underneath

the West Stand.   I had been to the ground on a previous occasion when

I attended a Liverpool-Sheffield Wednesday League match.    On that

occasion I used the central tunnel to get access to the terraces and I

thought that the tunnel was the only means of access to the terracing.

I cid not see any disorder or fighting inside the ground.    I did not

see any people drinking or any drunkenness.

We all walked along the central tunnel towards the terraces.    It was

very quiet in the tunnel and we had a free passage along it.    I did

not see any Police or stewards either at the entrance to the tunnel or

anywhere inside it.

At the end of the tunnel we all went to the right hand side and into

whet I now know to be pen number three.     It was about ten to two

(1550) when we entered the pen.    It was fairly busy in the pen at that

tirre and we had to push our way through the people to get to the front

of the pen.   We were able to get to a position towards the front of

the pen without too much difficulty.

Our first position was about fifteen feet (15') frcm the front fence

anc towards pen four.     I have marked this position on the separate

grid plan using the figure one.    We had quite a bit of space in

position one at ten-to-two (1350) and were able to read our programmes

without any difficulty.    During the next ten minutes, the pen was

filling up and we began to be pushed around by the crowd. Because of

this we all decided to move to the rear of the pen and get up against

the wall, so as not to get pushed around.     I had hoped to watch the

match frcm position one as it was a good view, but      the pushing became

toe much. Position one would have been a good spotfor
______as Hillsborough was the first football match that she had ever

been to.

We all went to the rear of the pen and stood up against the rear wall.

I have marked this position on the separate grid plan using the figure

twc.

Frcm two o'clock (1400) onwards, the pen was continually filling up

anc becoming more packed.    We didn't feel any discomfort, but it was

filling up very quickly.

It wasn't until about ten-to-three (1450) that I began to feel

uncomfortable.   It was very packed in the pen by then and we were

slcwly being pushed across the wall, towards pen two.

I watched the players come out onto the pitch and I saw the game kick-

off. By now it was very tight in the pen and we were being squashed.

However, because the match was in progress, any discomfort was

secondary to what was happening on the pitch.

I had a good view of the pitch and was watching the game.            was

not watching the match and was concerned that something was wrong.         I

saw the move that led to Peter BEARDSLEY hitting the Forest crossbar

at the other end of the pitch.    There was a large verbal response

frcm the crowd and there was an obvious surge forwards by the crowd in

per three.   It was at this point that people started climbing over

the front fence and my reaction to that was 'What's going on?'.      For

all I knew it could have been a pitch invasion.    There were also

pecple at the rear of the pen who were being dragged up into the

seating area above us.     There were people shouting towards us, "Get

back, get back."    We couldn't get back any further, we were right up

against the wall.

I saw the game being stopped and it was about that time that a man in

the seating area above me was looking down at          who was next to
m e . The man looked at______ and said, "Fucking get her up here now."

He said it with real urgency so I gave          a foot-lift up and the

mar pulled her up to the stand above.    As soon as        tfas up in the

stand, I was pulled up into the stand as well.     It was a state of real

par.ic by now.   I was still unsure as to exactly what was happening.       I

then remained in the stands as the disaster unfolded underneath me.

I saw people being assisted out of the pen who were obviously

seriously injured, however, I did not witness any deaths.

      and I remained in the stands for about fifteen minutes until we

reelised just how serious things were and decided to leave. We then

left the ground at about twenty-past-three (1520).

Throughout the course of the afternoon, I did not witness anything

thet I would consider to be a criminal offence.

I cid not receive any injury at Hillsborough.

I produce the separate grid plan indicating positions one and two.

I did not witness the barrier breaking in pen three and was not aware

at the time that a barrier had broke.

I would like to say that I would not put any blame on the South

Yorkshire Police for the disaster.    They, like many Liverpool fans,

were not aware that a tragedy was unfolding.     It would not be fair to

bleme the Police for the disaster.    Overall, I think there was bad

planning, mainly by the FA, particularly in relation to the incorrect

allocation of ends.
                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:        301189

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          PAUL
£              HAND

ADDRESS:
                          LANCASHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050889                                                            (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and live at the above address with my family.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended the FA Cup semi final

           match played between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at the

           Hillsborough ground, Sheffield.    I am a Liverpool supporter and am a

           season ticket holder and attend most home matches and have only

           visited Wembley away from home.

           I obtained my ticket from Anfield and paid #6 for a lappings Lane

           Standing ticket.

           I travelled by car to the match with

                          we left             at about 9.30 am (0930) and travelled

           straight to Sheffield and we were not subjected to any delays.

           We arrived in Sheffield at some time between 11.30 am (1130) and

           nocn (1200).   We parked the car on a pub car park.    I can't remember

           it's name, but it was on a hill.

           We all went into the pub we had a drink, but it was awful and after a

           couple of mouth fuls we left and went across to the chip shop and

           bought some food there and walked on down to the ground.

           Whilst walking to the ground we received no Police direction or escort
HMD                  PAUL                                                    2


but there were quite a few officers about.    I did not see any

violence disorder or drunkeness whilst going to the match.     Although

there were other supporters in the pub we'd used there was no

drunkeness in there either.

We got to the ground at about 1.15 pn (1315) and bought our programmes

outside and sat and read them for about 20 minutes.     We then decided

to go into the ground.   There were no queues at all.    I had no

difficulty finding my set of turnstiles and had no difficulty getting

into the ground. B

There were a number of Police officers inside and outside the

turnstiles searching everybody.     I remember there were a couple of

stewards outside but I can't remember any inside.      I handed my ticket

in as I went through the turnstile.    I did not see

any gates other than the turnstile open on being opened.

Once inside the ground we all went down the tunnel.     As far as I was

concerned that was the only way onto the terracing and I did not see

any signs directing us elsewhere.

There were no Police officers or stewards controlling the tunnel.       We

hac free passage along the tunnel in fact we were the only pecple in

it.

At the end of the tunnel we went right onto the terracing and sat down

to read our programmes seme more.     This would have been about 1.45 pn

(1245).   That area was fairly empty with only about 30 people in it.

I have indicated on the attached plan where we initially took our

viewing position this being E3.

After about half an hour it began to get packed around us as more and

more people came in but nothing excessive.     We could see there

was plenty of space at the front so we moved down there.

We stood about 12' (12') from the front fence and there was a barrier
HAKD                   PAUL                                                 3


behind us about 2'-3' (2' - 3') away.

I have indicated on the attached plan this position with the figure

1A, this being at point C7.

At this point I was still with ray three friends.            was just

slightly behind me and the others were to ray right.    As time went on

more and more people came in and it began to get a bit

crowded, but again no more than normal, I certainly wasn't worried by

it.

But by about 2.45 pm (1445) I realised it was becomming tighter than

normal. Over the next few minutes the crowd swayed forwards and

backwards but I couldn't see what was causing it.

I became aware of two girls in the crowd near to me initially they

were behind me but with the swaying they were brought in front of

me.    They looked quite distressed.

They were in their late teens with one older than the other.     They

both had blonde/brown straight hair, I think it was the elder one she

was wearing a brown leather pilots jacket with motifs on the back.

Eventually the younger one of the two fainted with the pressure that

was building up around us.    She did not fall to the floor the pressure

of bodies kept her up.    After a couple of minutes she came round

again.    People around the girls asked if they wanted to get out but

the older one said "No we're alright"    When she spoke I realised she

wasn't a 'scouser' or frcm up North she sounded like a Southerner but

I couldn't say where abouts exactly.

We shouted to a Police Officer on the track round the pitch, he was

standing right in front of us and looking at us.    The people were

shcuting at him to get the girls out, but he just ignored us and

walked off.

I remember the players coming out onto the pitch.      At about this time
HAKD                   PAUL                                                    4


there was a sudden surge from behind this time it didn't go back.          I

was totally trapped with ray arms down by ray side.

Just before the surge the girls were still in front of me but they

just disappeared.    The pressure just kept coming on, ray legs were by

no*- trapped, but, I couldn't tell on what, ray body kept being pushed

but ray legs stayed still, I was being pushed sidewards ray legs were

being pulled from under me and I thought they were going to break, the

pain all over was intense.       You couldn't struggle to free yourself so

I stayed still to try and get some air because it was getting

difficult to breath.

Suddenly there was a release from behind I think I fell sidewards I'm

not sure because I think I passed out.       The next thing I remember was

waking up and there were bodies all around me, ray legs were trapped

and I was lying on top of people.       I don't know whether they were

alive or dead.    I was just trying to get out.

Pecple were lying across ray stomach, I was looking up I heard a man

say "There's a live one here."       I put ray arm out but he couldn't move

me then either this man or another and           managed to pull me out.

The problem was ray right shoe was wedged against something.      When I

was pulled out I left ray shoe in the pile of bodies.

My shoes were 'Sigini' Size 10 They were black with brogue pattern on

the top with yellow/brown laces.

After I'd been pulled out I went to the side fence next to Pen 2 with

       to get ray breath back.    All I could see was this pile of bodies,

there was nothing between it and the front fence, at that time there

were no Police officers in the area, but I was aware of the front gate

out of the pen was op)en.

I remember the gate had been opened once before that was during the

main surge, but before I went down it was opened and closed again.
HAKD                   PAUL                                               5


I have indicated on the attached sheet where I was pushed to in the

final surge and where I got trapped.    This is with the figure 2, at

point C8.

After getting ray breath back I climbed over the front fence towards

the pitch.    As I got to the top I fell over it and I was caught by

sorre Police officers on the other side.

I was told to go on the pitch so I did with          and we found

anc then a short time later we met         and we went to the side of the

pitch.

I think we left the ground at about 4.15 pm (1615) of own accord and

we travelled home.    The only injuries I received were pains in ray

chest and a terrible headache on the day, I have not sought medical

treatment for this.

Whilst in the ground I did not see anything I consider to be a

criminal offence and I did not witness the consumption of alcohol in

the ground.     I know that one of the barriers broke in the area I was

in and it must have been close to me, but, I did not see it break.

In my opinion the Police in the control box must have seen what was

going on and should have directed people away frcm the centre

sections.     There should have been more Stewards   inside the ground

guiding people away from the tunnel.     P Hand




                                                                              2143
        HAKD              PAUL                        6

                                      P HAND SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          1IME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:              PS




                                                          2144
                                                                   6/9/89 STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                          DERBY,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 49

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statanent consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 131289                                                             (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the Semi Final between

           Nottingham Forest and Liverpool held at the Hillsborough Football

           Ground, Sheffield, together with




           We arrived at the ground at around 1.30 pm (1330) and checked into the

           Press Room and then eventually went onto the pitch.     I took a number

           of crowd photographs and waited for the kick off.     After the teams had

           core out I waited for the toss up to see which end of the ground

           Nottingham Forest would be attacking and then I ran to that end of the

           grcund which is the Leppings Lane end.   I positioned myself facing the

           pitch on the right hand side of the goal posts just to the right of

           the six yard line.   I was right up against the back of the hoardings

           arcund the pitch on the perimeter track and there set up my camera

           equipment, this was virtually kick off time at 3.00 pm (1500).

           Alirost immediately I became aware of what I thought was a crowd

           disturbance quite distinct from the crowd noise at a normal kick off.

           I looked over my left shoulder towards the terracing and West Stand




                                                                                       2145
                                                                          2


anc saw fans trying to climb over the fence and being prevented from

getting over by Police Officers.    My immediate impression was that it

was going to be a pitch invasion.

Within a minute I turned completely round and looked directly behind

me and saw faces squashed into the wire mesh and they were in total

distress.   There were large numbers of people crushed against the

fence in what appeared to be layers.

I immediately realised that something was radically wrong and I took

sorte pictures of what was happening.

Within a very short space of time it became obvious that semething

shculd be done and I started to shout to a senior Police Officer who

was four to six yards away from me towards the South Stand on the

gress on the edge of the pitch.     I continued to shout to the officer

but he did not respond.   By this time I had been forced over the

hoardings by the number of supporters who had ccme onto the running

trsck.   The Officer had still not taken any action but at the time I

was aware of Policemen assisting supporters coming over the fence and

at this stage the perimeter gate I now know to be Gate 3 was still

shut.

I vas now on the pitch being forced there by the supporters coming

onto the running track.   Just after this a Senior Police Officer ran

onto the pitch upto the referee and stopped the game.     I then moved my

equipment away from the crowd and then went back to see if I could

assist at the fence but saw it was a hopeless situation and then moved

away because of the aggression and abuse being shown towards us

because we were obviously photographers.
                                               SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     S BEECHEY D/SUPT 360
                                                                            STATION

NAME:          STEPHEN
               ELLIS

ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIR1H: 34

OCCUPATION:     PHOTOGRAPHER FREELANCE   -


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 301189                                                      S ELLIS (SIGNED)



           I vork on a freelance basis for Sheffield Newspapers, and Sheffield

           Wednesday Football Club as official photographer.

           I ettend all Sheffield Wednesday football matches both hone and away.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended Sheffield Wednesday

           Foctball Club, Hillsboro to cover the semi final between Liverpool and

           Notts Forest as the official club photographer.       As such I was wearing

           the official club bib.

           I actually arrived at the ground about 12.30 (1230) part of ray

           responsibilities is to liaise with the National Newspaper

           photographers and club officials.    Having completed this task and

           organised the visiting photographers I walked out of the players

           entrance and round the perimeter track to behind the goal at the

           Leppings Lane End of the ground, where the Liverpool fans were

           situated.    I positioned myself to the left of the goal, when facing

           the pitch.    The time would have been about 1445 hrs to 1450.     I was as

           far as I remember the only photographer that side of the goal.       To

           actually pinpoint ray position I was directly behind the advertising

           boards between gates 4 and 5.     Nearer to gate 5.
ELLIS                STEPHEN                                                 2


I remember looking around at the crowd, and noticing a lot of space in

the outer pens.   I commented on this to a Police Constable sat behind

me, a couple of yards towards gate 5.   He was sat on his stool.   This

officer was in the same position for all games, and over a period of

tirre I've got to know him as PC John ILLINGWORTH.   I could see the

twc centre pens were very full with fans right up against the fence.

At this time there was just the normal crowd noise going on, just

prior and just as the teams came onto the field.     I did not hear any

of the fans calling for help.    My back was towards the crowd at this

stage as I set up my equipment ready for the kick off.

Just after kick off I began to hear fans screaming out for help,

particularly from two girls at the front, who were pressed against the

fer.ce as I looked round, to my right, they were young girls dressed

in Liverpool tops and scarfs.    I cannot describe them any further.

It was at this stage that fans began to climb over the perimeter fence

onto the track.   I heard people shouting for help but I heard none

shcuting for the gate to be opened.

There were only about 5 police officers on the track at this stage.

My first reaction was it was a crowd spillage, onto the pitch, some

fars were also climbing out of the central pens into pen 5 and onto

the pitch.   The Police Officers including PC ILLINGWORTH were trying

to tell the fans to get back, and push back to relieve the pressure

at the front.

All the fans I saw come over the fence weren't injured, the only one I

die see was one that collapsed in front of me.     I called over the

first aid people from the North Stand, they were slow to react.        The

noise was loud from the crowi in fact it was bedlam as more people got

over the fence onto the track.    Amongst all the shouting I never heard

a specific request or shout for the gates to be opened.
ELLIS                 STEPHEN                                                3


As more people came onto the pitch, the game had stopped, the fans

were highly charged, and things were getting a bit hairy so I moved my

equipment over to the North Stand, at the corner flag.

I remember thinking as I went over to the North Stand, why no Police

reinforcements weren't being brought in, the same 5 or so officers

were still trying to deal with what was now becoming a very serious

situation.

It wasn't in fact until the referee was taking the players off the

field that reinforcements did in fact arrive.

I noticed for 3-4 minutes the Police pushing the fans back over the

fence,   then just prior or certainly around the time the match was

stepped I suddenly saw the same officers pulling people out over the

fer.ee onto the track.    Like me they had obviously seen how serious the

situation was, and were doing all they could to get the fans out of

pens.    Included among these officers was the constable I know as PC

ILLINGWORTH.    There was a lot of ccmotion.    I could not see through

the crowi whether the gates at the track side had been opened.

I remained at the ground throughout the afternoon, taking photographs

which I have supplied to the enquiry.      I was asked by one of the club

directors to take some photographs of the Leppings Lane end of the

ground, as it had been cleared.

I vvent there and saw PC ILLINGWORTH he was in his shirt sleeves, his

shirt was ripped, with another officer he was still searching under

advertising hoardings.     I took photographs of the area, including PC

ILLINGWORTH, I have the negatives of this film, which I can produce

MWVC (       ) Ex Ref (         ).

I can also produce a photograph from the untouched negative, which I

produce MWW (        ) Ex Ref        (   ) • When I saw PC ILLINGWORTH and

his colleague still working away the time was 6.15 pm (1815).      They
        ELLIS                STEPHEN


        deserved commendation for the way they carried on working all through

        the whole disaster, at the Leppings Lane end.

                                                              S ELLIS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          1IME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    S. BEECHEY DSUPT

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 DS
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 49

OCCUPATION:    FREELANCE PHOTOGRAPHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270489                                                             (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with ray wife and son. We have lived at

           this address for about 16 years.

           I em a freelance photographer and on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489)

           I vas employed by                    newspaper to develope and forward

           the negative to the newspapers head office. I was sort of employed by

           a number of Newspapers and                    told me that if I got

           any interesting photographs to forward them to them.

           At about 2.30pm (1430) I had to move a wire photo machine from the

           North Stand to a house situated at                     where we were due

           to transmit match photographs to the papers I was working for. I

           would normally have worked from inside the ground but one of my

           telephone lines was given over to the press association.

           When I carried out the transmitter to the Leppings Lane entrance

           nearest the shops. The gateman on duty told me that he thought the

           gates were coming in with the heavy pressure from crowded fans on the

           outside of Leppings Lane waiting to get into the ground.

           I realised they would not open the gates for me at this time so I

           arranged to go back again at about 3.00pn (1500). On my way back to
the pressroom in the North stand I was confronted by about six

Liverpool supporters who were rather worse for drink. They were trying

to grab the machine from me or knock it to the ground. I resisted

there attentions and two policemen came over and assisted to clear

this group and they broke the group up.

At about 3pm (1500) the position was still the same so I decided to

take the machine out another gate on Penistone Road and carry it up

Vere Road on the reset road into Leppings Lane. As I walked up

towards Leppings Lane I saw a number of Liverpool fans some rather

drunk carrying packs of beer and spirits. They were drinking this

alcohol as they walked down the road. They were staggering and abusing

Police officers as they were controlling them. I delivered the machine

to                     at about 3.05pm (1505). I then started to go back

the same way via Penistone Road into the ground.

As I was walking back I saw ambulances and emergency services

entering Leppings Lane near to the turnstiles where a large number of

Liverpool fans were.

I soon realised that fans were being brought out of the West stand

entrances near to the turnstiles and were badly injured and in seme

cases were actually dead and had the faces covered. I saw Police

officers and ambulance crews bringing out the dead and injured, and

I took a couple of photographs but was attacked by drunken and

distraught fans as I did so. Police at the scene asked me to put my

canera away as it was causing problems for them during rescue

attempts. At this time ambulances were parked outside the wall just

inside the Leppings Lane gates, on the right hand side of the West

stand. TVyHes and injured fans were being brought out mostly by

Police officers and fans appeared to be attacking officers who were

doing this. It could have been crowd hysteria but it seemed to me as
       an experienced journalist, like drunken behaviour and I was

       disgusted to see fans throwing beer cans as this was happening. Sane

       fars were throwing contents of glasses and containers as well and

       spitting at Police and rescue teams and going onto the dead and

       injured.

       I was really disgusted at those fans attitude to police and ambulance

       crews who were trying to save lives. They were shouting and

       screaming, it was the police who had caused the trouble by opening

       the gates and when people were jammed outside in the tunnel, onto the

       terraces. All the photographs I took were given to the

       the photo editor                                              I could

       not say what photographs I took but the                  ri.ll be able to

       give you the negatives.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          FLACE:

9         1IME:           DATE:   270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
               LEEDS.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:    FREELANCE PHOTOGRAPHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060689                                                             [SIGNED)



           States:

           I live at the above address and am a Freelance Photographer

           employed by                                                      Deeds.On

           the 15th April 1989 (150489) I was working under contract for the

                                         to cover the F A Cup Semi Final football

           match to be played between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at the

           Hillsborough football ground in Sheffield.

           On the match day I travelled in my car to Sheffield, I had an

           uneventful journey to the ground.   I remember I did see police

           stopping coaches as they left the motorway but I was not stopped.     I

           arrived at the ground I suppose at about 1.0 pm. (1300)

           At first I went to the Leppings Lane end of the ground in an attempt

           to park my car, but most of the side roads were cordoned off and so I

           returned to a private car park off Merries Road where I parked the car

           and walked to the ground.    During my drive to Sheffield and walk to

           the ground I did not see any bad behaviour by football fans.

           I eventually got to gate 'O' in Penistone Road where I met

                                                                               in
the North of England.    I was to work with him that day as a two man

team.           had ray pass to the ground and we entered together.

We then went to the press room where I was issued with a brightly

coloured Bib displaying a number.      I think the word Photographer. I

was given the Bib by a person I assumed was an employee of Sheffield

Football Club who recorded the number he had given me.

I eventually went out to the pitch at about 2.0 pm (1400) and took up

a position behind the advertising     boards   on the perimeter track. I

was in front of the Kop terracing and facing the West Stand and

terracing.    When I took up ray position the ground was not very full

and none of the terracing was full.    For the next forty five minutes I

sat talking to other photographers and just watching the ground fill

up.     I remember thinking that it appeared to be a very happy occasion

and I was quite enjoying myself.     I was on occasions using ray

telsphoto lens to look at the crowd at the Lepping Lane end.        I

reiramber thinking that as time went on the centre section of the West

Terracing seemed to be getting fuller and fuller but I recall that I

noticed the two sides of that area did not seem to be filling up.        I

must say though that from ray position I did not see anything that led

me to think that there was a problem at the Leppings Lane terrace.

At 2.45 pm (1445) I moved from the Kop end to the tunnel from which

the players would take the field.     I had done this in order to if

possible get a picture of Brian Clough, in fact he did not ccme out

so I returned to ray original position in front of the Kop. The

match kicked off and just a few minutes later ray attention was drawn

to the West End terracing as I saw surging movements, not one surge

but quite a bit of movement.     At the same time I saw fans who appeared

to be climbing the front perimeter fence.      Even then after the kick

off I still had the same thoughts that the centre part of the West
Terrace was packed solid but there still appeared to be rocm at the

sides. The next thing I remember was seeing a girl supporting a man

and she seemed to be in front of the photographer at the West end of

the ground.    I thought what is she doing on the pitch.    I also saw a

mala fan with his arms outstretched shouting at the Liverpool goal­

keeper. I eventually saw a police officer with a flat cap go onto the

pitch up to the referee and the match was stopped.    I did not knew

what was going on and to be fair I thought that there was a fight or

sane disturbance on the Liverpool Terrace.

A few minutes after the match had stopped I started to walk along the

edge of the pitch towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      I do

recall that I remember seeing a small gate in the perimeter fence was

open and people were coming through it onto the pitch but I also have

a recollection that after I had seen it open I also saw that it had

been closed again.

I was almost up to the penalty area before I realized that something

very serious had happened, there were bodies laying about on the

pitch, people who were obviously injured on the ground, seme being

given first aid, and I also saw police officers up at the perimeter

fence pulling fans over the fence onto the pitch.    All the time I was

taking photographs and I was threatened and insulted by Liverpool

fans.   I was told in no uncertain way to leave and stop taking

photograph or I would be assaulted.    All the photographers were told

to leave.     One particular incident when                 was

threatened I took a photograph of it.

One other incident I saw was quite shortly after the match had been

stepped was when a number of Liverpool fans started to move towards

the Kop end.     It was as a result of the Nottingham fans not knowing

what was going on and continuing to chant, the Liverpool fans appeared
to be very angry and were attempting to get at the fans at the other

end.   The Police then put a line of officers across the pitch to keep

the fans apart.   I agree the action was necesary and it had the

desired effect.   I would add that I think that the police cordon was

kept in place too long and the officers could have been better used at

the Leppings Lane end.

One other photograph I took was of a fan who had been shaking his

fists at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground. Two police officers

chased after him, caught him and took him away.

My impressions of the tragedy, that unfolded in front of me, was that

a factor must have been that the centre of the west terrace was too

full, the gates to allow people out of the pens were too small.      The

police did not seem to have total control of the situation, after

people were known to be injured the police did not appear to be

trained in First Aid.    There did not appear to be sufficient medical

and first aid equipment available.    I also wish to point out the one

thing that did concern me was that it seemed totake a very long time

before any ambulance arrived on the pitch.    I am sure that this delay

was a contributory factor in the number of people who died.

While I was at the football ground I took either 6 or 7 rolls of film

five of these I gave to                who took them to the

processing plant at Oldham.    I later took the other one or two.    Later

the same day I saw six or seven contact sheets that I am sure had been

printed from the negatives of the films I provided.

I then marked the contact sheets, 1 of 1, to 1 of 6 or 7, and placed

then in a negative folder which had my name on it.       These negatives

and contact sheets were then forwarded to t     h    e     i   n    London.

One thing I wish to put right is that in fact I did not actually use

my telephoto lens to look at the crowd at Leppings Lane until after
        the game had started.



                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   060689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                ^.357

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                      2159
                                                                           STATION



•
NAME:


ADDRESS:       __________
                                            SUSSEX

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 33

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I reside at the above address with my wife and child.



                            London,              business telephone number being

                              Company is a sports picture agency, we operate world

           wice.   I do not work for any specific newspaper, however, I visit

           major sporting events throughout the world, take pictures and then

           sell same to whichever newspaper is willing to buy them.

           In the above capacity on Saturday 15th April 1989, (150489) I

           attended the Liverpool versus Nottingham Forest Football match at

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I crove to the ground in a company motor vehicle arriving at about

           11.45 am (1145).    I did not experience any traffic delays on route

           and I did not witness any drunkenness or disorder of any kind.

           I actually entered the ground at about 13.30 pm (1330) via the

           Penistone Road photographers entrance.    I went to the Press

           Photographers' room situated in the North Stand and exchanged my

           ticket as per the usual procedure for a yellow press photographers

           bib. At 1.40 pn (1340) I took up my viewing position by the wall in




                                                                                      2160
                                                                           2
the front of the South Stand in line with the penalty area of the

West Stand. Up until about 2.40 pin (1440) I spent my time talking to

other press photographers.     I then left my position and walked to the

mouth of the players' tunnel intending to take a picture of Brian

CLCUGH. Whilst at the mouth of the tunnel I became engaged in

conversation with Glenn KIRTON, I think he is the Assistant Secretary

of the F.A. I would consider Mr KIRTON as a friend/colleague.     After a

few minutes of conversation with Mr KIRTON, a ground official carrying

a v\alkie talkie came up to us.    I do not know this man's name but he

was smartly dressed in dark coloured blazer, collar and tie.

This ground official in my presence and hearing said to Mr KIRTON,

"I think we still have between fifteen and twenty thousand people

outside the ground", at which point Mr KIRTON responded, "Well do you

want to delay the kick off."

The Official said, "I don't think it will be necessary."

We all then went our separate ways.     I tried to find Brian CLOUGH but

never saw him once.

At 3.01 pm (1501) walked back to behind the goal West Stand end near

to emergency gate number three to set up a remote controlled camera.

I heard screaming from behind me on the terraces. I turned round and

saw people crushed up against the perimeter fence of Pen three.        I saw

that one girl's face had gone blue, obviously the pressure on these

people at this stage was massive.     I realised something awful was

happening, people were starting to climb over the fence.     I finished

the film I had in my cameras.     There was nothing I could do to help

these people being crushed.     I absolutely knew by now it was

serious.   I was shocked and felt completely helpless.

The Police did not seem to appreciate what was happening.     I think

they initially they thought it was a pitch invasion or trouble
                                                                                 3


       starting.

       I then retrieved my remote controlled camera from behind the goal.

       I was standing in the goal six yard (yd) box when a Police Officer

       wearing a flat cap came onto the pitch.    I grabbed hold of him and

       pushed him across the penalty area towards the referee who was

       standing in the c o m e r of the penalty area towards the North Stand,

       saying to him, "Fuckin' stop the game."

       I irust have screamed these words at him at least three times.    Hie

       Police Officer then went up to the referee who I think was in any

       event about to stop the game.

       I then walked back to my original viewing position in a deep state of

       shcck.     I collected my equipment and then walked back towards the

       Leppings Lane end.     I knew because of what I had seen and felt I had

       to get out of the ground.     I know it sounds awful but the business

       part of your brain takes over and I took one more picture from the

       North Stand before leaving the ground at 3.21 pm (1521).

                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:               DATE:   160589

     S TO SIGNATURE
          SIGNATU1

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                     2162
                                                                      6/89 STATION

NAME:

•
ADDRESS:
               I
               ___________
               __________
                                           SUSSEX

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030190                                                               (SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statement of the 8th and 16th May 1989 (080589)

           (160589) I arrived by the right hand side of the goalposts at the

           Leppings Lane end of the ground at around kick off time.     I

           immediately saw people crushed against the fence   and as far as Ican

           recollect Gate 3 in the perimeter fence was open   and I could        seetwo

           Policemen wearing helmets pulling people through   the gate.

           In respect to the officer wearing the flat cap who I   grabbed        hold of

           and told to stop the match I have been shown the compilation video

           tape ref no MRE2 and at the time shown at 1506 I identify that Police

           Officer.

           I also identify myself wearing the                         shown at

           15C2 on the Video Tape.




                                                                                           2163
                                JIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE:

          1IME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION

 NAME:         JEFFREY   RICHARD
Q              POWELL

ADDRESS:       DAILY MAIL, NORTHCLIFF HO, TUDOR ST
                LONDON, LONDON EC4

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 47

OCCUPATION:    JOURNALIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180589                                               J.R. POWELL (SIGNED)



           I have been employed by the Daily Mail since 1966 (000066)

           transferring from Sports Sub Editing to football writing in 1969

           (0C0069), and being appointed Chief Soccer Correspondent in 1971

           (000071).   I have recently been promoted to Chief Sports Writer of the

           Daily Mail, having been honoured once as British Sports Journalist of

           the year for my work on the Hysel Stadium tragedy, and honoured a

           further three times as British Sports Reporter of the year.

           In the course of my duties throughout the past 20 years I have

           attended major sporting events on all continents of the war Id, the

           majority being major soccer occasions, including World Cup final

           series in West Germany 1974 (000074), Argentina 1978 (000078), Spain

           1962 (000082) and Mexico 1986 (000086), as well as interviewing

           European Championship finals and all major domestic and international

           matches affecting English teams. I have witnessed not only the Hysel

           tragedy but also most of the major outbreaks of crowd violence and

           distress involving Englands National and club teams in the past 20

           years. Based on all those experiences and observations there is no

           question in my opinion that the tragedy at Hillsborough, Sheffield on
POKELL                 JEFFREY   RICHARD                                    2


15th April 1989 (150489), was the culmination of several fundemental

causes. 1) Deficient Policing

2) Neglect by the football authorities, including the football

     Association as the organising authority and Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

     as host club,

3) Hooliganism similar in genesis, the late arrival of several

     thousand fans many of whan may have been without tickets or holding

      forgeries, to force access to the best located and therefore most

     crowded stretch of terracing if not in execution similar to the

     assault on Italian supporters in Brussels.

4) A lack of Central co-ordination of police, ambulance, fire

     brigade and first aid services, coupled with insufficiency of

     medical equipment at the Stadium.

I travelled from London April 15 (150489) by British Midland flight

frcm Heathrow to Leeds Bradford Airport in company with two colleagues

frcm other newspapers. They were

anc                                        We were picked up there by car

by                                          who drove us to Sheffield. On

that route the traffic was relatively free moving and access to the

parking area near the ground quite open.

My first doubts about the policing arose when an officer on duty close

to the Stadium could not direct us to the press car parking,

professing no knowledge of the geography of the area.

It there struck me as unfortunate that there was no screening of the

arriving crowds by police prior to them reaching the turnstile

entrances an action which on my approach to the stadium of the

Lepppins Lane entrance for the same fixture the previous year had

filtered out non ticket holders.     As a result there were more people

than usual crowded onto the concourse outside the main stand,
POfcELL              JEFFREY   RICHARD                                       3


although with the time being just before 2pm (1400) I was not aware of

any unusual build up of fans at the Leppings Lane entrance.    We had

entered from Pennistone Road to the area at the rear of the South

Stand. I saw seme fans drinking frcm beer cans outside the ground      and

at least one entering a turnstile carrying a beer can partly

disguised in his hand.

I entered the press box shortly before 2.30pm (1430) and witnessed a

nvnrber of spectators in front of the V.I.P. seating areas behaving in

an aggressive provocative manner, taunting recognisable celebrites and

trying to incite other supporters.    It gave the impression of the

organised disturbances characterised in my viewing at home and abroad

by members of the National front.    At least one of these fans in

Nottingham Forest colours was apprehended by the police.

It became apparent to several of us in the press box that congestion

was building up in the Central pens at Leppings Lane in the ten or

fifteen minutes before kick off, while the pens towards the c o me r

flags were comparatively unfilled.    So serious appeared the potential

for a crushing incident, especially to those of us who had witnessed

Hysel Stadium   and other incidents, that my entire focus immediately

prior to kick off was on that section.

As a result of watching fans clambering up the wall of the rear of the

terraces and trying to extricate themselves via the fences at the

front of the terrace, I did not witness the kick off and there was

clearly a case for delaying the start to reduce the pressure from

these trying to gain access in time to see the start of the game.

The police central tower at the left hand c o m e r of Leppings Lane

surely afforded a view of the difficulty at those gates and entrances,

which raises a serious question about the co-ordination between that

control post and the police on the ground.
POKELL               JEFFREY   RICHARD                                   4


It was clear to me that we were becoming involved in a crowd crashing

incident not a pitch invasion, but several police officers could be

seen trying to restrain the terrace fans frcm climbing the perimeter

ferce to safety.

The distress of the people at that end was so marked that my only

glimpse of the six minutes of action was in response to the roar which

accompanied the striking of the Forest crossbar by a shot from Peter

BEARDSLEY.   Immediately after that play was interupted by a police

officer running onto the pitch, a sensible though belated intervention.

That action had been preceeded by the second of two surges forward by

the fans in the most crowded central pens, one immediately prior to

the kick off, the other when BEARDSLEY struck the cross bar.    There is

no question that the congestion and surging was caused by the

press of people coming in from behind the terracing.

When the match stopped police acted to try and relieve the situation

and fans began to emerge from the terracing in varying states of

distress to receive aid and treatment.   It was evident from the press

box that people were seriously hurt and at least two appeared to

expire while being treated with mouth to mouth resuscitation on the

pitch near the touchline in front of the mainstand.

The lack of public information on the address system encouraged the

risk of a crowd disturbance with further tragedy being heaped onto the

crushing incident.   At this point uninformed Forest fans were taunting

the Liverpool spectator whom they believed to be encroaching on the

pitch and misbehaving.

One Liverpool supporter ran the length of the pitch to behave in a

provocative manner to the Forest end, an action which I believe made

it reasonable to deploy some police offiers in a security cordon

across the central line of the pitch.
POKELL               JEFFREY    RICHARD                                    5


At about 3.20pm (1520) shortly after the arrival of the ambulance

which surely should have made its way more quickly and directly across

the playing surface than slowly round the perimeter track, I went down

on the pitch.

I saw several fans being lifted out of the terracing, many uneoneious

anc attempts by many police officers to revive them.     At least two of

the victims appeared to die at that time, close to me, on the ground

in the goalmouth at the Leppings Lane end.    Police officer did attempt

to clear the pitch area but in my view they were asking fans to vacate

the area where people were being treated urgently.     Many fans were

angry and/or distressed,     and several spoke to me about a gate being

unwisely opened by a police officer to the Leppings Lane end which

caused the middle surge of overcrowding.

While many officers worked unflaggingly to help the victims, many more

stcod as if bewildered or in a state of shock themselves doing little

or nothing. There appeared to be no co-ordinated influence on the

services and many of the officers appeared inexperienced or untrained

for such a crowd incident.

I saw no specific incidents which would have impeded any Police officer

per forming his duty but there was by now an angry and

aggressive attitude among sections of Liverpool supporter and I was

subjected to verbal abuse both on the pitch and in the gymnasium where

the press gathered later.

Sorre police officers behaved in an insensitive manner towards

supporters enquiring for the whereabouts of relatives and friends they

knew to be in the Leppings Lane end.

Still public information was in short supply and when announcements

were made the public address system was not sufficiently audible to

all sections of the ground.
PCfrELL                 JEFFREY   RICHARD                                     6
There appeared to be a serious deficiency of first aid and medical

equipment and most victims had to be carried away on make shift

stretchers, mostly ripped up advertising hoardings, by supporters

trying to help.

When I inspected the relevant terracing later I saw the broken crush

barrrier and fencing.     I also inspected the tunnel through which most

of the late ccmers gained access. I find it extraordinary that

Hillsborough could be licensed for such large crowds with such

antiquated terracing.     The tunnel was a death trap.

I was advised later by officials of Liverpool Football club that they

had requested the F.A. not to use Hillsborough as the venue.     Their

preference would have been for Old Trafford, Manchester where the

match was eventually replayed.

Either in anger, distress or to be provocative several Liverpool

supporters were abusing police and football officials at this time,

mostly at the pitch of the approach to the dressing room tunnel.

I irade another inspection of Leppings Lane and came to the

conclusion that the lateral barriers there had been as instrumental in

the disaster as the perimeter fencing.

At Heysel Stadium, the lateral fencing was mesh wire and had been

flattened as Liverpool fans pressed in through a breach in the wall

behind their terracing, overfilling the area.     There the Liverpool

fans proceeded to drive Italian fans off their area of terracing.        At

Hillsborough the early arrivals were unable to move sideways to the

relatively empty flank pens because the lateral barriers were solid

metal.

By the time I left the stadium that evening I had established a clear

picture of the events. It is ray view that this Enquiry might consider
FOfc'ELL              JEFFREY     RICHARD                                 7


1) Policing was staffed with the wrong personnel and woefully un co­

   ordinated especially in the failure not to screen supporters on

   traffic routes to Sheffield, and on the approaches to the ground

   and in failing to identify quickly the nature of the crowd incident.

2) The police allowed no contingency for the known practice of

   football club supporters without tickets to arrive late at

   stadiums, cause a disturbance and thereby gain unlawful access

   through pressure of the turnstiles, the brand of hooliganism which

   was a root cause of the Hysel disaster.

3) The Football Association and Football League have no defined policy

   with regard to first aid and medical provisions of their grounds,

   nor for a co-ordinated response to crowd incidents of any nature,

    nor for the introduction of all seater stadium as an urgent safety

    and anti hooligan priority.

4) What persuasion is brought to bear on licencing authorities by

    clubs and football authorities to licence grounds for unsafe

    attendance, especially in view of evidence now forthcoming that the

    potential   for a crushing incident existed at the same fixture, at

    the same ground, one year previously.

5) That despite political propaganda to the contrary a national

    membership scheme including I.D. cards for supporters would have

    helped not aggravated the situation. No one has yet explained to me

    how an established practice of only issuing tickets to card holders

    who would then have to produce both en route to and at the point of

    access to the stadium would do anything other than discourage the

    potential trouble maker.

Fir.ally I would urge the enquiry to consider recamending :-

 1) An immediate review of procedures for policing soccer events with

    all emphasis on numbers of personnel and the associated revenue,
        PCfcELL                    JEFFREY   RICHARD


           and more on filtering and controlling the approaches to the

           stadium.

        2) All seater grounds as a pre requisite for staging a n y

           match liable       to attract a large crowd.

        3) The implementation of the National Membership scheme proposed by

           the government.

        4) An urgent review of the failure of the football authorities F.A.

           and League to address the matter of crowd safety, and control as

           an urgent priority, especially in the four years since the Heysel

           tragedy.

        5) That stadium licensing be taken out of the hands of the local

           authorities, with the attendant risk of influence and corruption,

           and made the responsibility of a central licensing authority.

           Football cannot be trusted any longer to make good its

           empty promises to put its own house in order.       There are too many

           vested interests and as a result no responsible leadership.

                    J.R. Powell



                                                          JEFFREY R. POWELL SIQJED

^^ATEMENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

           TIME:                  DATE:

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:       DAVID SMITH INS3078

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                               1- LONDON

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 32

OCCUPATION: JOURNALIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I travelled to Hillsborough on April 15 1989 (150489), as the

                         of the                    a position I have held for the

           last three years.

           I have covered professional football



                                                                 and so I am

           fairiliar with the problems of handling large crowds at sporting

           occasions.

           I was present at Hillsborough in April 1988 (000488) for the

           corresponding fixture.    This year I drove to Sheffield frcm a house I

           have                   via the M62 collecting colleagues Jeff POWELL,

                                                                         The journey

           was delayed considerably at the M62s junction with the M63 at Swinton

           in Greater Manchester.     Large traffic queues had built up by 1130am

           (1130) and a short journey beyond the M61 interchange took almost an

           hour.   It was apparent frcm the problem that anyone travelling frcm

           Liverpool and the North West to Sheffield would be facing considerable

           delays. We arrived in the environs of Sheffield at around 1.25pm
                                                                        2
(1325) and made our way off the Ml motorway at junction 34 as indicated

on our car parking map only to find that the road we were advised to

take was blocked off by roadworks.   We finally arrived close to the

stadium at Hillsborough by about 1.50pm (1350) and was surprised that

when we asked the policeman near the ground exactly where the press

car park was they, even after studying the map, could not tell us.

They were not frcm Sheffield they told us.    It was surprising that

they did not know the geography of the stadium.

Once parked we walked straight to the stadium.    Around the approach

roads there were a small number of fans, both frcm Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest, drinking frcm cans.    There was no sign of

drunkeness or misbehaviour of any kind.   Wfe had also passed several

pubs en route where supporters sat outside in the sunshine drinking.

As they wore red and white, the colours of both sides, it was

impossible to identify where they had travelled frcm.   Again there was

no police activity around the pubs nor any signs of problems.

On arrival at the Hillsborough gates of the South Stand on Penistone

Roed it was a surprise not to find any advance ticket checks. These

have become part and parcel of the organisation of big events, not

only sport, in the last decade. With only brief glances frcm the

stewards we passed into the car park area and pathway behind the South

Stand which seemed considerably more occupied than last year.    Then we

hac approached from the Leppings Lane end having travelled over the

Pernine route to Sheffield.   Then advance checking and filter system

were in place and once we had passed the outer barriers last year

there were very few people in the area behind the South Stand.

A small number of fans were searching for tickets for sale, but I saw

few touts in this area.   Again although the area was more congested

than usual there was no apparent trouble. I saw no-one trying to
_____________________________________                                      3


smuggle alcohol into the seating area of the South Stand nor were

there any problems in access to the turnstiles although queues were

building up.

We entered the ground through gate H and went inrnediately to the press

rocm, it was t o around 2.10pm (1410). After visiting the press room

I took my seat in the press box at around 2.25pm (1425).    The ground

was already filling up especially at the Nottingham Forest end the

Spion Kop.     The pre match discussion was pre-occupied with the

thoughts about Hillsboroughs suitability to stage such a match.

Already there had been indications that Liverpool were unhappy at the

choice of Hillsborough by the F.A. for the match.     They would have

preferred Aston Villa or Manchester United where the distribution

could have been fairer.     Liverpool like many of us were concerned with

the number of tickets that they were to be allocated in comparison

with their greater average support.     In the past Liverpools support

for such matches has always been large and enthusiastic even so

Hillsborough had coped the year before.     These discussions were

fuelled by what appeared to be overcrowding in the central section of

the terraces we were told by local reporters was called the Leppings

Lare end. Just before kick off there was a noticable and detectable

surge in the central section, now known to be Pen 3 and 4, at the

Leppings Lane end, while the wings seemed to be below capacity.       There

was growing anxiety in the central pens and people began to try to

escape either into the seating area or by climbing the fencing.       At

this stage at around 2.55pm (1455) there was no indication as to the

size of the problem which was developing.

The police officers at that end of the ground were trying hard to keep

the fans behind the fences but fans continued to try to scale the

 fences to avoid the crush.    The police continued to resist them.
                                                                            4


By kick off time though it was apparent to most in the press box that

there was a serious problem developing, fans continued to clamber into

the seats above and were now being allowed onto the pitch surrounds.

To many in the ground it appeared to be a pitch invasion and the

Nottingham Forest supporters responded by chanting abuse at the

Liverpool end.    Some of the Forest fans had already abused people in

the overspill press box including Tommy SMITH the former Liverpool

player.   So abusive was one Forest fan that members of the press box

urged the local police to have him removed.    I hear that he was in

fact later arrested.

There was another more marked surge in the fifth minute of the match

when Peter BEARDSLEY hit the bar for Liverpool.   The roar that

emerged frcm the Leppings Lane end was not the normal football crowd

noise. It was laced with panic and screams and more and more fans

spilt onto the pitch behind the Liverpool goal.   Almost immediately a

policeman took the brave decision and action of running onto the pitch

to tell the referee to halt the game.    But for his speed of thought

anc movement more people could well have been seriously injured or

killed in the crush.

As the players left the field the Nottingham Forest fans grew more

agitated and abusive.    They still believed they were watching an act

of hooliganism.    The view was substantiated they felt by the sight of

far.s clambering onto the goalposts to take the netting down.     It was

of course to allow the fans tumbling through the one gate open to have

a tetter access to the pitch and to allow the ambulance which

eventually arrived to get behind the goal.

The dead, dying and injured were already being carried onto the pitch

by police, ambulancemen and fans.    It was now about 3.10pm (1510).       In

frcnt of the South Stand there was an urgent attempt by a group of
                                                                          5


far.s and St Johns Ambulancemen to revive a young fan who was about

three feet frcm the touchline.   Suddenly his foot twitched and the

crcwd clapped with spontaneous emotion, but he was carried away by an

ambulanceman with his friend in close attendance.

Other fans were being treated for injuries but still no announcements

hac been made to the rest of the ground.    This appeared a major

mistake and just another indication of the lack of co-ordination at

the stadium between all services.    The lack of public statements could

have led to even more problems. The Forest fans began to howl insults

at the Liverpool supporters tending their dead.     Suddenly the police

could have been faced with a riot as well as a disaster.

Feelings ran high and if the ambulance had raced across the pitch

rather than pick its way around the edge then it may have given sane

hixt of the problem to the Forest fans.

Jeff Powell of the Daily Mail and myself made our way onto the pitch.

There seemed a huge amount of confusion around the tunnel area where

police and officials were in urgent consultation.     The picture of

devastation and carnage unravelled when we made our way down onto the

pitch and walked towards the Leppings Lane end.     Bodies were being

carried on make shift stretchers that had been constructed using the

advertising hoardings and metal barriers.    Injured people littered the

penalty area.   The ambulancemen outnumbered and working in hopeless

conditions were trying to bring round supporters.     They tried mouth to

mouth resuscitation and tried to revive stopped hearts. A man with a

ginger beard had a ventilator inserted in his mouth in an attempt to

restart his breathing, he was rushed away on an advertising board

towards the ambulances in the far corner of the stadium.

Sorre police officers were actively helping in the process while others

stood bewildered several in tears.    Fans spilled frcm the terraces
                                                                              6
telling of the opening of a gate behind the Leppings Lane terraces.

They suggested that stewards pleaded with the police not to open the

shuttered gate, several clutched unchecked tickets as way of evidence

that the gate had been opened.     They told of the crush and of the

charge by fans down the narrow tunnel leading into the Leppings Lane

terrace.    They also told of lost friends and relatives.      One fan

claimed to have asked a policeman, "Where do I go to try and find my

friend." The policeman apparently         told him to go and look in the

morgue.     There was calm one minute     and then raginganger the next.

A photographer trying to take pictures was chased by Liverpool fans,

others calmly discussing matters with us one minute became abusive the

next.     All this time there were no audible announcements.     There

seemed no one on the ground in charge of operations and the whole

piecemeal rescue seemed elastic.        Clearly no contingency plan

existed.     The fire brigade arrived about half an hour after we reached

the pitch, the stewards like the police were working on an individual

basis while the doctors and nurses        arriving at the ground were

harrpered by lack of medical facilities.

While there was no disaster plan for a major sporting event there was

also no medical requirements laid down by the F .A. other than for on

field injuries during a football match.        A doctor complained that his

oxygen cylinder was empty as he tried to revive a casualty.           The scene

was one of utter confusion.

The only announcements had been to clear the pitch.        It was

insensitive to believe the fans wanted to return to the terraces and

foclish to believe they would respond to the order.

The Liverpool fans became more and more angry at the chants fran the

Forest supporters who only halted their abuse at the sight of bodies

being carried away towards the ambulances and gymnasium behind the
____________________________________                                       7


North Stand.    There was a move by Liverpool fans towards the Forest

end but this was countered by a line of police reinforcements who had

been called into the stadium.    While the police were in position

across the halfway line to prevent confrontation it is unlikely any

would have taken place had the rest of the ground been made aware of

the disaster earlier.    The gates could have remained closed so the

ambulances could move freely in and out of the ground while at the

sarre time the frustration felt by the Forest supporters would have

been quelled.    Instead the dreadful picture emerged of fans

desperately trying to help their injured while the police held their

lire across the centre of the field.     If everyone had been aware of

the situation the police could have been released to help.

Untrained in cardiac massage or mouth to mouth I decided I should

leave the area at the Leppings Lane end so as not to hinder the

attempts of the emergency services.    I walked slowly along the

touchline past crying policemen, bewildered girls frcm the executive

lounges who had been helping by bringing napkins and ice buckets of

water onto the pitch, heartbroken fans, and finally the line of

bemused policemen to reach the tunnel.

There the confusion still’reigned, the referee wondered around seeking

advice, the angry Liverpool Chairman emerged to describe the scene as

an organisational disaster, and the players frcm both sides searched

for the latest information.     No one it seemed was taking control even

now at 3.50pm (1550).    The old gymnasium under the South Stand was

full of Liverpool supporters queueing to use an old payphone to ring

their relatives.

 In the press box colleagues were realising the magnitude of the

 incident and at 4.01pm (1601) seme 55 minutes after the initial

problem the first announcement was made outlining the scale of the
                                                                           8
disaster.   By then but for the restraint of the Liverpool supporters

anc the sudden understanding of the Forest fans the whole scene could

have been even more horrific.    The overall impression of those moments

was the lack of co-ordination among the services.

Fans continually asked:- Why had the kick off not been delayed, why if

the decision to open the Leppings Lane gate had been taken was the

small gate across the mouth of the tunnel not closed.     Why had there

not been an orderly queuing procedure and ticket check.    Why had all

the gates at the front of the terracing not been opened immediately,

why had the police not recognised the problems they were facing that

this was a safety and not a security incident, and most of all why was

the match at Hillsborough with Liverpool having the smallest

allocation of tickets.

After a few minutes in the press box the announcement was made that

the match was abandoned and we decided to return to the pitch again.

This time the door to the tunnel area open before was now guarded by

stewards.   After a brief press statement from Graham Kelly the F.A.

Chief Executive we left by the door into the pathway outside the South

Stand and walked to the Leppings Lane terrace.

A fan showed us the gate he believed had been opened and we wondered

down the terracing.    A crush barrier had been snapped and had coiled

like a corkscrew.     The mesh fencing had been peeled back to allow

greater escape facilities for the fans.

We stood in Pen 4 as the clearing up operation began.     There were five

of us and it seemed full then.     It is an unpleasant standing area and

there seems little space to accomodate 10,000 fans.     As a spectator at

the 1977 (000077) FA Cup semi final between Manchester United and

Leeds I had a ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace.     It was the most

uncomfortable afternoon I have ever spent.     Much of the opening part
___________________________________                                         9


of the game had to be viewed from the darkness of the tunnel.    The

terracing was packed that day but fortunately there was no additional

influx of fans. We wondered across the Hillsborough pitch and came

across the last of the ambulances parked behind the North Stand.      Hie

gyrrnasium door was opened and we saw the rows of bodies.   As we turned

away another stretcher brought in another corpse.    It was now 5pm

(1700). We eventually left the ground at 6.20pm (1820) and returned

hare. My last conment is that this was a tragedy that quite easily

could have, and should have, been prevented.    The responsibilites seem

to lie in three main areas, firstly with the Football Authorities re

the choice of Hillsborough and their failure to check and possibly

overrule some of the decisions taken by other authorities particularly

the police.

Secondly the South Yorkshire Police are left open to criticism for the

failure to implement some of the more basic crowd control techniques.

These would include failure to have advance filtering and ticket

checks.   Also the apparent lack of liaison between officers outside

the ground and inside the ground even though the police control box

at Hillsborough offers the perfect view of both situations which

developed. Once that liaison had broken down the major seeds of the

tragedy were sown.    Their failure also to recognise quickly the scale

anc nature of the problem did not help.

Thirdly the behaviour and nature of footballing crowds in Britain.

There was evidence that some fans arrived without tickets and others

followed the recent trend of arriving at the stadium-possibly to

avcid the alcohol restrictions, as late as possible.     In the absence

of the police checks this combination led to chaos at the lappings

Lane turnstiles.     Although I saw no evidence of drunkeness there was

obviously a problem caused by the frustrations of the inability of the
                                                                         10


        police and the turnstiles to deal with the situation.



                                                                SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          PLACE:

          1IME:            DATE:   180589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                □
                                                                              2182
                                                                           STATION

NAME:          DAVID JOHN
Q              WALKER

ADDRESS:
                           BOLTON, LANCASHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:       SPORTSWRITER DAILY MAIL •


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090589                                                 D.J. WALKER (SIGNED)



           I am Sportswriter with the Daily Mail newspaper specialising

           in Football.

           On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended at Hillsborough

           Stedium, Sheffield to the Semi-final of the F.A. Cup between Liverpool

           anc Nottingham Forest.    On the day I travelled to the ground with

                                    newspaper and friend of mine called

                      We travelled to the ground in my car and parked in the

           Sheffield Wednesday No. 2 Car Park across the road at the back of the

           KOF.    I arrived actually on the ground about 1345 and went in through

           the gate at the Kop end of the stadium from Penistone Road and then

           went to the South Stand where I had a ticket to the overflow area for

           the press. I approached over for Foxhill and Penistone Road, I saw

           Nottingham Forest fans on the road in but saw no disorder, I do recall

           seeing fans with cans of beer and recall seeing some instances of

           urinating openly but that is all.     I went to the Press Roam first and

           spent some time in there and about 1430 the three of us want up to

           take our seats.                was in the main Press box and myself and

                   had seats in the overflow.    I scanned the ground and about 1440




                                                                                       2183
WALKER                DAVID   JOHN                                       2
I recall specifically noting that the centre sections of the terracing

at the leppings Lane end were packed to capacity and that the end

sections were both free of fans for what I counted as four to six

steps completely.   By 1450 with the wing sections still fundamentally

uncer populated and the centre packed I recall saying to

they are going to have to put the kick-off back there are still a lot

of fans clearly outside it was obvious to me that that should

happen and I expected an announcement to be made, I had no

doubt as to which fans went where on the ground because I had worked

on the ticket allocation controversy. I remember the players caning

onto the field and around kick-off time I saw youngsters clambering up

the fence obviously in distress and trying to get out - this was as

the game had just started certainly in the first minute or two they

were getting dragged over.    I remember that the policeman behind the

goels were trying to put them back in, but in the centre section they

were climbing up all over and there was obvious distress amongst

them.    All I can remember of the match itself is the BEARDSLEY shot

that hit the woodwork I remember a figure of a young boy being lifted

over the fencing and him having heart massage and frantic treatment

frcm a fan until a St. Johns Ambulance man took over. Again whilst all

this was happening more and more fans were congregating behind the

goal at that end and I saw a photographer pushing a policeman onto the

pitch and he ran to the referee who blew the game-up.    He was on the

edce of the penalty area at the Liverpool end when he blew his whistle

and he took the players off quite quickly.    Away to my left at the

Leppings Lane end more and more fans were coming over the fencing and

supporters were on the field of play in increasing numbers.     Certainly

there were four prostrate figures on the field all having treatment by

way of heart massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation and I knew then
WALKER                 DAVID   JOHN                                       3


that something very serious was happening.    More and more fans were

coring over and onto the pitch and the Nottingham Forest fans in front

of where we were were being very vocal and abusive particularly

towards Towny SMITH who was in front and to the left of me.     These

Nottingham Forest fans were vocal towards the Liverpool fans too as

they seemed to think it was a pitch invasion and a deliberate move to

end the game.    The players went well off the pitch by then and I left

my place was down there on the field of play where things were

happening so I made my way down through the main Stand and along the

players tunnel. I went onto the pitch and met Mr MCCHE and we had a

brief conversation about what a terrible event seemed to be happening

and he certainly didn't have an idea of what was happening at that

tirre. There were fans milling around, Liverpool fans, who were

abusing Sheffield Wednesday officials Police and the like and were

saying things such as they should have had the KOP end, that

there were Liverpool fans dead, and that a gate had been opened

to let them in.    I took out my notebook and began taking names and

quctes, on particular supporter was

           he was the first supporter I spoke to who had seen the

gate being opened.    With him were supporters who admitted they had got

into the game without tickets when the gate had been opened at

Leppings Lane.    A fan showed me his full ticket with the counterfoil

still attached, another fan claimed he had seen a Liverpool supporter

snatch a wad of counterfoils from the turnstile operator and pass them

out to fans.     A Liverpool supporter told me there was a line of

corpses over towards the North Stand - I went over in that direction

and on the way was asked to help a group carrying a teenage boy on a

makeshift stretcher.     The boy looked blue and looked   dead, he had

marks of the fencing impressed onto his face.     The boy was fair haired,
WALKER                DAVID   JOHN                                          4


abcut 16, with jeans and trainers on and I think he had a Liverpool

shirt on certainly a red one.    I ended up on one co m e r of the

stretcher and helped carry the body out to the gym by way of the KOP/

North stand.   The make-shift stretcher was part of an advertising

boarding.   We took the stretcher through to the gym and going in there

I look around and counted what I thought were twenty or thirty bodies

there.   Sane had oxygen masks on, seme had coats over them and sane

had white plastic bags over them.    I haven't any idea of time - while

I was in there there were a lot of supporters in there bringing

victims in and milling around and the order came fran someone to

clear the gym of everyone other than medical and police staff.       As I

left a plain/clothes officer identified himself to me as a C.I.D.

officer asked me if I was medical staff and I told him no and that I

was a member of the press and we went outside the gymnasium where

there was another journalist,

the C.I.D. man took us to one side and said he didn't want us to

scaremonger or cause alarm by publicising what we had seen.      I went

back and found Mr ICGEE again, the pitch was full of people and the

police cordon was still there across the pitch.     I remember Mr ICGEE

saying sanething like "We have a mortuary situation haven't we ?" and

I told him as gently as I could that I had seen at least twenty dead

bodies over in the gymnasium. I was back on the tunnel when the

announcement was made that the game was off.     After this I went back

onto the pitch, met more fans and interviewed a number.      Soon after I

went with a fan who wouldn't identify himself and with a number of

other journalists to the Leppings lane entrances to see the gates

where the fan maintained he had been allowed in.     There had been

stcries that the gate had been broken down but that was obviously not

the case - I went to check the wooden doors at the top of the tunnel
WALKER               DAVID    JOHN                                             «


to see that they were still intact and hadn't been broken down and

they were intact. There were no bodies in the tunnel and no injured

pecple at that time. After that we went back and looked around the

terracing, I saw the Police Scenes of Crime pecple arrive,     I went to

the halfway line and saw Graham KELLY being interviewed and then

there would be a press conference in the press roan and that consisted

of us being told a press conference would be held at Police

Headquarters at 1900 hours.    I don't know who chaired that meeting.      I

feel very strongly that what happened at Hillsborough wouldn't have

happened if Brian MOLE had not been moved away. I've been to many big

matches at Hillsborough covering I would think fifty matches in the

last five years there.    I have also been to four Hillsborough semi-

fir,als I was there on the day the closed-circuit television system was

installed and was shown over it on a Press day by Brian MOLE who was

then second-in-command.    I had a lot of dealings with him over the

Leeds versus Coventry semi final because of potential threat of

trouble frcm the then most notorious supporters in the Country i.e.

Leeds. The Leeds supporters had the same allocation as Liverpool this

year and there was a kick-off delay of half-an-hour.    That

announcement was made fifteen minutes before the scheduled kick-off

tirre and relayed to the people outside.   They were told the kick-off

wouldn't take place until they had entered - on that day there were

barriers 50 to 100 (50 to 100 yds) yards from the ground filtering

ticketless fans - queueing was orderly and heavily supervised by

police in control allowing no more three abreast for each turnstile.

Frcm what I have seen of the Police cordon of the game since this kind

of supervision obviously didn't happen this year and there was

certainly no control over how many or who went into the terracing or

where they went.   I did see Brian MOLE later and he was in the
        WALKER               DAVID   JOHN


        mortuary assisting or supervising the mortuary I asked a Sheffield

        Wecnesday official why Brian MOLE hadn't been running this game and I

        was told he'd been transferred away and his duties had been taken on

        by a Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD who had taken over three weeks

        earlier. In my experience Brian MOLE had an effective blueprint for

        Policing games, big games, at Hillsborough that worked and it seems a

        great pity that the South Yorkshire Police couldn't call on his

        expertise in the management of this particular game.



                                                          D.J. WALKER SIGNED

          TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURES      W.R. CHIDLEY SUPT7703
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                  BLACKPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 53

OCCUPATION:       JOURNALIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I am a married man living at the above address.     I am employed as a

           journalist by the



                                       I have been involved in football reporting.

           I have reported on an average of 80 matches a year.       I have been at

           seiri-finals held at Hillsborough for a number of years.      I was at

           last years semi final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest and the

           year before between Leeds and Coventry.

           I travelled to the match on April 15 in my own car and I was on my

           own.    On the journey to Sheffield I did not notice anything unusual

           abcut supporters making the same journey.      There was not as I saw any

           excessive drinking or rowdiness.     As I arrived at the ground I did

           think to myself that I had never seen so many supporters outside the

           ground before.      I approached by the Penistone Road.   All along the

           road there were fans on both sides of the road.      This was about 1.30pm

           (1330). I parked in car park 2 which press and journalists are

           allocated to park here.      I was recognised by several people and it

           tock me about 20 minutes to get into the ground only a short distance




                                                                                        21 89
                                                                           2
away.   The road was full of fans supporting both teams and all were

well behaved. I went to my seat in the pressbox at about only 2.30pm

(1430) and as part of my pre-match commentary I mentioned the fact

that there were seats available in the North Stand opposite and seme

space at each end of the terraces of Leppings Lane but what really

struck me were the empty seats I knew it was a sell out and I

realised people were probably having trouble getting into the ground.

The match started at 3.00pm (1500) and I concentrated on this but my

attention was drawn to the terraces at Leppings Lane.     I saw seme

persons climbing up the perimeter fence.     I thought that they were

trying to get over and I saw one policeman indicate that they should

get back into the crowd.    I thought that at this time the officer was

doing his job well.    I could not see any problem although the terraces

were packed.     I continued on the match until the policeman came onto

the pitch to step the match.    People started to get onto the pitch by

new and I thought now something was wrong and people were down under

the wall and trapped but I couldn't see.

As the tragedy unfolded I remained in my postion and watched.     I feel

that the services acted well in the circumstances as the incident

proceeded because it was not evident to start with what had happened.

My view is that most of our football grounds are out of date.     There

is no free sp>ace outside grounds themselves and if sp>ace was available

a crush could not occur in the same manner.     Grounds are like that on

the continent.    Also our ground are sectioned off so forcing people

into confined areas.      With better arrangements for control of the

supporters the fencing could be removed.

At Hillsborough in p>articular access is restricted to narrow passages

and with cars piacked along one side of the south stand, despite this

being one of our best grounds.
        I would also say that footballs administrators are not in touch with

        w h et the supporters has to put up with.   They do not travel and see

        the problems and conditions and try to put right these problems

        without experiencing them.

        One point that does come to mind is that at the Leeds Coventry semi

        final two years ago the kick off was put back because supporters were

        still outside and I feel that should have been considered at this

        match because I could see empty seats opposite and I realised people

        must still have been outside.



                                                                         3I(3®D

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:    100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                  2191
                                                                         STATION
NAME:          STEPHEN   ROBERT
Q              CURRY

ADDRESS:       DAILY EXPRESS, LUDGATE HSE,
               BLACKFRIARS RD, LONDON, SE1

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 46

OCCUPATION: JOURNALIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180589                                             STEPHEN CURRY (SIGNED)



           I work as the Chief Football Writer for the Daily Express, a position

           I have held for the past 10 years though I have reported football for

           this newspaper for the past 23 years and as a football journalist for

           27 years.

           In that period I have reported the game across the world and in every

        major stadium.

           I attended the FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough on Saturday April

           15th.   I travelled to Sheffield by car frcm Leeds/Bradford Airport

           arriving at the ground at approximately 1.45pm (1345).

           En route from the Ml to Hillsborough I passed several public houses

        where fans were drinking outside but the atmosphere was friendly and

           convivial.

           On arrival in the immediate environs of the stadium, myself and

           colleagues pjarked on the special press car pjark off Herries Road

           walking back to the ground across Penistone Road and in by the main

           entrance to the South Stand.

           At that time there were fans milling by the entrances off Penistone

           Road but no crushing.   Indeed people were gathered in group® by the
CUPRY                 STEPHEN   ROBERT                                    2


main entrance chatting.

I entered the ground at approximately 2.10pm (1410) and took up my

position on the front row of the main press box at 2.25pm (1425)

approximately.   At that stage the Spion Kop end of the ground was

already well populated through the main seating on the North and South

stands was filling slowly.

At the West Stand the central section behind the goal was already

quite full though there was ample sp>ace on either side of the central

section.

At no time did I see alcohol brought into the Stadium though earlier

on the outside young fans had been drinking from cans.    There was

however, no sign of excessive drinking or of fans who were drunk.

The atmosphere inside the ground half an hour before kick off was

quite friendly though rival fans were chanting at each other as you

would expect at a major football occasion.

At 2.45 (1445) I noticed the section in the West Stand was looking

very full and at that time took out a pair of binoculars I always use

at soccer grounds to examine the position more closely.     It was then

I noticed that fans at the front were already being pressed very

tichtly against the perimeter fence.     I was so conscious of the

potential danger of the situation that I mentioned to a radio

colleague from Liverpool in the next seat that I could foresee trouble

at that end of the ground and in that particular section.

I watched the position with increasing concern since it was evident

the position was worsening by the minute.    The crush was getting

extremely heavy and I could see quite clearly that some spectators

were distressed and in difficulty.

Even before the players came out for the warm up I was amazed that the

police standing in front of the perimeter fence had not opened the
CUPRY                STEPHEN   ROBERT                                       3


gate leading into Section 3 to relieve the crush.     It seemed to be the

obvious thing to do as so many people were pressed against the fences.

By the time the players were on the pitch there was obvious and quite

visible panic behind the goal even though there still appeared to be

plenty of room in the sections either side of the central section.

I had felt compelled throughout this period frcm 2.45 - 3.06 (1445 -

15C6) to keep my binoculars on the section concerned and could see

mar.y fans were in real trouble.

Eventually the gate was opened but then appeared to be closed again

even tho the position behind the goal now seemed to be everyones focus

of attention.

Pars began to climb on top of each other to scale the perimeter fence

but were quite clearly being discouraged frcm doing so by the police

imrrediately in front whose number had now increased.

By the time the game was under way it was clear that the dangers had

been realised by the officers near the fence and people began to

tunble through the one gate that was now qpen.     Unfortunately such was

the press for escape that the crush towards the gate was creating

further pressure.

Sore fans were now being lifted by their arms into the elevated

section of the West Stand while others were being bodily hauled into

adjoining sections 2 and 4.

It was a disorganised scene and it was only when a police officer ran

onto the pitch to bring the referee's attention to thechaos that the

gaire was halted and the players left the field.

Then the full extent of the crush became more apparent asfans spilled

onto the pitch many clutching their chests and some of them collapsing.

The scene was very confused with seme police attending to the injured

anc others still signalling to spectators to push backwards to relieve
CUFRY                  STEPHEN    ROBERT                                     4


the crush still taking place.

With fans now milling among the police there seemed to be a lack of

organisation and direction.      There were no tannery directions audible

and the position was totally confused.

It was fully 15 minutes before there was evidence of anyone from any

medical units assisting the injured who appeared to be being tended

principally by other spectators.

By the time a lone ambulance arrived it was clear that several of

these fans lying on the pitch were either dead or seriously injured.

With no one supervising the scene the fans began to tear down the

advertising hoardings to use as      makeshift stretchers and ferry the

injured to the c o m e r where the   Kop meets the North Stand.   Numerous

far.s were hitched across the West Stand end, many receiving the kiss

of life frcm police officers and other spectators.

The scene continued to be ill directed and out of control for at least

a further 45 minutes by which time I moved from the Press Box to the

press room below the South Stand to seek FA officials.

Having failed to receive any news on whether the game would continue I

returned to the Press Box where      the pitch was still being utilisedto

treat the injured.   When the announcement     was eventually made thatthe

gaire had been abandoned I again left the press box area to attend a

brief press conference given by the Football Association Chief

Executive Graham KELLY.

Frcm there I went onto the Hillsborough pitch which was now largely

deserted.   The ground had emptied but there were at least 30-40

Liverpool fans still wandering around.

Their behaviour was aggressive but on talking to them it was clear

they were frustrated and angry rather than drunk.

Quite a number of spectators were in possession of tickets which had
CUFRY                   STEPHEN   ROBERT                                     <


not had the stub removed and their anger was that the gates at the

lapping Lane end had been opened to allow fans into the stadium.

It was only then that I was able to reflect on the events of the

afternoon.   I find it inexplicable how a terrace like the one on the

West Stand could not be stewarded to allow an even spread of

spectators for it was quite clear that there was no crush on either

sice of the central section.      Nor can I understand how police officers

could allow a situation to develop over a period of at least 20

minutes without taking any direct action to alleviate it when it was

clear to even an untrained eye that people were crushed and suffering.

When action was taken it was too late and even then there was

evidently no clear direction and an acute shortage of medical

equipment and personnel.

Having been present at the Heysel disaster which was a riot of drunken

anc violent fans I can say this was a totally different set of

circumstances which in my view was in no way sparked by hooliganism.

The decision to place Liverpool fans at the West End of the ground was

an ill-conceived one.    Liverpool have a majority of spectators who

are used and prefer to stand to watch football.      It seemed much more

sensible to allocate them the Spion Kop end where more standing

spectators would then have been able to acquire tickets.      I found,

toe, that the approaches to the ground frcm the North were hampered by

roadworks on the approaches to the ground which may have accounted for

sore of the late arrivals.

Nor could I understand why it was fans were not screened to ensure

they had tickets before they got to the turnstiles to sift out the

supporters who had travelled to the ground without tickets.

The logic of playing the game at Hillsborough rather than Old Trafford

also escapes me especially in view of the representations made to the
        CUFRY                STEPHEN   ROBERT


        Foctball Association by Liverpool FC.



                                                STEPHEN CURRY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   180589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      B A MASON SUP5810




                                                                       2197
                                                                         STATION
NAME:
•
ADDRESS:
               LJ____
                SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 46

OCCUPATION:                     CAMERAMAN PHOTOGRAPHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 310190                                                           (SIGNED)



           I em a                           cameraman and I work exclusively for

           BBC TV                                             This work can be

           distinguished from BBC Outside Broadcasts which is responsible for

           spcrts coverage.

        On 15 April 1989 (150489) I was asked to be at Hillsborough Stadium,

           Sheffield to record after match interviews with managers/players.     For

           a number of reasons I comnenced work at the ground at something like

           2.15pm (1415) and started to film pre-match build-up scenes which

        would provide library material for the BBC (Leeds) studios.

           On the day in question I was working together with

                     who acted as the sound recordist.

           I had arranged to meet the BBC TV News reporter,                 at a

           pre -determined meeting place after the final whistle.

           My recollection of the sequence of events which I filmed is that

                    and I commenced film/sound work at the Penistone Road

           entrance to the Sheffield Wednesday ground at about 2.15pm (1415).

           This involved recording the arrival of Nottingham Forest fans at the

           Penistone Road turnstiles.




                                                                                       2198
                                                                          2
Having completed this I wished to film similar scenes of the Liverpool

supporters arriving at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     I think

we finished filming the Forest fans at about 2.30pm (1430) and having

taken 5 minutes to get to the other end of the ground.     Started

filming at the Leppings Lane at approximately 2.35pm (1435).

We used a variety of sites to record/film including a position near to

turnstiles A-G and later, to obtain a wider angle, from the bridge

parpet.

Subsequently, shortly before the start of the match, I decided that I

hac filmed all the material which I wished to record. I had left my

tripod in an area fairly close to the BBC Outside Broadcast vehicles

towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground, along the private road

which runs south east of Gate C.

I had left the tripod there to avoid having to carry this cumbersome

equipment in what I knew would be a crowded area.     I would say that

the time was 2.50pm (1450) when I decided to move to get the tripod.

The area at that time was a seething mass of people and there was no

way I would have been able to get through.     I had therefore to go

back onto Leppings Lane and walk left down Catchbar Lane to Penistone

Road and back into the stadium complex via the Penistone Road

entrance.   I made my way along the thoroughfare with the river to my

nearside and the South Stand to my off-side.

My own recollection is that it must have been about 3pm (1500) as I

passed the Directors' entrance as I heard a noise of shouts which in

my own mind I thought to be the match kicking off.

Within only a couple of minutes I had reached the point approximately

25 yards (25 yds) or so frcm Gate C where my tripod was.      I noticed

this area was now completely empty.   I know that Gate C had not been

opened, in my view at least, whilst I had been filming I cannot say
for sure whether or not Gate C was open or closed when I returned.

I would estimate the time to now be about 3.03pm (1503).        I remarked

to a police officer whom I knew by sight but whom I do not know by

naire.    I asked him words to the effect 'What have you done with them

all?'

The officer replied, "WE'VE HAD TO OPEN THE GATES BUT IT'S A VERY

DANGEROUS THING TO DO, BECAUSE THEY GRT IN WITHOUT TICKETS AND WITHOUT

BEING SEARCHED."

It was just about then that my attention was drawn to a number of

police officers running along the private road towards the gate which

leads towards the police control box.

I cidn't enter the ground itself at that time as a steward closed

the gate behind the police officers.

I saw in one of the vehicles parked with the outside broadcast

vehicles that a colour TV monitor was stowing scenes inside the ground

which I could see were live pictures.        I could see there were

obviously problems inside and within a very short space of time

another group of police officers approached the gate near the police

control box.

Together with            I joined iirmediately at the end of this group

of officers and found our way to an area of concrete adjacent to the

control box.    The steps of the police control box obviously afforded

the best view of the chaotic scenes at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground.
                                         0



I inmediately started filming and did so for seine time until I felt

that we had achieved everything we could from that position and moved

to a different location to shoot more film.

I have been shown by Inspector SAWERS of West Midlands Police a video

tape identified to me as MAP9/E.    I have viewed excerpts of this
        tape.      During the first part of          I do not recognise my work and

        car. distinguish the "Time of Day" time shown on the tape as that used

        by outside broadcasts.       Whereas in TV News there is a preference to

        use what I refer to as elapsed time -       in other words a timer runs

        continually showing only the time elapsed from the start of filming.

        I have viewed          and at what is shown as 16.07.14.23 an

        identification title board using the words:




        Imrediately following is video tape which I identify formally as my

       work on the Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) (Ref Mark          Ex No       ).

        The remainder of             I formally identify as my work and I can say

        that on the video I have been shown I used two video cassettes in the

        recorder which operates separately from the camera.



        M EAWERS Inspector

                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACES

9         TIME:              DATE:      310190

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        M.R.SAWERS INSPECTOR 3451
                                                                                    T


Incident    IC2      190390 CIP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                    Other Document Number   D472



      Date               100589

      Description        QUEST SELECTED QVS N4138




                                       QUESTIONNAIRE




                                        SELECTED




                        SURNAME

           POFNAMES

           ADERESS

           TEL.NO.HOME

                                         QV./.S..



                        THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUEICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



            A£ A CAMERA MAN FOR THE B.B.C.



           Q2.    PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



            CAMERA MAN



                                                                                        2202
Q3.     DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?




Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?




 NCNE

Q5.    HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

        FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 ONLY THAT I HAVE BEEN FILMING FOOTBALL MATCHES FOR NINE YEARS



Q6.     DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



 NC



Q7. WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?




Q8.     FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



 TELEVISION BOAT IN THE SOUTH STAND



Q9. HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



 TAXI



QIC.     WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)
                                                                 PAGE   3
                                                                 D472



NC



Qll. WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



 9.30am (0930)



Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



 FFOM THE SPION KOP END



Q13. DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?      IF YES, BRIEFLY

      DESCRIBE.



 NC



Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

      i)   DISORDER

      ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?

      BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.




 NC

Q15. DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

      LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC



Q16. FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CRCWD

      BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



                                                                            2204
                                                                    PAGE   4
                                                                    D472



£    NC



    Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

           (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




    Q16. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

           CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



•   *


    Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

           OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



     NOTHING UNUSUAL



    Q2C. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST

           STAND?



     YES



    Q21. DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

           BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?




    Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

           CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



                                                                               2205
                                                                     PAGE   5
                                                                     D472




•    *


    Q23. WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



     2.15pn (1415)



    Q24 . DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CRCWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

           BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



     NC



    Q25. AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

           DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



     NC BUT I SAW THE DEAD ON THE PITCH



    Q26.   DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?   BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



     NC



    Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?      (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




     NC

    Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

           POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?




     NC


                                                                                2206
                                                                  PAGE   6
                                                                  D472

Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAI® ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

      OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



NC



Q3C. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

      MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



 NC



Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

      PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF TOE DISASTER?



 NC ANNOUNCEMENT WAS MADE, UNTIL AT LEAST 45 MINUTES AFTER KICK OFF,

TO LET OTHER PEOPLE KNOW WHAT WAS HAPPENING



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



 NC



Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

      BY ANY PERSON?



 NC



Q34 . HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OfflER

      FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC




                                                                             2207
Q35. IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

     SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

     TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

      STANDING AREA TO TOE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



 SURPRISED AT THE NUMBER OF SPACES TO THE SIDES. WHEN THE TWO CENTRE

PENS WERE FULL



Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

      FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



 I FEEL THAT THEY WERE LATE IN RECOGNISING WHAT WAS HAPPENING, AND

THEN THERE WAS A LACK OF ORGANISATION ON THE PITCH, IT APPEARED THAT

MOSTLY FAN'S WERE GIVING ASSISTANCE WITHOUT DIRECTIONS.



THERE WAS NO CONTROL OF THE DISASTER AT ALL, IT JUST HAPPENED TO FAST

FOR ANYBODY TO CONTROL



Q36. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

     TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



 LACK OF CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR ANY MAJOR INCIDENT




SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED
                                                                        PAGE   8
                                                                        D472



£       NAf'E/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS)



        SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING___



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                      IMPRESSIVE .....

                                                AVERAGE ...... X.

                                                P O O R ..........




    OF REPORT




                                                                                   2209
Incident    IC2     190390 OP8O64      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                  Other Document Number   D468



      Date               100589

      Description      QUEST SELECTED QVS N411




                                     QUESTIONNAIRE




                                      SELECTED




                      SURNAME ..

           POFNAMES ..

           ADCRESS ...

           TEL.NO.HOME

                                       QV./.



                      THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY

           15C489.




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



                  As a camerc            for the BBC



           Q2. PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



                  Camera




                                                                                    2210
                                                               PAGE    2
                                                               D468

Q3. DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



      No



Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



      None



Q5.   HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

      FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



      I have been involved in broadcasting outside sports events for

      about 25 yrs, in particular I was present at the World Cup in

      Spain and the European nations cup in Italy.



Q6. DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



      No



Q7 . WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?



      /


Q8 . FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



      From the T.V. gantry level with the centreline of the pitch



 Q9. HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO TOE GROUND?



       By train then taxi to the ground


                                                                           221 1
                                                                      PAGE   3
                                                                      D468



£   QIC.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



           No



    Qll. WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



           Around 10.00am (1000) I cannot be prescise



    Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



           I cannot be sure but I think it was near to the South

           Stand



    Q12. DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?       IF YES, BRIEFLY

           DESCRIBE.



           No



    Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

           i)   DISORDER

           ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?

           BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



           No



    Q15. DID YOU WITNESS ANY CRCWD BUIID UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

           LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



           No



                                                                                 2212
                                                                    PAGE   4
                                                                    D468



£   Q16 . FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD

          BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



          No



    Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

          (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



          No



®   Q16. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

          CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



          No



    Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

          OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



          No



    Q2C. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST

          STAND?



          Yes



    Q21. DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

           BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?



           No



                                                                               2213
                                                                       PAGE   5
                                                                       D468



Q   Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

         CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



         No



    Q23. WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



         Around 2.15 - 2.30pm (1415 - 1430)



    Q24. DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CRCWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

          BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT    TIME DIDIT OCCUR?



          Yes.   As we scanned around   the crowd before the game started I

          remember seeing the crowd behind the goal at the West Stand

          backwards and forwards.   At the time it gave me the impression

          that a dangerous situation    might arise from it, I cannot

          be exact about the time at    this stage but I think itmay

          have been around 2.45pm (1445).



    Q25. AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

          DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



          No



    Q26. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?     BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



          No



    Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



                                                                                  2214
                                                              PAGE      6
                                                              D468



     No



Q26. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

     POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



     No



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

     OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



      I was impressed at the speed with which the Police formed a line

      across the pitch to seperate the two sets of fans, also the way

      in which they helped the dead and injured fans.

     An announcement by the Police should have been made to the other

      fans.



Q3C. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAE® ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

      MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



      No



Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OIHER

      PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



      There was no annoucement by the loadspeaker system to the other

      people in the ground to explain that fans had been injured.



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?




                                                                            2215
                                                                    PAGE   7
                                                                    D468

         No



    Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

         BY ANY PERSON?



          No



    Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

          FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



          No



    Q35. IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

          SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

          TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



          I did not attend last years match



    Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

          STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



          No



    Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

          FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



          Once the incident had been recognised it was handled well on the

           pitch.   But again I must make comment about the lack of any

           loudspeakers announconents



•                                                                              2216
                                                                        PAGE   8
                                                                        D468

        Q36. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

 £              TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



                No




        Signature of person interviewed



        Narre/Rank/Number of Officer completing (print in block capitals)



        Signature of officer completing



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                       Impressive .....

                                                Average ...... X.

                                                Poor ..........




END OF REPOFT




                                                                                   2217
Incident    IC2      190390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                   Other Document Number   D469



      Date               100589

      Description       QUEST SELECTED QVS N4119




                                      QUESTIONNAIRE




                                       SELECTED




                       SURNAME

           FOFNAMES ..

           ADCRESS ___

           TEL. NO.HOME ...

                                         QV./B..



                        THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY

           15C489.




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



           BBC television cameraman



           Q2.    PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



           Television cameraman



                                                                                    2218
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                D469



Q3.    DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



No



Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?




Nore

Q5.    HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

       FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



No



Q6. DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?




No

Q 7 . WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?




Q8.    FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



Approx. 6 rows back in south stand from the pitch level with the 18

yard line (18 yds) at Leppings Lane end.



Q9 . HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



I travelled to the ground in                        car




                                                                            2219
                                                                     PAGE   3
                                                                     D469

     QIC.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)


*
     NO

     Qll. WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



     Abcut 9.30am (0930)



     Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



     Leppings Lane

t§
     Q13. DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?     IF YES, BRIEFLY

            DESCRIBE.



     No



     Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

            i)   DISORDER

            ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN TOE STREETS?

            BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



     No



     Q15. DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT TOE LEPPINGS

            LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



     No



     Q16. FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CRCWD



                                                                                2220
      BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?




No

Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

      (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




No

Q18. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUQTT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

      CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



No



Q1S. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

      OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




No

Q2C. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST

      STAND?



Yes



Q21. DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

      BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?



Nothing apart frcm the fact that the fans were packed in behind the

goel at the West Stand
Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

      CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



No



Q22. WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?




Abcut 2.00pn (1400).

Q24 . DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CRCWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

      BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



At about 2.45pm (1445) I remember that the crowd surged forward

enrrass and that the people were packed in tightly.



Q25. AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

      DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



No



Q26. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?    BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



No



Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



No



Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

      POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?
                                                                   PAGE      6
                                                                   D469



    No
*
    Q2S. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

          OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



    At around 3.00pm (1500) I could see that people were trying to climb

    out of the pens. The Police were pushing these people back off the

    fer.cing into the pens. As soon as the Police realised the full extent

    of the disaster they acted as well as they could.



»   Q3C. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

          MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



    They acted in the same manner as the Police



    Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

          PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



    There did not appear to be anybody in authority who gave out any

    information that the disaster was occuring.



    Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



    No



    Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

          BY ANY PERSON?



    No



                                                                                 2223
                                                                     PAGE   7
                                                                     D469



    Q34 . HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

           FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



    No



    Q35.   IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

           SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

           TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



    No

t   Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

           STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



    The fans were concentrated in the middle area of the west stand and

    there appeared to be plenty of room at either side



    Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

           FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?


m   There was no control, everybody involved appeared to be overwhelmed

    by the events that occured.



    Q36. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

           TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



    There was no information given out at all about what was happening.

    Pec pie had to guess what was going on



♦
                                                                                2224
                                                                        PAGE   8
                                                                        D469




t       Signature of person interviewed



        Naire/Rank/Number of Officer completing (print in block capitals)

                                   PC

        Signature of officer completing ..



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                       Impressive

                                                Average ...

                                                P o o r .....




END OF REPORT




                                                                                   2225
Incident    IC2      190390 OP8064      DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                   Other Document Number   D470




9     Date

      Description
                         100589

                        QUEST SELECTED QVS N4127




                                      QUESTIONNAIRE




                                       SELECTED




                       SURNAME

           FOFNAMES

           ADLRESS                                         SURREY

           TEL.NO.HOME

                                        QV./....



                       THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JULICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUQi FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY

           15C489.




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



                  AS A CAMERA MAN FOR THE BBC.



           Q2.    PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



                  CAMERA MAN.



                                                                                    2226
                                                                     PAGE   2
                                                                     D470




*   Q3.   DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



          NO.



    Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



          NONE.



    Q5. HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

          FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




    Q6.   DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



          NO.



    Q7. WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?




    Q8.   FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



          FROM BEHIND THE GOAL AT THE SPION KOP END OF THE GROUND.



    Q9.   HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



          PRIVATE VEHICLE.




                                                                                2227
                                                                      PAGE    3
                                                                      D470

    QIC.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



           NO.



    Qll.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



           9.30 AM (0930).



    Q12.   WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



           THROUGH THE BBC COMPOUND AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END OF THE GROUND.

*
    Q12.   DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?     IF YES, BRIEFLY

           DESCRIBE.



           NO.



    Q14.   DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

           (i)   DISORDER

           (ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?


*          BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



           NO.



    Q15.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

           LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



           NO.



    Q16.   FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD



                                                                                  2228
                                                                PAGE    4
                                                                D470

     BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



     NO.



Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

      (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



      NO.



Q18. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

      CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



      NO.



Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

      OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



      NO.



Q2C. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST




      I COULD SEE IT FAIRLY WELL FROM THE PLAYERS' ENTRANCE BUT, WHEN

      I MOVED TO MY POSITION BEHIND THE GOAL, I COULD NOT SEE MUCH.



Q21. DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

      BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?



      THERE WAS A LARGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE CENTRE PENS AND THEY

      CROWD WAS SWAYING FROM SIDE TO SIDE, BUT THIS WAS PRIOR TO THE



                                                                            2229
                                                                 PAGE   5
                                                                 D470

       KICK-OFF.



Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

       CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



       NO.



Q23. WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



       3.05 PM (1505).



Q24 . DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CRCWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

       BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



       NOT FROM WHERE I WAS STANDING.



Q25. AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

       DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



       NO.



Q26.   DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?   BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



       NO.



Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?      (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO.



Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER



                                                                            2230
                                                             PAGE       6
                                                             D470

     POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



     NO.



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

     OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



     LACK OF COMMUNICATION.



Q3C. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

      MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



      NO.



Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

      PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



      NO.



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



      NO.



Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

      BY ANY PERSON?



      NO.



Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

      FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



                                                                            2231
Q35.   IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

       SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

       TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       /


Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

       STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



       THE TWO CENTRE PENS WERE VERY CROWDED WHILST THE TWO OUTER PENS

       SEEMED EMPTY.



Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

       FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



       AGAIN, A LACK OF COMMUNICATION IN THE WAY THAT OTHER FANS WERE

       NOT TOLD WHAT WAS HAPPENING.



Q36. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

       TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



       NO.




SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED
                                                                       PAGE   8
                                                                       D470

        NA^E/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS)



        SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                      IMPRESSIVE

                                                AVERAGE         X

                                                P O O R .....




END OF REPOFT




                                                                                  2233
Incident    102    190390 OP227         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                   Other Document Number   D471



      Date              100589

      Description       QUEST SELECTED QVS N4131




                                      QUESTIONNAIRE




                                       SELECTED




                      SURNAME .

           FORNAMES .

           ADDRESS ..

           TEL.NO.HOME                        .....BUSINESS .

                                    QV./___



                        THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



                  AS A CAMERA MAN



           Q2.    PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



                  CAMERA MAN FOR THE BBC



                                                                                    2234
                                                                PAGE    2
                                                                D471



Q3.    DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



       NO



Q4.    WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



       NONE



Q5.    HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

       FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q6. DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



       NO



Q7. WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?



       WITH A SECURITY OFFICER




Q8 • FROM WHAT PSOITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



       FROM THE WEST STAND ON A SUSPENDED PLATFORM FROM THE ROOF



 Q9.    HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



        BY CAR


                                                                            2235
                                                                PAGE    3
                                                                D471



QIO.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Qll.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



       9.30AM (0930)



Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



       LEPPINGS LANE ENTRANCE



Q13.   DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?   IF YES, BRIEFLY

       DESCRIBE.



       NO



Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

       i)   DISORDER

       ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?

       BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



       NO



Q15.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

       LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO




                                                                            2236
                                                                 page :   4
                                                                 D471

Q16. FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD

       BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



       NO



Q17.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

       (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q18.   DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

       CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

       OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       AFTER THE INITIAL INCIDENT AND PEOPLE HAD COME ONTO THE PITCH I

       SAW ONE OR TWO INDIVIDUALS ARGUING WITH THE POLICE, I WOULD

       ESTIMATE THIS TO BE BETWEEN 3.30PM - 4.00PM (1530 - 1600).



Q20. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT

       OF THE WEST STAND?



       YES BUT ONLY FROM ABOVE AND BEHIND



Q21.   DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

       BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?




                                                                              2237
                                                                  PAGE    5
                                                                  D471

       AT ABOUT 2.50B1 (1450) I OBSERVED A RIPPLE IN PEN 3 WHICH

       STARTED IN THE TOP LEFT AND BENT DOWN INTO THE BOTTOM RIGHT.      AT

       THE TIME I CAN REMEMBER THINKING THAT SOMEBODY WAS PUSHING AND

       THAT PEOPLE MAY BE HURT.



Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

       CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



       NO



Q23.   WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



       1.00 PM. (1300)



Q24.   DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CROWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

       BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



       ONLY WHAT I DESCRIBED IN QUESTION 21



Q25.   AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

       DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



       NO. BUT I SAW THE DEAD AS THE CRCWDS CLEARED.



Q26.   DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?    BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



       NO



Q27.   DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




                                                                              2238
                                                                  PAGE    6
                                                                  D471

       NO



Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

       POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



       ONLY THE ODD SUPPORTERS ARGUING WITH THE POLICE AS PREVIOUSLY

       STATED.



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

       OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



       I CANNOT UNDERSTAND WHY THE GATE WAS OPENED AND SO MANY PEOPLE

       ALLOWED INTO THE PENS WHICH WERE ALREADY FULL AND NOT SENT TO

       THE SIDE PENS.

       THERE SEEMED TO BE A LACK OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THOSE

       INSIDE THE GROUND AND THOSE OUTSIDE THE GROUND.



Q30.   HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

       MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?




Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

       PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



       NO



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



       NO


                                                                              2239
                                                                PAGE     7
                                                                D471



Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

       BY ANY PERSON?



       NO



Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

       FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q35. IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

       SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

       TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




Q36.   HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

       STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



       JUST THAT THERE SEEMED TO BE TO MANY PEOPLE IN PEN'S 3 AND 4.



Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

       FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



       THE POLICE AND OTHER AUTHORITIES WERE SLCW TO RECOQTCSE THE

       INCIDENT BUT WHEN THEY DID I FELT IT WAS CONTROLLED WELL.



Q38. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

       TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?


                                                                             2240
                                                                      PAGE   8
                                                                      D471




        SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED .



        NAME/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS)

         ..pd           ...............................................

        SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                      IMPRESSIVE .

                                                AVERAGE ...X

                                                P O O R ......




END OF REPORT




                                                                                 2241
Incident    102    190390 OP227        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                  Other Document Number   D473



      Date             100589

      Description      QUEST SELECTED QVS N4140




                                     QUESTIONNAIRE




                                      SELECTED




                      SURNAME

           FORNAMES

           ADDRESS                                   LONDON.

           TEL.NO.HOME                               BUSINESS

                                       QVS/D473



                      THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY




           Ql.    IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



            TELEVISION CAMERAMAN.



           Q2.    PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



            TELEVISION CAMERAMAN.    (BBC)


                                                                                    2242
                                                               PAGE    2
                                                               D473



Q3. DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



 NC.



Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



 NCNE.



Q5.    HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST SALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

       FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q6. DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



 NC.



Q7. WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?

 /
Q8.    FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



 TV GANTRY JUST TO THE LEFT OF THE CENTRE LINE.



Q9.    HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



 TAXI.



QIO.     WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




                                                                           2243
Qll.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



 0900 - 0930 hrs (0900 - 0930)



Q12.   WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



 LEPPINGS LANE.



Q13.   DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?     IF YES, BRIEFLY

       DESCRIBE.



 NC.



Q14.     DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

         (i)   DISORDER

         (ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?

         BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



 i NO.

ii NO.

Q15. DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

         LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q16. FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD

         BUILD UP AT ANY CITHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?
                                                                  PAGE   4
                                                                  D473

 NC.



Q17.    DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

        (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q18. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

        CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

        OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



AT ABOUT 2.30 PM (1430 HRS) I WAS OF THE OPINION THAT THE SWAYING OF

THE CROWD BEHIND THE GOAL AT THE      WEST STAND WAS OF A DISORDERLY

NATURE.



Q20. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST

        STAND?



 YES.



Q21. DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

        BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?



THE OVERCROWDING BEHIND THE GOAL OBVIOUSLY CONTRIBUTED TO THE

 DISASTER.




                                                                             2245
Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

       CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



NC.



Q23.   WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



 AEOUT 2.00 PM (1400)



Q24.   DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CROWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

       BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



 NC.



Q25.   AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

       DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



 NC.



Q26. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?    BRIELFY EXPLAIN.



 NC.



Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q28.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

       POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?
                                                                 PAGE
                                                                 D473

NC.



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

       OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



BEFORE THE FULL SCALE OF THE DISASTER WAS REALISED, THE POLICE

RETURNED QUITE A FEW FANS BACK INTO THE PENS WHO      HAD   CLIMBED OUT OVER

TOE FENCING.   I WAS IMPRESSED WITH THE SPEED AND     DISCIPLINEWITO WHICH

TOE POLICE CUT OFF THE TWO SETS OF FANS.



Q30.   HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF TOE

       MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



 NC.



Q31.   HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

       PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



A LONG PERIOD OF TIME PASSED BEFORE ANY SORT OF LOUD SPEAKER

ANNOUNCEMENT WAS MADE.



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



 NC.



Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

       BY ANY PERSON?



 NO.




                                                                               2247
                                                                PAGE
                                                                D473

Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

       FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q35.   IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

       SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

       TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



 NC.



Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

       STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



THE FANS WERE CONCENTRATED JUST BEHIND THE WEST STAND GOAL, LEAVING

THE SIDE AREAS RELATIVELY EMPTY.



Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

       FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



APART FROM THE LACK OF THE PA ANNOUNCEMENT AS EAR AS I AM CONCERNED

EVERYTHING THAT COULD HAVE BEEN DONE WAS DONE.



Q38. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

       TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



 NC.




                                                                          2248
                                                                       PAGE   8
                                                                       D473

        SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED



        NAME/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS)



        SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                      IMPRESSIVE     X

                                                AVERAGE .....

                                                P O O R ........




END OF REPORT




                                                                                  2249
Incident   102    190390 OP227         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                   Other Document Number   D474



      Date             100589

      Description      QUEST SELECTED QVS N4141




                                     QUESTIONNAIRE




                                      SELECTED




                       SURNAME

           FORNAMES

           ADDRESS .                                 MIDDLESEX.

           TEL.NO.HOME .                          .BUSINESS .

                                        QV./.



                       THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INK) THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY

           150489.




           Ql.   IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



                 AS A CAMERAMAN FOR THE B.B.C. SPORT.



           Q2.   PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.



                 CAMERAMAN FOR THE B.B.C.



                                                                                   2250
                                                               PAGE    2
                                                               D474



Q3.   DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



      NO



Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



      NO



Q5.   HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

      FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



      I HAVE BEEN FUMING FOOTBALL MATCHES FOR 4 YEARS.



Q6 . DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



      NO



Q7. WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?




Q8. FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



      O N THE PITCH TO THE LEFT OF THE PLAYERS TUNNEL.




Q9. HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?



      TAXI




                                                                           2251
                                                                PAGE    3
                                                                D474

QIO.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Qll.   WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT TOE GROUND?



       9.30AM   (0930)



Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



       TOE LEPPINGS LANE ENTRANCE



Q13.   DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?   IF YES, BRIEFLY

       DESCRIBE.



       NO



Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND TOE GROUND ANY

       (i)   DISORDER

       (ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN TOE STREETS?

       BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



       NO



Q15.   DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUIID UP OR CRUSHING AT TOE LEPPINGS

       LANE ENTRANCE?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q16.   FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD



                                                                            2252
                                                                  PAGE   4
                                                                  D474

       BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



       NO



Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF TOE GROUND?

       (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q18. DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO TOE GROUND OR BEING

       CONSUMED INSIDE TOE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT TOE TIME WAS

       OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q20. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY TOE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF TOE WEST




       YES



Q21.   DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

       BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?



       THERE SEEMED TO BE A LARGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE PENS, 3 AND 4.



Q22. DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY



                                                                             2253
                                                               PAGE     5
                                                               D474

       CONCERNED WITH TOE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?



       NO



Q23. WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



       1.45PM (1345)



Q24. DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CRCWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

       BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW TOE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?




Q25.   AT TOE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED TOE

       DEATH OF ANY PERSON?



       NO



Q26. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF TOE DECEASED?    BRIELFY EXPLAIN.




Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF TOE INJURED?    (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



       NO



Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

       POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT TOE TIME OF TOE DISASTER?



       NO



                                                                            2254
                                                              PAGE     6
                                                              D474



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT TOE ACTIONS OF TOE POLICE

     OFFICERS AT TOE TIME OF TOE DISASTER?



      I FEEL THAT THEY ACTED WELL WHEN TOERE WAS A RUSH OF LIVERPOOL

      SUPPORTERS TOWARDS TOE SPION KOP BY FORMING A LINE ACROSS TOE

      PITCH.



Q30. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT TOE ACTIONS OF ANY OF TOE

      MATCH STEWARDS AT TOE TIME OF TOE DISASTER?




Q31. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT TOE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

      PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT TOE TIME OF TOE DISASTER?



      NO



Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?




Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

      BY ANY PERSON?



      NO



Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

      FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




                                                                           2255
                                                                page ;
                                                                D474

       NO



Q35.   IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

       SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

       TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON' THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

       STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



       IT WAS QUITE PLAIN BEFORE THE START OF THE MATCH THAT THE SIDE

       PENS WERE EMPTY WHILST THE PENS 3 AND 4 WERE FULL.



Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

       FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?



       NO



Q38. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

       TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



       I FEEL THAT THE POLICE CONTROL BOX IN THE POSITION IT IS SHOULD

       HAVE SEEN THE PROBLEM MUCH BEFORE THE DISASTER.




SIGNATURE OF PERSON INTERVIEWED



NAKE/RANK/NUMBER OF OFFICER COMPLETING (PRINT IN BLOCK CAPITALS)




                                                                          2256
                                                                page ;   8
                                                                D474

        SIGNATURE OF OFFICER COMPLETING



        QUALITY OF WITNESS                IMPRESSIVE

                                          AVERAGE ...     .X.

                                          P O O R .....




END OF REPORT




                                                                             2257
Incident   102    190390 OP227          DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                   Other Document Number   D475



      Date              100589

      Description       QUEST SELECTED QVS N4143




                                      QUESTIONNAIRE




                                       SELECTED




                        SURNAME

           POPNAMES

           ADDRESS

                     LONDON.

           TEL.NO.HOME                                BUSINESS

                                        QVS/D475



                        THIS QUESTIONNAIRE IS TO ASSIST THE LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS'

           JUDICAL INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER ON SATURDAY

           150489.




           Ql.   IN WHAT CAPACITY DID YOU ATTEND THE SEMI-FINAL MATCH ON 150489?



           TELEVISION CAMERAMAN.     FOR THE BBC OUTSIDE BROADCAST.



           Q2.   PLEASE STATE YOUR OCCUPATION.




                                                                                    2258
Q3.     DO YOU HOLD ANY PUBLIC OFFICE?



NO.



Q4. WHAT IS YOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB?



NONE.



Q5 . HAVE YOU ANY SPECIALIST QUALIFICATIONS OR EXPERIENCE WHICH YOU

        FEEL CAN ASSIST IN THIS INQUIRY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



I HAVE BEEN EMPLOYED AS A CAMERAMAN BY THE BBC FOR 6 YEARS BUT THAT

WAS ONLY MY SECOND WEEK ON OUTSIDE BROADCAST.     AND MY 1ST FOOTBALL

MATCH.



Q6.     DID YOU ATTEND THIS SAME FIXTURE LAST YEAR?



NO.



Q7 . WHO WAS WITH YOU AT THIS YEARS MATCH?



BY SELF.

Q8. FROM WHAT POSITION DID YOU VIEW THE MATCH?



CORNER OF SOUTH STAND AT THE SPION KOP END OF THE GROUND.



Q9 . HOW DID YOU TRAVEL TO THE GROUND?
                                                                PAGE   3
                                                                D475

BY CAR.



QIO.   WERE YOU DELAYED IN ANY WAY? (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



NO.



Qll. WHAT TIME DID YOU ARRIVE AT THE GROUND?



BETWEEN 8.30 - 9 AM (0830 - 0900)



Q12. WHICH ENTRANCE DID YOU USE TO GAIN ACCESS?



MAIN GATE.



Q13.   DID YOU HAVE ANY PROBLEM GAINING ACCESS?   IF YES, BRIEFLY

       DESCRIBE.



NO



Q14. DID YOU WITNESS AROUND THE GROUND ANY

       i)    DISORDER

       ii) CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN THE STREETS?

       BRIEFLY EXPLAIN.



 1. NO

 2. NO



Q15. DID YOU WITNESS ANY CROWD BUILD UP OR CRUSHING AT THE LEPPINGS

          LANE ENTRANCE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




                                                                           2260
                                                                 page ;
                                                                 D475

NO



Q16. FROM YOUR EXPERIENCE WOULD YOU SAY THERE WAS EXCESSIVE CROWD

       BUILD UP AT ANY OTHER GROUND ENTRANCES ON YOUR ARRIVAL?



NO



Q17. DID YOU WITNESS ANY UNAUTHORISED ENTRY TO ANY PART OF THE GROUND?

       (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



NO



Q18.   DID YOU WITNESS ALCOHOL BEING BROUGHT INTO THE GROUND OR BEING

       CONSUMED INSIDE THE GROUND?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



NO



Q19. DID YOU WITNESS ANY SITUATION WHICH YOU THOUGHT AT THE TIME WAS

       OF A   DISORDERLY NATURE?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



NO



Q20. COULD YOU SEE CLEARLY THE STANDING AREA IN FRONT OF THE WEST

       STAND?



YES



Q21.   DID YOU SEE ANY INCIDENT IN THAT STANDING AREA WHICH YOU

       BELIEVE COULD HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THIS DISASTER?




                                                                          2261
NOTHING OTHER THAN THE SHEER VOLUME OF THE FANS IN THE STANDING AREA

OF THE LEPPINGS LANE END AND THE SWAYING FORWARDS AND BACKWARDS OF THE

CROWD.




Q22.     DO YOU KNOW IF YOU SAW ANYTHING WHICH YOU BELIEVE WAS DIRECTLY

         CONCERNED WITH THE BREAKING OF A BARRIER IN PEN 3?




Q23.     WHAT TIME DID YOU TAKE UP YOUR MATCH VIEWING POSITION?



ABOUT THE 2PM TIME (1400)



Q24. DID YOU SEE ANY UNUSUAL CROWD SURGE IN EITHER PEN 3 OR PEN 4 OR

         BOTH? IF SO, DO YOU KNOW THE CAUSE AND WHAT TIME DID IT OCCUR?



FROM TIME TO TIME I FOCUSED ON THAT AREA AND SAW SWAYING OF THE CROWD

BUT NOTHING UNUSUAL.




Q25.     AT THE TIME OF THIS INCIDENT, CAN YOU SAY IF YOU WITNESSED THE

         DEATH OF ANY PERSON?




Q26.     DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE DECEASED?   BRIELFY EXPLAIN.
Q27. DID YOU ASSIST ANY OF THE INJURED?     (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



NO



Q28. DID YOU WITNESS ANY ACT BY SUPPORTERS WHICH OBSTRUCTED EITHER

       POLICE, STEWARDS OR MEDICAL PERSONS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



NO



Q29. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF THE POLICE

       OFFICERS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



THE ONLY OBSERVATIONS I CAN MAKE IS I SAW A POLICE OFFICER RUN TO THE

REFEREE TO GET THE GAME STOPPED.




Q30. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OF THE

       MATCH STEWARDS AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



NO



Q31.   HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ABOUT THE ACTIONS OF ANY OTHER

       PERSON IN AUTHORITY AT THE TIME OF THE DISASTER?



ONCE THE EMERGENCY SERVICES GOT INTO FULL SWING ALL, INCLUDING FANS

SEEMED TO BE DOING ALL THAT WAS POSSIBLE.

AT THE TIME OF THE START OF THE INCIDENT THERE DIDN'T SEEM ANY

METHOD OR WAY OF RELEASING THE PRESSURE OF FANS IN THE CENTRE PENS

AT THAT END.
Q32. WERE YOU SUBJECTED TO ANY THREATS OR VIOLENCE?



NO



Q33. DID YOU WITNESS ANYTHING THAT YOU CONSIDER TO BE A CRIMINAL ACT

       BY ANY PERSON?



NO



Q34. HAVE YOU BEEN PRESENT AT, OR HAD EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER

       FOOTBALL TRAGEDY?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)




NO

Q35.   IF YOU ATTENDED LAST YEARS SIMILAR MATCH WAS THERE ANYTHING

       SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT WHICH YOU THINK IS A CONTRIBUTORY FACTOR

       TO THIS DISASTER?   (BRIEFLY EXPLAIN)



N/A



Q36. HAVE YOU ANY COMMENT TO MAKE ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF FANS IN THE

       STANDING AREA TO THE FRONT OF THE WEST STAND?



NO, OTHER THAN FROM MY POSITION IT SEEMED PARTICULARLY CROWDED TOWARDS

THE CENTRE SECTIONS OF THE LIVERPOOL END.




Q37. DO YOU HAVE ANY VIEWS ON THE WAY THIS DISASTER WAS CONTROLLED

       FOLLOWING THE RECOGNITION OF THE INCIDENT HAPPENING?
VERY WELL ORGANISED ONCE IT WAS RECOQQISED THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE

SITUATION.



Q38. IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU WISH TO ADD WHICH YOU FEEL IS VITAL

     TO THIS JUDICIAL INQUIRY?



SHORTLY AFTER THE MATCH WAS STOPPED A SECTION OF THE NOTTINGHAM

FORREST CROWD BEHIND THE GOAL STARTED JEERING AT THE LIVERPOOL FANS, I

PRESUME NOT KNOWING WHAT HAD HAPPENED.   A NUMBER OF LIVERPOOL FANS

MOVED UP TO THEM AND IT APPEARED OTHERS WOULD POLDCW AND A SERIOUS

DISORDER SITUATION COULD HAVE OCCURRED IF THE CORDON OF POLICE

OFFICERS HAD NOT BEEN PLACED ACROSS THE PITCH.   IT WOULD BE FAIR TO

SAY THAT ONCE THE NOTTS FANS REALISED THE GRAVITY OF THE INCIDENT

THEIR WHOLE ATTITUDE CHANGED.

I FEEL THAT FAR BETTER USE OF THE GROUNDS PA SYSTEM AND MUCH MORE

INFORMATION SHOULD HAVE BEEN GIVEN OUT THE ALL CONCERNED.



Signature of person interviewed




Name/Rank/Number of Officer completing (print in block capitals)




                                                            Signature

of officer completing



QUALITY OF WITNESS                       Impressive

                                         Average .X
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIREH: 48

OCCUPATION:     CAMERA


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                            |SIGNED)



           For the last thirty years I have been employed as a camera man for

           the BBC, most of this time being involved with outside broadcasts,

           including sport.   During this period I have covered major sporting

           events including F A Cup Finals.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I formed part of an outside

           broadcast team covering the F A Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough, Sheffield.



                              I was equipped with a hand held camera complete with

           recorder                  This camera can be held on the shoulder or

           tripod mounted.    I was accompanied by             Sound Technician.

           I travelled to the ground frcm a nearby hotel and arrived at about

           10.00 am (1000) on the day of the match.   At this time there was a

           scattering of fans.   Between 10.00 am (1000) and 2.00 pm (1400) I

           was inside the ground available for any recording that was required.

           At 2.00 pm (1400), with               we walked around the track to

           take up our filming position at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

           I set the camera on a tripod to the right side of the goal facing the
pitch.     This position is on the grass fringe behind the white paint

lire which denotes the press area.     The barrier separating pens 2

and 3 would be about the area we were situated.

I noticed at this time that the Spion Kop end appeared full and that

the pens on the south extremely at the Leppings Lane end were

relatively empty.     From plans of the ground I see these pens are in

fact numbers 1 and 2.     Pen 3 was full, and in my opinion was at its

capacity.     Between 2.00 pm (1400) and 2.30 pm (1430) I saw a few

supporters climb from pen 3 into pen 2.     I remember being surprised

that there were not more Liverpool supporters in the Leppings Lane

stend at that time.

Between 2.00 pm (1400) and 3.00 pm (1500) I occasionally glanced at

per 3 and saw that it was alwaysfull to capacity.     I seem to

rerrember that pens 1 and 2 still had empty spaces.    I cannot recall

seeing any uniformed Policemen inside pen 3.     I doubt whether I would

have been able to see whether any ground Stewards were in there.

After the players and officials had come onto the pitch I began

focusing my attention on the pitch.

On thinking back I now recall that the Liverpool players had come

onto the pitch well before kick-off time to warm up.     There was a

lovely atmosphere and a marvellous rapport between the players and

the supporters who were in the ground at that time.

At around kick-off time I had my camera tripod-mounted at low level

anc         was positioned behind me, slightly to my right.   Shortly

after kick-off time I became aware of some sort of crowd disturbance

taking place behind me.     I then became aware that a male person was

lying on his back just in front of me.     He was breathing very

heavily.     Within a very short space of time other persons were doing

the same thing.     Some were stumbling, some standing and seme lying.
                                                                             3


I was aware that these people were in a state of distress and that

they were seeking safety and refuge.    At this stage I could no longer

see the pitch owing to the fact that the view through the camera lens

was obscured by people.

I realised that something unusual was taking place in pen 3.       I took

the camera off the tripod and mounted it on my shoulder.     I began

taking wide angle shots of the general melee taking place.      I remember

seeing three supporters standing in pen 2 at the co m e r of the

barrier with pen 3.   They were hurling abuse at a Policeman on the

track and they were extremely agitated by the fact that a friend of

theirs was stuck in pen 3.   They then turned their attention to me

and began spitting and being generally antagonistic towards me.        I

rerrember that these three had space around them and that they were

free to move.   At this stage Police Officers were standing on the

wall facing the supporters and urging them to move back.     I can state

that there was no open gate frcm pen 3 to the track.    For no reason

that I could see the emphasis changed frcm one of containment of the

supporters to one of removal of fans frcm the pens to relieve the

crush.

I could see that supporters seated in the stand above pen 3 were

reaching down and dragging supporters up by the arms.     I saw

supporters coming through the gate of pens 1 and 2 and going onto the

pitch to assist people who were injured.    I remember seeing tvro

Policemen trying to rip an opening in the barrier of pen 3.

At the front of pen 3, close to the corner where the barrier between

per 2 is situated. I could see that the front tvro rows of supporters

were pushed hard against the barrier.    They were completely

motionless and in particular I remember a young girl with the right

sice of her face being pushed hard against the barrier.     She was
holding one hand up trying to protect her face frcm the barrier.

I cannot recall sequence of events but I turned the camera onto the

pitch and I remember being surprised at the number of people lying

injured.   I remember that the Police, the St Johns Ambulance brigade

anc quite a number of supporters were assisting the injured.

I was approached by a number of indignant supporters asking me to

film various things, in particular film showing them holding complete

tickets.   They told me that that a gate had been opened by Police.

They generally felt that Liverpool supporters would be unfairly

blamed. I was approached by a Policeman wearing a flat cap who told me

to leave that particular area or he would arrest me.           who had

been with me the whole time, and myself then moved to an area at the

halfway line on the South Stand side of the pitch.

Saretime after I had arrived on the half way line I became aware that

the Police had formed a cordon across the width of the pitch and they

were slowly walking forward ushering Liverpool supporters back to the

Leppings Lane end.   This appeared to me to be a safety precaution and

it was not conducted in an aggresive fashion.   At this time I

conducted an interview with a group of supporters allowing them to

express their views on film.

With regard to the incident as a whole I would make the following

points.

At no stage did I see or hear anyone using a loudhailer.   I think the

use of one would have been useful.   I feel that people should have

been informed of what had happened. The P A system was used only

twice and I thought that insufficient information was imparted on

both occasions.

I had been close at hand to many of the events that had occurred yet

I was astounded when the enormity of the tragedy was later known to
        roe.    I still find it difficult to comprehend that all those people

        died.

        I did not cover the Liverpool v Notts Forest Cup Send Final in 1988

        (0C0088). All film that I took was subsequently handed to the

        production department of the BBC Outside broadcast unit



                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

^pPNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                 2270
