ix   &   ■
    NAME:
                                        Sheffield Archives Ref:
                                                                                 1     STATION



•
    ADDRESS:


    AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

    OCCUPATION:


    Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
    by me, is true to the best of my knowledgeand belief aad I make
    it knowing that if it is tendered in evid&rice I shall be liable to
    prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anyOiingwhich I know
    to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATED: 070589                                                                     (SIGNED)


    +
                                                              I am a                   by

               trade.



               I have been employed as a Turnstile Operator at Hillsborough for

               about



            On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I was working at the

               Liverpool/Nottingham FA Cup Semi-Final.            It was an all-ticket match,

               so my job on the day was to examine the tickets presented at the

               turnstile, remove the counterfoil and allow the spectators into the

               ground.



            When I first got the job at Hillsborough, another operator shewed me

               how to use the equipment. It's straightforward, only a matter of

            pressing the pedal and then allowing it up slowly.                I have also

            worked as a

                                               ^~                   '     ~        1 so I can




                                                                                                 349
  do both jobs.     I have never experienced any difficulties operating
  the turnstile, mechanical or otherwise.



  At last y e a r's Sani-Final I was also working a turnstile at the
  Ieppings Lane end.



  On the 15th of April 1989 (150489), X was posted to Turnstile        |*t the

  lappings Lane end which allowed spectators access to the Vfest Standing

  Terrace.    I was working on my own                       H    There was
 a young lad facing me in turnstile



 When you report to the ground on the day of the match, you don't

 necessarily know which turnstile you will be operating.    This is

 especially so at a big match when you can be posted anywhere.



 When we reported for duty on the 15th (150489) we received a verbal

 brxefing by one of the office staff, and also frcm a high ranking

 Policeman.   It was stressed that we should only accept the correct

 ticket for the correct gate.   In my case, this iraant a blue ticket
 for the standing area.



I am not and never have been provided with a radio or any other form
of camiunication.



I am aware of the coded message that Is broadcast on the PA system in

the case of an emergency.    if i heard this, I would siaply lock the

gate on the turnstile, remain there, and ajrait further instructions.



Oi a normal match day I start wark at about 12 to 12.30 (1200)
(1230), finishing at about 3.30 (1530).



On the Semi-Final day I reported to the ground at between 10am (1000)

and 10.30am (1030).   I travelled to the ground with a guy called

       We both booked in about 10.15am (1015).     We like to get

there early.



I did not see any alcohol being brought into the ground.     I think

that people were being searched outside the turnstile by the Police

and any alcohol was being confiscated.



I didn't see any trouble outside the ground, but I was aware that the

sudden rush came at about 2.30pm (1430).    Normally there is a steady

build up from 2pm (1400), but this time it was much later.



I am aware that a number of fans had actually managed to climb over

the building housing the turnstiles.     I could hear them on the roof

and could see them jumping down.   Also there were fans sitting on the

roof with their legs dangling down.    I was worried that the windows

were going to be kicked in, but no damage was caused to my particular

bit.



I think there were about 4 fans, who, when they got to the turnstile,

offered me cash to get in.   I refused point blank to let them in and

sent them away.   I was offered money but didn't take any.   Also a

number, say about a dozen, tried to cane through with the wrong ticket

they were red tickets for the Kop.    This was quite early on and I

just turned them away.
____________________________                                             4


I let one person through who had the wrong ticket, after a Policeman

who stood on the ground-side told me to.    It was a red ticket and I

took the counterfoil.   This was about 2pm (1400).



I did not see any of the gates being opened.   I cannot ccmnent on

what the crowd was like inside the ground until after the tragedy.



Fran about 12.30pm (1230) there was a steady stream of fans into the

ground.   At about 2.30pm (1430) I was aware that the crowd outside

had became much greater and packed together.   I could see that people

were sweating a lot as they came through.   It was obviously

uncomfortable outside the turnstiles. You can only work as fast as

you can and I was doing that.



Although I didn't see him, I heard seme comments about a bloke outside

selling tickets for the Kop end.



The spectators who came in before 2pm (1400) were generally good

humoured.   'Hie only abuse I got was from people who I refused entry.



The comments that I would like made to the Judicial Inquiry are

contained on my Steward's questionnaire.



I have marked my position on the map and signed the back of it.



Description of maker
                                            5




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:             DS

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DS




                                                353
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589




                                                                                  ]

           I have been employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as a

       Turnstile Operator                                  . Prior to that, I

       was a programme seller for about               with the Club.




           I have had no experience as a turnstile operator prior to taking up

       this appointment.     The only training I have received was at the first

       two matches when I was together with another turnstile operator,

       familiar with turnstile operations, who stowed me how to correctly

       work the turnstiles.     Following that, for the next few matches, I was

       allocated ticket-only turnstiles, and thereafter I was allocated a

       position wherever I was required in the ground.




                                                                                      354
                                                                        2


My normal hours of work at the ground are from 12.20pm (1220) to

3.30pm (1530).    However, on the occasion of the FA Cup Semi-Final

match on Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489) my working period was fran

11am (1100) to 4.30pm (1630).



On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) I left hare at about 9.50 am

(0950), together with my parents, and we drove to Steffield, parking

the car in Middlewood Road, a journey of approximately fifteen to

twenty minutes.



I arrived at the football ground at 10.20 am (1020).    I went to an

office where all turnstile operators have to report on their arrival

at the ground, and signed in.    There were other turnstile operators in

the office, which is situated under the South Stand and reached via

the directors' entrance, marked at the door 'Players, Officials and

Referees'.



Just after 11 am (1100) a senior official of the club spoke to the

 turnstile operators in the office and told each of us where to go to

 take up our position for the match.   I do not know the name of this

 official.



 For this particular match, the ground administrator issued to me

 Turnstile   Eor the Leppings Lane end of the ground.    He handed to

 me the key for the door to the turnstile, some small plastic money

 bags for the ticket tabs, a large cloth bag to put everything into

 when the turnstile was closed and a form on which details of ticket

 numbers and quantity are recorded, turnstile number and name of the

 operator - The normal procedure is to enter the appropriate details
onto the form, which the turnstile operator then signs.     The form is

in duplicate and when both parts are completed, one copy is placed in

the cloth bag, together with the ticket tabs.    The second copy is put

on top of the cloth bag which is then handed in at the signing in

office under the South Stand.    On the occasion of the Semi-Final

match on Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) all these were handed to

me as normal by the official.    These items were the same as those

issued for any other match.



I made my way to the turnstile at around 11.15 am (1115).    Turnstile

is situated in a block of seven turnstiles which are housed separately

and numbered from A through to G alphabetically when viewed from the

Leppings Lane side, and going from left to right on so viewing.

Turnstiles            face each other in the same block, and are

separated by a wire mesh partition.



Initially, to enter the turnstile, I unlock the door on the ground

side of the turnstile, which opens onto the gangway by which the fans

gain access to the ground, passing through the turnstile.     I go into

my compartment in the turnstile, and pull this door shut behind me

and bolt it secure.    This then separates me completely from the

gangway down which the fans gain access.



Once inside the turnstile, the only means of viewing outside the

turnstile is a small glass window which allows me to look into the

enclosure inside the ground.



When inside the turnstile, I unbolt and open the outside door to the

turnstile.   This door opens by sliding sideways, and thus the fans can
                                                                         4


enter the gangway where they stop by the metal turnstile situated

midway along.   When fans enter the gangway and stop at the turnstile,

they tender either the entrance fee or their match ticket.     On receipt

of this, I operate a mechanically operated foot pedal, which when

depressed, allows the turnstile to move through 90 degrees so allowing

the fan to move forwards and into the enclosure.



On the day my turnstile was open for admittance at 11.30am (1130), I

was already aware that the match was a semi-final between Liverpool

and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs.    The match was an all-ticket

occasion and I was aware that tickets which should have been produced

to me were allocated to Liverpool supporters.



Between 11.30am (1130) and 12.30pm (1230), I had admitted into the

ground perhaps one or two people.   I could see through the wire

meshing that there were supporters sitting in Lappings Lane.     They

appeared to be reading programmes • They were drinking, but I could

see no sign of any alcohol being consumed.



From 12.30pm (1230) to 1.30pm (1330), there was a steady increase of

people passing through the turnstiles.    At this time, most appeared

to be family parties.   At about 1.00pm (1300) I noticed that seme

people were coming to my turnstile and offering orange tickets, which

applied to the Nottingham Forest end of the ground.    One of the people

who produced tickets for the Nottingham Forest area of the ground

informed me that they had been purchased from a ticket tout in the

immediate area of Hillsborough.



I was able at this time, to bring this to the attention of a police
officer who was close to the turnstile.    He directed the supporter to

another police officer outside the ground.     I do not know where these

people went, as they did not come back.    I assume that they got into

the ground through another entrance.     I was not aware of any stewards

in the imnediate area of ny turnstile.     I could see in the enclosure

that there were three or four stewards at the bottom of the stairs

leading to the seating area of the West Stand.    There were, however,

ten or twelve police officers inside the enclosure imnediately behind

my turnstile area, who were conducting body searches.



From 1.30pm (1330) onwards, there was a general increase in people

coming through the turnstile into the ground, but I would say that the

influx of peqple at this stage was no greater than that at a normal

league natch.



I was able at this time to count and number the tickets which is a

practice I had begun at about 12.00 midday (1200).



At about 2.00pm (1400), there was a further increase in the numbers of

people coming to the turnstile.    There was also an increase in the

number of tickets for the Nottingham Forest end of the ground, which

were being tendered by Liverpool supporters.     I could tell that they

were Liverpool supporters because they had Liverpool tops on, and

Liverpool accents.



At about 2.15pm (1415), supporters were producing themselves at the

turnstiles, they had no tickets for the match, butwere offering money

in order to gain entrance.    At this stage, most of these supporters

were with their friends.     One person would enter the gangway with a
ticket, the second person would follow him closely, and attempt to

pass through the turnstile, together with his friend in front, at the

same time as offering me money for his entrance.   There was, however,

enough roan at this stage to step the attempt and to send the person

without a ticket back out of the gangway and outside the turnstile.

These people were able to get out, but only by pushing their way

through the crowds waiting to enter.



Generally, the supporters who attempted to gain entrance without a

ticket would put the money through the gap in the wire mesh.     Hie

money tended to be rolled up into a cigarette shape.     Mostly the

bundles offered were brown which indicated a ten pound note.    Sane of

the bundles seemed to contain more than one note; others were

different colours indicating other values.



I always returned the money to the person who offered it.     In those

cases where they had gained entrance with a friend on one turnstile,

I asked the next person in the queue to call him back.     I then gave

the money back to that person, vdio then would remain in the ground.

At one point, I am certain that a police officer who I cannot

identify, witnessed my action in returning money to a supporter who

had tried to gain entrance. This supporter passed through the

turnstile and was approached by this same police officer.     I assume

that he was then ejected frcm the ground.    I have no idea what time

that was.



Between 2.20 (1420) and 2.25pm (1425) I began to sense that there were

problems outside the ground.   The pressure of people coming through

the turnstile was so great that it was difficult for only one person
to pass through without catching or trapping another person's leg.       I

had no time to continue to count and number the tickets I collected.

I put the ones I had already counted, about 700, into a pile apart,

and then took the others without numbering then.     I could also hear

the fans commenting that the turnstiles were too inadequate to

accommodate the size of the crowd.



The peqple coming through the turnstiles were becoming very abusive

towards me at this time.   Most of it was just foul language, but one

supporter threatened me with physical violence.    The person following

this supporter told him it was not my fault and they both went into

the ground.



There were now fewer Nottingham Forest tickets being handed to me.       I

had to admit the holders of these tickets, as the crowd outside was so

great it was inpossible for anyone to go back.     There were a lot more

supporters now with no tickets at all, who would offer me money in

return for entrance. Again, I would return their money to than but

would have to let them into the ground, as there was no way for them

to get back outside the ground.



Some supporters would try to get two people in on one ticket.    The

ticket consisted of three portions; I had to detach and retain the

middle portion of the ticket.     Some supporters would tender the two

outside portions of their ticket, saying that they had lost the middle

portion in the crowd.   I believed that their friend would have this

middle portion to try and gain entrance.



At this time it was irrelevant whether or not people had tickets, as
once they were in the turnstile gangway, the only way they could go

was into the ground.



The time was now about 2.30 (1430) or 2.35pm (1435).    I could hear

someone outside the ground shouting to be let in as peqple were dying

outside.   I tended to disregard this, but very shortly a group of

three supporters came into my turnstile.       of them were assisting

the middle youth who appeared to be nearly unconscious.    The third

person in the group was annoyed because his friend had suffered from

the situation outside.    I then realised that there was a definite

problem outside the ground.



The people coming through the turnstiles at this time appeared to be

hot and sweaty.    Seme, in particular, were sweating profusely.   I

could also at this time smell drink on the people coming into the

turnstiles.    The majority of the people who came through smelt of

drink, although I did not notice anyone who appeared to be very

drunk.



Also at this point, I heard the sound of footsteps on the roof of the

turnstiles.    I can't say how many people were on the roof, but I

assume that they ware climbing up and gaining admission to the ground

in this way.



I was aware that there was a large crowd outside the turnstile which

did not diminish in any way.    Wider normal circumstances, the crowd

would start to lessen, but this was not the case on this occasion.

The crowd continued in its intensity until shortly after three

o'clock (1500), when suddenly there was no one there at the turnstile
any more.   I could not give or think of any reason why the crowd had

suddenly disappeared.   I did not witness anything which was a direct

cause of the sudden fall in the number of people outside.



I did not think that anything untoward had occurred, and so I began

my normal practice of counting and numbering the tickets.    At about

3.15pm (1515), I closed and bolted the outside door to the turnstile.

This again is normal practice, one turnstile in the block is

designated to remain open until half-time.   The others all close.



As I was counting the tickets, I noticed a crowd coning back down the

tunnel that runs underneath the West Stand to the terracing.      They

came into the enclosure, and I shut the inside door to the turnstile,

shutting myself into the compartment.   I did at this time wonder why

they had come away frcm the match but I continued to count my

tickets.    I then heard an announcement over the Tannoy, which

requested the Liverpool fans to return to the enclosure, back through

the tunnel. This announcement was quite clear, but the content I

consider to have been insufficient for those in authority - ie Police,

ground staff, to understand the enormity of what was actually taking

place.



One of the fans in the enclosure came to the back of the turnstile

and banged on the window to my turnstile with his fist.     He was angry

and abusive and was shouting at me, although I could not hear exactly

what he said.    His manner was very aggressive and threatening, and I

became frightened.



Eventually, this fan left the rear of my turnstile, and I could see
                                                                          10


the people emerging from the tunnel.    Seme were obviously injured, in

my view sane were quite serious but I am unable to describe or

identify any of these persons.



There was a vast number of Liverpool supporters milling around in the

enclosure which I considered to be a threat to my safety, I looked

into Leppings Lane itself, where there were Liverpool supporters who

were obviously grief-stricken.    Also present were a number of

Fire and Ambulance vehicles.     I remained in the turnstile, secure in

there, until after 4 pm (1600), when I noticed that a line of police

officers were across the enclosure, ushering people frcm the seated

area out of the ground.     I then considered it safe enough to leave the

security of the turnstile, through an open gate and returned to the

office to hand in my tickets.



I had counted the tickets, which numbered 970 or thereabouts, in

total.   Of those, about 270 tickets I had taken in the thirty minutes

leading up to 3pm (1500).     In that period I would estimate that for

every two people who entered with a ticket, there was at least

one who entered without a ticket, ie at least half as many again

without tickets.



I then went to where the programme sellers had congregated and met my

parents.   When the situation had become much more quiet, we then

left the ground together and made our way to our car, and then hone.
                                         11




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:          DATE:   100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:            "JPC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             POL




                                              364
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


A£$ / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                             (SIGNED)




           During the football season, I am employed on a casual basis by

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as a Turnstile Operator.    I have

           been engaged in this capacity for about the last nine seasons.    The

           job actually consists of me attending at a turnstile and receiving and

           checking tickets as supporters enter the ground.     I have received the

           following training for this job.   When I first took up the position, I

           went with an experienced turnstile operator who showed me what to do.

           Before the start of the season, since the POPPERWELL Report into the

           Bradford Football Club Fire, a meeting is held at the Ground for all

           persons employed at the Ground during a match.     The Police, Fire and

           Ambulance representatives attend and give a talk on action to be taken

           in the event of an emergency.   Also various items of equipment are

           shown, such as fire extinguishers and how you use them.    A pass in a

           form of a badge with your photograph on is issued which is then warn
on match days.



On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was at the ground and employed

as usual as a Turnstile Operator.    My position that day was given to

me at a briefing which took place at 11.30 am (1130) that morning.        I

was instructed to take turnstile      J Leppings Lane end, taking

tickets with the letter 'B' printed on, which was for standing places

only on the Lepping Lane terrace which covers pens 1 to 7 only.       I

went with the person who shared the turnstile, who was on turnstile

     to take up our position at 11.55 am (1155).    We work back to

back within the turnstile. The match was the Liverpool v Nottingham

Forest Semi-Final of the FA Cup.



Our end of the ground was for Liverpool supporters.



On this day I was what is called a 'stopping gate'. In other words I

was going to remain at the turnstile with it open till half-time, in

order that late-comers could enter the ground.     There are no radio

or telephone communications on the turnstiles for a Cup semi-final.



The day started as normal up to about 2 o'clock (1400) - about 200 to

300 supporters came through my turnstile.   After 2 o'clock (1400)

there was a steady flow of supporters coming through the turnstile.

At about 2.30pm (1430) there was a constant queue of people,

culminating in a lot of crushing inside my turnstile, from about

2.45pm (1445) onwards until after the match had started.



This was the worst match I had experienced for lack of control by

supporters to get into the ground.    Because of the crush, seme
supporters were unable to take tickets fran their pockets.     They also

pushed through two together and at that stage I was unable to stop

this unauthorised entry of the Liverpool fans.     I would say about 20

to 25 fans may have entered the ground through my turnstile without

tickets.



In my opinion, a large proportion of the fans had been drinking

alcohol.     I could tell this by the smell of alcohol on their breath,

and their violent and abusive remarks towards me; in fact I was

frightened, I feared they would get into my area of the turnstile.

I have never experienced this at another football match that I have

worked at.



After the match had been stopped, fans were coming from inside the

Ground and back to the turnstile and threatening to kill me.     I could

only think that was because of what they had witnessed and what state

they were in.    I obviously became aware that something serious had

happened inside the ground but I did not knew what.



I received a verbal message which was passed down the line of

turnstiles, to shut the outer gate, and when the abuse started again

against us, I collected all my tickets up, put them in two bags, then

we decided together to go out to the outside of the ground because of

the threats.    We went over my turnstile out of the Ground and past

the 'C' gate which was open.    I saw two ambulances and a fire engine,

then four or five bodies lying on the ground.    There was people

attending each one.    I did not stop, I carried on to the stile rocm.

There was at least one ambulanceman giving mouth-to-mouth

resuscitation and seme fans were also gathered round seme of the peqple.
       _____________________________                                                4


        Whet struck roe was that none of them had many clothes on.    One of

        them, a male, had just boxer shorts on.      I could not say whether the

        people were dead or not.      At the stile rocm I handed my tickets in.    I

        was totally shocked and I was told to go hone.      I did not see or hear

        of any ticket touts that day.



        Fran my position I did not see gate 'C' being opened or closed.



        Prior to 2.30pn (1430) I was approached six, seven or eight times and

        offered money to allow Liverpool supporters to enter the ground who

        had not got tickets but I refused and turned them away.



        They mostly offered ten pounds a time.     During the crush no person

        offered money.   They did not need to, they were forcing their way in

        and. I could not stop them.




STATEMENT TAKEN
 ^        PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:      060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      POL DC




                                                                                        368
                                                                         STATION

N^:

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                            SIGNED)




                                      I have had a part-time job as a turnstile

       operator at Sheffield United football club and also i

                 I have doubled that up by doing the same job at Hillsborough the

           hone ground of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.



       The job consists of standing in a turnstile kiosk and receiving the

       entrance fee for that particular match or ticket if a ticket match

           such as a semi-final.   When the appropriate fee or ticket has been

       paid, I then operate the turnstile by depressing a foot pedal.      There

           is a sort of clock system connected to the turnstile to count the

       number of peqple going through the turnstile.



       On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I was on turnstile duty at

       Hillsborough for the Semi-Final of the FA Cup between Liverpool and

       Nottingham Forest. This was about the            semi-final I had worked

       at Hillsborough, including the one last year between the same two




                                                                                    369
                                                                             2


teams.   On that occasion, I was posted to a turnstile at the Spion Kop

end.



On this Saturday I got to Hillsborough at about eleven o'clock (1100)

that morning.   I reported to the South Stand stile room where I

received my postings for the day which was to be turnstile    at

lappings Lane end and listened to a short briefing which is usual for

all matches. After the briefing I made my way to turnstile        and must

have opened it up at about twelve o'clock (1200), and frcm then until

about two o'clock (1400) it was to my mind a normal semi-final with a

steady flow of Liverpool supporters coming through into the ground.      I

would like to say at this stage that on all previous semi-finals I

have been more or less finished by about half past two (1430).     By

that I mean except for the odd latecomer, the vast majortiy of

supporters have come into the ground at least half an hour before

kick-off, and that was certainly the case last year.



After two o 'clock (1400) there was a steady build up of fans coming

through the turnstiles and this began to increase to such an extent

that sometime before half past two (1430), the police constable that

had been searching the fans coming into the match, had been pinned up

against the outside wall because of the huge crowd that had built up

outside the Lappings Lane entrance. It was then onwards that I

witnessed the worst ever crowd crush and behaviour by football fans

that I have seen in twelve years of turnstile operating.   They were

lxke animals, hooligans, call them what you like, they were determined

to get into the match no matter what the cost.   I was verbally

threatened with violence.   I was spat at and continually swore at for

about thirty, thirty five minutes. During this time, I was genuinely
                                                                         3


scared for my own safety and also this was the period where the

Liverpool fans were getting in two at a time through the turnstile and

I was powerless to do anything about it, although earlier I had

stopped a few without tickets getting in and informed the police

sergeant who was inside the ground and took them off my hands.    He, by

this time, had gone and I felt very alone and very scared.     I would

not like to estimate how many Liverpool fans got through my turnstile

that way.



During this crush, and certainly at its peak, which would have been

getting on towards three o'clock (1500), there were fans coming

through my turnstile and saying that other fans were dying outside and

looking at the crush I would have thought that could possibly have

been the case.



At sometime just before kick-off I happened to look out of my hatch

over to gate 'C' and I saw that it had been opened which struck me

as being unusual because it is only opened as a rule to let stewards

or Police in and out, or as on exit at the end of the match.

What I saw was hundreds of Liverpool fans rushing through that gate

 'C' and I think there were at least two policemen trying to push them

back to stop the flow, but they were not being very successful, and

the Liverpool fans were just surging all over then and into the

ground.



 It was then that I was aware that the pressure on the turnstiles had

eased and I remember breathing a sigh of relief, but almost as soon as

 it died down, it began to build up again because gate C had been

closed.     Just after that, a policeman on a horse came to the turnstile
                                                                          4


and told us to close up.    This would have been about three o'clock

(1500).    By now at the time I did not find this unusual because it's

happened before on big match days.    We closed the doors to the

outside.    Then my colleague in turnstile   had his radip on and he

said to me that there were three people dead inside the Ground.      I

immediately felt shocked, but having said that, I wasn't really

surprised after what I had experienced that past hour or so.    We

closed the doors to the inside of the ground, then Liverpool

supporters cane banging on the doors and shouting and swearing at us

inside the turnstiles.     Something then cracked the wire mesh window

which is on the inside of the turnstile ground-side.    These Liverpool

fans were now an angry mob and I began to feel scared again, so we

           at this time not to count the tickets as we should do but to

get out of there as quickly as possible.



In order to do that, we left via turnstile      out onto lappings Lane.

When we got out there I saw ambulances and a fire engine.    As we

walked past gate C, making our way to the South Stand stile rocm, I

saw that it was open again and that there were people or bodies lying

all over the place.     I saw a policewoman giving heart message to a

young man.     I saw ambulancemen attending to other people and I saw

Liverpool fans comforting others.     I could not believe what had

happened or what was happening; I was shocked totally.



We made our way back to the stile room and I felt totally physically

 and mentally exhausted.    Fran there I went to try and meet a friend of

mine in the ground but couldn't find him, so I went hone and was in

 the house by three forty five (1345).    As previously stated I have

 never been a witness to anything like this in all my years of
                                                                                5


       football.



       I would like to say that early on in the afternoon, I was offered

       money in the form of #5.00 notes, to let people into the game who

       had't got tickets, and on these occasions these people were dealt with

       by a police sergeant at my turnstile.    I can categorically state I did

       not receive or accept money frcm any Liverpool fans that day.



        I would also like to say that, in my opinion, this problem was caused

       by the late arrival of hundreds of Liverpool fans who by one way or

        another got into the Ground.   By that I mean by unauthorised means.




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:             DATE:    060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE!

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DC




                                                                                    373
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIR3H:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589




                     I also have part-time employment at Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club, as a Turnstile Operator.



           At about 1045 hrs (1045) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was

           walking along Leppings Lane, Sheffield to go to the turnstile offices

           which are situated under the South Stand of the Hillsborough Football

           Ground.   It was whilst I was walking along Lepping Lane, that I

           observed four or five persons who definitely were selling tickets for

           the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-Final which was due to

           be played that afternoon.   I only saw one transaction take place

           whilst I was walking past, and I am not aware what the charge was for

           the tickets.



           On arrival at the office, I signed in as normal and waited for the

           turnstile to which I was to be allocated.           I don't know his

           surname, gave me my turnstile which was turnstile         I was given my

           work sheet and I walked along the back next to the football pitch to




                                                                                      374
turnstile         On arrival at the turnstile I unlocked the gates and

took the chain and padlocks off the turnstiles, and ready for the fans

to ccme into the ground at about midday (1200).



On starting to allow the fans into the ground, it was steady flow,

with plenty of time to spare.    There was a Police Officer assigned to

my turnstile on the ground side and one to the front on the outside

of the ground.    Also on the ground side there were five or six

Policemen searching the fans.    There were also three Stewards who I

could see through my window, they were also inside the ground.     I can

say that fron midday (1200) to about 14.15hrs (1415), I had what I

would call a nice steady flow of fans coming through my turnstile and

was not crushed at all, and I can say the same for the Police; and the

fans were polite and in good humour up to this point.



The rush then started to build up, and up until about 2.30pm (1430) it

became very busy which is what we expected for this type of game with

a real good flow of fans going through my turnstile, and the turnstile

had worked fine up until this time.



Frcm 14.30hrs (1430) onwards, it became very hectic, and as the fans

were coming through, they were saying they were being crushed frcm

outside and the operation of the turnstile became very difficult.

About this time, due to the amount of people trying to get through,

the gate totally jammed and at this the fans climbed over the

turnstile gate.     Sane of the fans were showing their tickets as they

jumped over.     Others were throwing their tickets at me and others, I

presume, hadn't got any tickets. There was nothing I could do about

it all because they just could not go back, due to the pressure of
people trying to get in.   Although I do know that the Police did

put out same of the fans who hadn't got any tickets.    I can only

describe the situation at this time as total and utter pandemonium,

and I was frightened for my own safety at this time as I had visions

of the entire turnstile collapsing and being buried under the rubble.

This went on until about 15.05hrs (1505) when it suddenly seemed to

stop, and there was only the odd one or two fans coming through.      I

rirri see through the comer of my eye the fans all going towards 'C'

gatem, but at that time I wasn't aware it was open, and it didn't

really register with me that's where they were going.



It was after that a Police Officer came and told us to close up.      He

seemed calm to me, when he told us to do that, and that was at around

15.05hrs (1500).   I did as I was told and locked the doors and put

the chain and locks on the turnstile. I then bagged my tickets up and

put my label inside and outside; and any money taken should also go

into the bag.    I never put any money in my bag, although seme, at

least one ten pound, had been thrown at me during the crush through

my turnstile but I don't know what happened to it.



As far as I am aware no one came to take the turnstile readings whilst

I was there.    There were only Liverpool tickets that came through my

turnstiles.



I was then standing listening to my radio when I heard that the match

had been delayed and at that time I thought there had been a pitch

invasion and I had no idea what was going on at that stage.    It would

be about 15.20hrs (1520) that I saw people carrying people fron the

West terrace tunnel, who at that time I thought were injured persons.
                                                                          4


I only saw two or three being carried out and the fans were coming

back out of the tunnel in great numbers.



There were three Stewards who then came over to the turnstiles and

told us that there were three people dead, and it was then that we

started to appreciate what was going on.     It was at this time that

we started to receive the abuse and threats frcm the Liverpool

supporters and we were frightened to leave the turnstiles.    We all,

that's all the turnstile attendants, got together, we took our badges

off so that we wouldn't be recognised.     We left the turnstile by the

front to walk back to the South Stand on the outside of the ground.

It was whilst I was passing a gate that I saw a white man aged about

forty, carrying a white man, aged about twenty, slim build and wearing

blue jeans.   He was struggling to carry this youth and I helped this

man with the youth, who to me, appeared to be dead.    We laid him down,

his arms and legs were straight but they were as stiff as a board, and

he was covered over with a coat.    There were three others there as

well, two of whom appeared to be injured, and the other, who appeared

to be dead.      I then carried on to the office to the South Stand

office and handed my bag in.



I then went to the stand area between the Spion Kop and the South

Stand where we usually go after completion of vrark, and watched

what happened.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                  378
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRUHs

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160589                                                             SIGNED)




           In                        I started a part-time job as a Turnstile

           Operator at Hillsborough Football Ground in Sheffield.     I've never

           received any formal training to carry out the job, but I was

           supervised for the first match when I was shown how to operate the

           machinery, handle the cash and mark up a cash sheet.     The turnstiles

           themselves operate a mechanical counter which takes account of

           everyone gaining entry to the ground.   The counter itself is enclosed

           beneath a locked security gate.   As an operator, I physically admit

           individuals by releasing a break on the mechanism.     I do this by means

           of a foot pedal. The counter is read at the end of each match for a

           count of persons admitted and this figure should correspond with my

           cash takings (or in the case of a ticket match, the number of

           tickets).



           As part of my job at Hillsborough, I am expected to work at any
                                                                           2


turnstile in the ground and I don't keep a specific post.



At the beginning of each season, I am expected to attend a social

evening at Hillsborough, which is held in conjunction with the

emergency services, Police, Ambulance and Fire.    We are given

instructions on procedures in the event of there being an emergency at

the ground.   As an operator on the turnstiles, I will know when

there is a problem in the ground because a specific message will be

passed over the ground's PA System.    This message is, "Mr MEADOWS is

urgently required in the office."     Upon hearing this message, I am to

remain at my post and await advice frcm the Police.     If the emergency

is over I will expect to hear a second message, "Mr MEADOWS is no

longer required."   These are basically the instructions which apply to

me as a turnstile operator.



Normal match day hours of work are frcm 1 pm (1300) to 3.30 pm (1530),

although on special games, such as cup ties, I would usually start at

about 11 am (1100).



On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I reported at Hillsborough

Football Ground at about 11 am (1100), to work a turnstile for the FA

Cup Semi-Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football

teams.   I went to my normal meeting point in an office under the South

Stand.   I was there issued with a bag to hold all of the tickets I

received (the match was an all-ticket match) and also a cash record

sheet which was just to record the number of tickets I took.      I was

then allocated turnstile      at the Leppings Lane end of the ground to

the rear of the West Stand.
I took up my post at turnstile       at about 12 midday (1200).   This

block of turnstiles is marked A-G; seven in all and serves the

standing area of the West Stand.    The turnstiles are singly manned,

although they are grouped in two's with an operator facing each other

in every section.



I have marked on a sketch plan of Hillsborough Football Ground the

location of my turnstile for this match and I now produce this plan

in evidence, marked identification reference number         Exhibit

No            ).



I opened the outer door on the turnstile after about 5 minutes fran my

arrival.   From about 12.30 pm (1230) I had a gentle trickle of people

coning through my turnstile.   At this time there were two police

officers posted outside and two inside my turnstile.



Looking fron the rear of turnstile         have a clear view of the

whole of main gate C which affords access to the enclosure at the rear

of the West Stand fron Lappings Lane.    When I took up my post there

was one steward only on the gate.    The gate is about    eet fron my

turnstile.



By about 2 pm (1400) the gentle stream of supporters was abruptly

stopped by a sudden rush of supporters through all of our bank of

turnstiles.    Fran this time on I didn't have a break and there was a

constant flow of supporters coming through.



The West Stand for this particular match had been allocated to

Liverpool Supporters only.
During this steady flow of supporters passing through and prior to

about 2.30 pm (1430), I saw gate C opened on numerous occasions by the

steward in attendance, to allow mainly the Police to eject supporters.

The gate was never opened fully but only a few feet each time.



At about 2.20 pm (1420) I was beginning to get uncomfortable due to

the crush at the turnstiles.    There seemed to be so many supporters

outside, that people were crushing into the entrance to my turnstile.

There were comments from supporters coming through that people were

being hurt outside because of the crush and that if the gates weren't

opened then someone was going to get really hurt.



The crush continued outside for some time and by about 2.45 pm (1445)

supporters were telling me that three poople had died outside in the

crush.    Just after hearing these comments at about 2.50 pm (1450), I

saw a uniformed police officer wearing a helmet, walk towards main

Gate C frcm the enclosure.     He went to open the gate.   I was then

distracted for a second and when I looked back, the main gate had been

opened fully and masses of people were running into the enclosure

frcm outside the ground.     The gate remained open for about 30 seconds

to a minute, when a mounted officer frcm outside, blocked the entrance

and the gate was closed frcm inside by a steward.     He had difficulty

in closing the gate as it appeared to be buckled and it didn't appear

to slide properly.



It was the same steward who had been posted there since midday

(1200).    I didn't know what happened to the police officer wearing the

helmet who opened the gate.     As a result of the gate being opened on
                                                                          5


this occasion, I would say that perhaps one thousand people entered

through it.    I don't know the name of the steward posted to Gate C, he

was a youth of about             He was                                and

had                             He was wearing a steward's vest.



As a result of gate C being opened, the crush on my turnstile ceased

and it returned to a steady flow.    I can only assume that there was a

severe crush outside and that by opening the gate this was stopped.



Just prior to kick-off time, I again witnessed Gate C open.    I

couldn't see who opened it on this occasion but it was fully open.

There weren't many people coming in but there were a lot of Police

about and there were people being carried out of the ground through

the gate, apparently injured.



It wasn't until some time after kick-off that I realised that there

was some sort of problem in the ground, and even then I hadn't got a

clue what it was about or the severity of it.



Going back to the main crush on my turnstile between 2.15 pm (1415)

and 2.50 pm (1450), large numbers of Liverpool supporters jumped

through my turnstile without producing tickets.    I'd say that about

200 in this way during this time.    It was so busy and there was so

much confusion at this time, that there was nothing I could do about

the problem.    The Police inside the West Stand enclosure caught some

who were then ejected, but not all of them were by any means.



 I was also offered money by supporters who didn't have tickets,

 sometimes as much as #40.00.   I declined on each occasion and took no
                                                                          6


money at all.   I must have been offered money on at least thirty

occasions. Due to the crush outside the turnstile, they couldn't go

back so I had to admit these people.   On virtually every occasion when

I was offered money, the police officers in the enclosure ejected them

frcm the ground.



On other occasions, I had Liverpool fans producing Nottingham Forest

tickets which were for the Spion Rep Stand.   I admitted these people

to the West Stand, after being advised to do so by the Police.       It was

about 12.30 pm (1230) when a senior police officer came to my

turnstile and instructed me to admit people with Spion Kop tickets.

The officer wore a flat cap and had a full beard.   He had dark hair

and his beard was of the same colouring.   He was well built.    I

recall other officers nearby calling him, "Sir."    I admitted in

excess of 50 people with Spion Kop tickets.



Prior to reporting to the South Stand for duty on that Saturday, I

was at the rear of the stand itself when I saw several people openly

selling tickets for the ground.    I was stopped myself and asked if I

wanted to buy one; I declined.    Whilst at the rear of the stand I

saw money change hands on one occasion, for a ticket.



As I have already stated I had no idea what had occurred in the West

Stand and I wasn't fully aware of the severity until I got home later

that day and saw it on TV.   I didn't have cause to visit the West

Stand at all and I didn't have sight of the pitch at any time.



I would like to add lastly, that the uniform officer who was wearing a

helmet and walked towards main gate C, just prior to it being opened,
                                                                               7


       also had a Liverpool supporter with him who I presume he was going to

       eject.     This supporter had jumped through my turnstile and I had

       nodded to the officer who then detained him.    We had a prior agreement

       that we would nod to officers if people were gaining access without

       producing a ticket.



        I am willing, if required, to attend the Judicial Inquiry to give this

       evidence.




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   160589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                 DC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL DC




                                                                                   385
                                                                          STATION

jgp
1


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             SIGNED)



           I am                         and I reside at the above address with my




           For the past               have been employed by Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club as a Turnstile Operator at their Hillsborough Ground in

           Sheffield.     In this capacity, I may be required to work at any of the

           sets of turnstiles within the ground and it is purely a matter of

           allocation where I am posted for any particular match.



           I have never received any formal training for this job other than to

           be shown how to operate the turnstile itself when I first started.       We

           do, however, attend a meeting at the beginning of each season which

           involves the Police, Fire and Ambulance services.    We are told what to

           expect and what to do in cases of emergency.    We have been instructed

           that in the event of an emergency arising at a match, then a specific

           message will be passed over the ground's PA System.     I can't remember

           the exact terms of what will be passed but I will know it if I hear

           it.    Should this message be given then I would close my turnstile and




                                                                                         386
                                                                           2


leave the ground.



I have not received first aid training fran the football club but I

have been trained in the past by the St John's Ambulance.     I don't

consider myself presently competent to give first aid.



On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I reported for duty at

Hillsborough Football Club at about 11 am. (1100).     The match was for

the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

Football Clubs.     This is earlier than I usually report because of the

importance of the match.     I usually start at about 12.30 pn.(1230).



On this particular Saturday, I went to a roam at the rear of the South

Stand.    This is the usual place to meet for stewards and other ground

staff.     I am there given by a ground ackninistrator a piece of paper

which details the turnstile I am to operate for that match and its

location in the ground.     This paper is also used to record, in this

particular case, the amount of tickets I have received throughout the

match and there is also space for a steward to record on it the

number of persons recorded as going through the turnstile on that

date.     This paper is used to keep a check on persons entering the

ground.    Normally, I would enter cash takings on there but on this

Saturday, as I've said, it was strictly a ticket match.     I am also

issued with a key for my turnstile. On normal match days I am also

given a #60.00 float.



For the semi-final match I was allocated turnstile        at the

Leppings Lane end of the ground.     It is a single turnstile but faces

another directly opposite; there is only a divider between.     Turnstile
    is the end turnstile in a row of six,

            Fran my position in the turnstile, by looking through a

small window, I am able to see main gate 'C' fully.      I have marked on

a sketch plan of the ground my turnstile position for this match and

I now produce this sketch plan in evidence marked exhibit reference

number      (Exhibit No).    The system iadqpted by the football

club to record the entrance figures for the ground is governed by a

mechanical counter which registers every time a person is admitted

through the turnstile.      The counter itself is concealed beneath a

locked security plate which is read by a ground administrator at the

end of each match.   This figure is entered on the cash sheet I am

provided with.   Operated, in conjunction with the mechanical counter,

is an electronic beam which detects unauthorised entry to the ground

over the turnstile mechanism.



On this Saturday I set up in my turnstile at about 11.45 am (1145).

There was a police officer present when I got there.      It's a ground

rule that we should ask the Police permission to open the turnstile

but this isn't generally adopted if the Police are present.        I opened

the outer gate and positioned myself in the box behind a wire mesh

screen.   When I opened, there were four police officers present on my

own turnstile, two outside and two inside.      I had unlocked the

mechanism on the counter and I was ready to accept supporters.



A couple of supporters came through just after I opened, and I

accepted their tickets. The tickets themselves are in two sections,

being perforated across the middle.      I rip the ticket in half, retain

one half and give the other to the entrant.      I admit them through the

turnstile, by releasing the mechanism with a foot pedal which I
operate from my box.    As I press the pedal, it releases the turnstile.

In this manner, I can control who enters the ground.    The flow of

people caning through my turnstile increased to a steady flow of

people by about 2.30 pn.(1430).     I wouldn't say it was uncomfortable

at this time, but I didn't have a break between people caning in.



Just prior to this steady flow, I remember the two police officers

outside my turnstile taking cans of drink fron fans waiting to enter.

They were either taking the cans fron them or making them drink the

contents.     I can't say what was in the cans, whether it was alcohol or

soft drinks.    I couldn't see what was happening outside as the flow of

poeple increased, as I was too busy.



There was a steady build up of people caning through until about ten

to three (1450) when it became very uncanfortable and people were

pushing into my turnstile.    I'm slightly deaf but I could sense that

there was a large crowd gathered outside the turnstile by the noise I

could hear.    This was confirmed when people began to crush into the

turnstile itself.     I couldn't see anything of the two policemen

outside the turnstile and I couldn't in fact say whether or not they

were still there.



As people were crushing into my turnstile, I noticed through the

glazed window in my box, that a police officer was opening main gate

'C'.    The gate itself is of concertina type which joins centrally and

opens to either side.     I could only see one policeman pulling my side

of the gate towards my turnstile.    The other side of the gate was

moving simultaneously, although I couldn't see who was operating that

gate.    I shouted though a gap in my box door to the police officer
opening the gate.    He was about eight yards away.   I shouted, "What

have you opened that for?"    I thought it was a silly move as I

believed there would be a sudden rush.    The policeman was pulling on

the gate and he shouted to me, "There'll be somebody killed outside if

we don't open it."     As he came backwards the gate was forced open

fully and a large crowd of supporters surged through and into the

enclosure, forcing the policeman against the turnstile wall.    The mass

of bodies mixed with those already in the enclosure.



Main gate 'C' was only open for about 5 or 10 minutes at the most,

during which time I saw the same police officer struggling to close

it.    Although the gate was only open for a short period of time, I

would estimate that between one and two thousand entered in this

way.    I couldn't see what direction the crowd surge took through the

gate as the people mixed with those already inside.    There must have

been quite a number of people outside in Leppings Lane, as even after

the main gate had been opened, it didn't relieve the pressure on my

turnstile.



Within a few minutes of the main gate being closed, a mounted

policeman shouted to me to close my turnstile. The policeman was

outside the ground in Leppings Lane.     I left my box to close the outer

door and the policeman stopped people actually entering the turnstile

as I closed.     I couldn't tell how many supporters were still waiting

outside.     I then spent seme time putting all of the tickets I had

collected into a bag.     I locked and secured my own turnstile and then

waited for the other operators to finish in my block.     We then opened

one of the outer doors on the turnstile and shouted to a policeman

outside.     We asked him if he would accompany us back to the office in
the South Stand.    We all then left the turnstile block together and

walked around the outside of the ground to the South Stand.       We were

all totally unaware of what was happening in the West Stand and when

we reached the South Stand office we were told that the Liverpool

supporters had invaded the pitch.     I wondered how this could have

happened myself because of the fencing at the front of the stand.       It

wasn't until later, that I found out exactly what had happened and

that people had died in the stand.



As we walked together from the turnstiles to the South Stand, I can

recall seeing an ambulance parked directly outside the gate in

Leppings Lane.     There were two bodies lying on the floor at the rear

of the ambulance.    The impression I gained was that both of these

peole were dead.    They were white faced and had seme bluing around

their lips. They were both males

                       This man would have been in his late forties or

even fifty.    He was wearing a white backgrounded shirt with stripes.

I can't recall what colour.    He was of average build.   I can't

remember anything of the man's facial features.     The second body was

that of a younger man, perhaps in his twenties.     He was stripped to

the waist.     I can't recall anything else about this man.



As we walked past the ambulance, there were two men lying on the floor

in front of the vehicle.     One man was being attended to by two police

officers.     One of the officers was trying to revive the man; he was

pressing down on the man's chest.     The other man was being attended to

by one officer, although there were others around him.        This officer

had his head next to the injured man's.     He could have been trying to

revive this man by giving him the kiss of life, I'm not sure.       Both of
these injured men were unconscious.    As I've said before we were

unaware of what had happened and I thought that these casualties were

through fans fighting.



I would like to add that during my time on turnstile      particularly

during the period when people were being crushed into the entrance to

my turnstile, I admitted to the ground possibly 50 people who didn't

have tickets for the game.     I had no choice in this matter as there

was no way that these people could go back through the turnstile.

Because of the crush of supporters, I had to admit them to the

ground.   As this problem arose, I tapped on the window in the box and

told a policeman inside the enclosure that a supporter I was admitting

hadn't got a ticket.     The police officer said that he couldn't do

nothing about it.   I then adopted the same attitude for all of the

others who came through without tickets.



When I travelled to Hillsborough ground on the morning of the match, I

passed perhaps three public houses on Handsworth Hill where I saw

supporters in groups of 10 or 15 standing outside on the car-parks,

drinking.   I can't recall the names of the pubs.   The one pub was in

Herries Road.   I estimate that about 50 supporters were standing

outside that one in particular.



I, personally, didn't witness anything which was a contributory factor

in any of the deaths, although I believe that the unauthorised entry

of fans without tickets must have been a factor in what happened.



I will just add that throughout the period I was on the turnstile

there was at least one steward present at main gate C.     On occasions
        there may have been more.



                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                      393
                                                                          STATION

I|pl:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                            (SIGNED)




           I have been part-time employed at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

           for the past            and I have always been a Turnstile Operator

           during this period.    I usually work on the turnstiles

                                                                       I receive

           #12 for an afternoon's work, which is paid the same day in cash.



           These turnstiles do not involve taking any money, they are purely a

           ticket entrance.   I usually work at the ground next to the same two

           people,               and                          is the Turnstile

           Supervisor for the whole ground.



           All the turnstiles at the ground operate in the same way.    That is a

           four pronged paddle which is operated by a foot pedal.    When the pedal

           is pressed the paddle revolves a quarter of a turn and lets in one




                                                                                      394
person at a time.    The number of quarter turns each paddle makes is

recorded on an analogue recorder.    It is inpossible to let the pedal

revolve freely without it recording.



At last year's Cup Semi-Final in 1988 (000088), I worked on a

turnstile                                    I did not experience any

trouble or difficulty on that occasion.



For this year's Semi-Final at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989

(150489), I arrived at the ground with              |at 10.45am (1045).

We parked in a side street and walked to the front entrance via

Leppings Lane.    We didn't know what turnstiles we were going to be on

before we arrived.    When we got there we were not the first there.      We

went into the turnstile room and saw                and I was allocated

number        turnstile in Leppings Lane for the North Stand.   My friend

         was allocated turnstile numbed    We walked to the turnstiles,

together arriving and opening up at 12.30pm (1230).     The recorder

number is kept in a locked compartment at the turnstile and when I

arrived my compartment was locked and I could not see what my starting

number was.



The crowd at this time was very sparce and it was just trickling in.

I would estimate that between 12.30 (1230) and 2.00 (1400) I had let

approximately 200 to 250 in.    There was no trouble up to this point

and all of the fans were good natured.



When I opened up I had 2 policemen present on my turnstile, one

outside and one inside.     I think it was the same for all of the

turnstiles, but I can't be sure as frcm the operator's position the
                     ___________                                             3


view is very limited and I can hardly see anything outside.    From

2.30pm (1430) the crowd in Leppings Lane built up and I have never

known it busier.   Fran 2.40 (1440) onwards things got worse and I knew

that there was an immense crowd outside.    The people caning through

were in a distressed state and it was obvious that they were being

pushed in fron the outside.



By 2.50 pm (1450) I couldn't see the light outside for people.      At this

stage I kept my foot on the turnstile pedal and I stopped taking

tickets off people/ although I did look at most of them and allowed

them straight through, purely to ease the situation outside as it was

obvious people were in distress.   A number of supporters climbed over

the turnstiles without showing their tickets, but I hadn't got time to

do anything about it.    At least 4 or 5 people came to my turnstile

with standing tickets for the West Terrace.    I let them in because

they had no chance of getting back out.    One supporter came in without

a ticket and offered me #5 to let him in.     I said, "No way," and he

just jumped over the turnstile.    I did not accept any money off

anyone.



By now it was 3.00pm (1500) and the situation was easing slightly.       I

heard a roar fron the crowd inside and I looked at my watch, it was 2

minutes past 3 (1502).    Then all of a sudden everyone had gone and

people stopped caning in.



A few minutes later, I heard the Tannoy inside the ground, I couldn't

hear what it was saying, but I thought that something was wrong

because they don't use the Tannoy whilst the match is on, unless it is

for something urgent.
At 3.10 (1510) I was still in ray turnstiles and a police constable

came to me and told me to close ray doors.    He didn't say why.    At

couple of minutes later he came back again and told me to open up

again to let a few stragglers in.    There were 4 of them - they all had

tickets and I let them in.



I was then visited by a man who checks the turnstile register.       I

don't know who it was.   I put ray tickets in a bag.                  same

round and said, "Don't bother counting them," and, "I think sane

people are injured."



I collected all the tickets up and put them all into a bag.        I came

out of ray turnstile and I saw that the grill at number 3 turnstile

was damaged and that its operator,           was in a state of shock.



I then walked round the back of the North Stand and onto the track in

front of the Kop.   I saw a cordon of Police across the pitch.       I saw

people being carried onto the pitch on advertising boards. I went

into the players' tunnel in the South Stand into the turnstile reran

and stayed there till 6.00pm (1800).



I would estimate that between 2.40pm (1440) and 3.00pm (1500)

approximately 500 to 600 people came through ray turnstile.
                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:              POL DC




                                                   398
                                                                          STATION

I^p!:
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                             (SIGNED)




           I have been employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as a

           turnstile operator for about            When I first started as a

           turnstile operator I got about         ier match.   I now receive

            12.00p a match.   If there has been a semi final on during that time

           at Hillsborough I would have been on the turnstile. On a normal

           league match I would normally be on a turnstile on



                                            As this match was a semi final

           these gates were kept locked and Liverpool supporters were kept away

           frcm that end to segregate them frcm the Nottingham Forest fans.       As

           these turnstiles were closed I was seconded to turnstile       t the

           Leppings Lane side of the ground leading to the North Stand.     This was

           an all ticket entry to the North Stand which is only for seating.       The

           turnstile operates by a windmill in the centre isle of the turnstile

           which allows one supporter through on a quarter of a turn.     This is

           manually controlled by a foot pedal which I operate after I have




                                                                                         399
obtained the ticket frcm the supporter.     I then press the pedal which

allows the windmill to do a quarter turn and this is then registered

on a counter.    You have to press the pedal right to the floor to allow

the windmill to turn.     If you keep your foot on the pedal the windmill

will still only do the quarter turn and then re-lock you have to

release the pedal and then depress it each time to release the lock on

the windmill, they are fiddle proof.     I always work with the same two

people and they were on the same end of the ground as me on the semi­

final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

On Saturday, 15th April 1989 at about 10.30 am I attended Sheffield

Wednesdays football ground with                   I drove____ to the

ground and I parked my vehicle in Leppings Lane as at the previous

heme game of Sheffield Wednesday we were told that this was allotted

parking area.    We entered the entrance to the South Stand via the the

Leppings Lane end.    We went into the South Stand to our normal office

to sign in.     I signed in and I was seconded to turnstile taro by

        I then went and picked up my paper which is used to record the

counter record on that turnstile.     I then walked with      to the

turnstile.    I opened number      id
                                   ip and      opened up number         We

got set up and opened the gates between 12.15pm to 12.30pm.       Gate 3

was already open when we arrived at our gates.     I wrote down the

reading of my counter on the wall before I allowed any fans through

into the ground.     I cannot remember the number I recorded frcm the

counter but between the time I opened up and 2.15pm I had counted 150

people going through my turnstile.     I had recorded this by writing the

number on each individual ticket.     In the next hour I allowed 920

people into the ground.     In a normal game I would normally allow about

200 people through the turnstile.     Between 2.15pm and 2.35pm it was

just a normal flow of people.     Within 5 mintues and at about 2.40pm it
                                                                              3


became noticably busier and I could notice people being forced into

the turnstiles.   I could not see the crowd outside the ground from

where I was standing.   I noticed that the fans were becoming irritable

and aggressive to get into the ground.    I could hear fans shouting

"what the hell is going on get a move on".     They were not singing the

normal football songs supporters normally do when entering the ground.

The people in the gangway leading to the windmill were being pushed up

against it frcm the people outside.    At one stage during this period

three fans entered my turnstile with tickets for the West Stand.

These were blue in colour.    I told them they could not enter and they

said there's no way we can get back through the crowd outside.      This

was at about 2.45pm.    I took the tickets and knocked on the window to

the police officers who were standing inside the ground side of the

turnstile.   I gave the officer the tickets and informed him that

these three supporters were in the wrong stand and I handed the

officer the tickets and I allowed the three fans through.    I then

presume the police officer escorted them to where they should be.         I

do not know the officers name or number.    No one tendered me a forged

ticket as far as I know.     I was not offered any money by any fans to

gain access to the ground, and I did not take any money.    As the time

was gettng closer to kick off time it became obvious that the fans

were being more crushed frcm other fans outside the turnstile.      When I

got to my turnstile at the time I opened up there was two police

officers outside the ground who were frisking supporters and directing

them to where they should go.     Inside the ground I saw three police

officers who were standing near to our turnstiles.     During the busy

period the two police officers appeared to disappear,    whether   they

were pushed away by the volume of supporters or what I don't know.

After all the supporters suddenly stop coming through the turnstile a
                                                                                   4


       police officer, a constable, told us to lock up, which I did.      I then

       collected all my tickets up and took them around to the South Stand

        after I had taken the reading off the counter.

        During the time I was on this turnstile I had no violence or threats

        of violence directed towards me.     The only thing was I had a lot of

       verbal abuse thrown at me.   I went to the South Stand by walking

        all the way round the back of the North Stand to the Spion Kop and

        into the South Stand via the players tunnel. __________________




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                       402
                                                                          STATION

1^ ! :


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIKIH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                             (SIGNED)



           States:




                             I got a job at the Club as a Turnstile Operator.

           I only take tickets.   I never deal with money as I always work on a

           stand where it is ticket entrance.   I am paid #12 for a normal match

           and for big natches like a cup semi-final I get #20.



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to work at the ground for

           the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



           On my way to the ground at about 10.15am (1015), I was approached by a

           man who was with a group of about nine others and asked if I wanted to

           buy a ticket for the match.   I could not describe this man.



           At about 11.00am (1100) with other turnstile operators, I was at a




                                                                                     403
verbal briefing at the ground it was given by a police officer and

seme others.   I don't know much about it as at the time I was doing

other jobs in the office.     I was just doing seme general admin jobs

so I did not take much notice.    I have been to briefings before and I

know what I am supposed to look for.    That is people trying to bring

drink into the ground, make sure the fans have the correct ticket for

the entrance they are using and not to take cash to let anyone in the

ground.



                                          I was shown by       how to

operate the turnstile.      All that you have to do is when a ticket is

presented, to operate the turnstile you just press a pedal which

revolves the gate and activates a counting wheel.



On the 15 April 1989 (150489), I was allocated turnstile no.        it the

Leppings Lane end which gives access to the North Stand.     I think I

have worked this turnstile before and as far as I remember, I have

never had any mechanical problems with this or any other turnstile.

I had no problems with turnstile no.      on this particular day.



I was on duty as a Turnstile Operator at last year's Semi-Final, but

I can't be sure where I was working - it may have been the South

Stand.



There are no telephone or radios available to turnstile operators at

Hillsborough Football Ground.



I am aware of the coded public address system message that is

broadcast if any disaster is anticipated.     I know that I must mate
myself ready, and would get further verbal instructions what to do if

such a disaster occurred.



I am not aware of any public address announcement on 15th April 1989

(150489) in connection with a disaster.    The first I knew of the real

problems was at about 3.10pm (1510) when                          came to

the turnstile and told us the match had been stopped and he told us

to lock up, not bother to count the tickets and just come away from

the turnstiles.



While I was at the turnstile earlier in the day I had a policeman in

front of my turnstile and two on the other side inside the ground.

They were stepping fans on the outside, searching them and

ensuring they had tickets.    I saw seme fans who had beer cans taken

frcm them.   I saw no one at any time get into the ground with drink.



When I first started taking tickets at about 11.15am (1115), there

were very few people coming into the ground.       It slowly got busier

and the crowds started to build up.    Then it appeared that quite

suddenly at about 2.30pm (1430), the crowd outside my turnstile got

very large indeed.   By 2.45 (1445) it was so bad that the people as

they came in, appeared to be distressed; they were out of breath,

sweating and red faced.      I remember I could feel the heat coming

from the crowd of people.     I could also smell that a number of fans

smelt as if they had been drinking.    The crowd outside were shouting

to be let in.   I was going as feist as I could.     It was at this time

that I got people coming into my turnstile who had got tickets for

other parts of the ground.     I can't remember the exact amount or what

parts of the ground they should have been in.       I would estimate 10 or
                                                                             4


12 people with the wrong tickets came and that seine of them had

tickets for standing areas only.   I could not send these people back,

so I just let them in.



I also had people at the turnstile who had no tickets at all.       Seme

of these just put money down and asked to be    let in.    I did not take

any of the money, but again, 1 had no option    but to let      them in.

There was no way they could get back out.



Often at matches people turn up without a ticket andtry to get in by

offering me money but I always refuse and turn them away.       If you

take money you get the sack, ___________________________ I just

would not do anything like that.



I remanber at the height of the crush outside the turnstile, one fan

got into the cubicle he had got a ticket but he started to shout at

me about the time it had taken him to get in.   He was so upset that

he punched the wire mesh in front of me so hard that it bent the

metal.   I was not injured, but I was quite frightened that someone may

try to hit me.



From where I was working, I am not able to see gate 'C' and I do not

know at what time it was opened, if in fact it was.       I am not able to

see the tunnel to the terraces or any of the pens on the terraces so I

saw nothing of the trouble inside the ground.



All I know is that at first all was going well.    The Police were able

 to search the fans and take people away who had no tickets or the

 wrong tickets, but after 2.30pm (1430) the crowd outside the lappings
       Lane entrance became so big and tightly packed together that no one

       was able to stop them and we just had to get them in as quick as

       possible.



        I have marked the position of my turnstile on a map of the ground.




                                                                       ilGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

^        TIME:             DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     POL DC




                                                                                407
                                                                           STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             (SIGNED)




           I have been a Turnstile Operator at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

           for                   low.   I have not received any training for this

           job, and have never worked at any other football grounds.

           At normal league matches, I normally work




           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was posted to turnstile number

                 in Leppings Lane, which was on that day a turnstile for the North

           Stand seating area only.

           I arrived at the ground at 11am (1100) on that day.      I went into the

           Turnstile Operators' rocm at that time, and was allocated my turnstile

           by                  He is in charge of the turnstile operations at the

           ground.     I got to my turnstile at approximately 11.30am (1130) and I

           opened up at that time.      The analogue counter for the turnstile was

           unlocked and I wrote down the reading onto my gate receipt that I

           later handed into                   When I opened up the turnstile was in




                                                                                       408
                                                                            2


good working order.

My first customer came in at 11.50am (1150) and then there was a very

slow trickle of people into the Stand until about 1.30pm (1330) when

the number of people starting building up.    By 2.00pm (1400) I had let

in about 400 people.    Up until that time there was no trouble

whatsoever and everyone produced their ticket. From 2.00pm (1400) to

2.20pm (1420), it was busy, but nothing more than I had expected.     By

2.20pm (1420) the crowd outside the turnstile had become very heavy

and customers were coming in hot and bothered and very angry.     I was

beginning to be subjected to a lot of verbal abuse people were coming

in saying, "People are dying out here."

I could see that the crowd was heavy outside but I couldn't see how

heavy or what was going on.

Frcm 2.30pm (1430) people were coming through, pushing and shoving;

some came in without tickets.    There was nothing I could do.    I could

not send them back, there was only one way to go.    Others came in and

jumped over the tumgate, without showing their tickets.     On about 7

or 8 occasions, I was offered money to let people in without tickets.

I did not take any money off anyone.

The bad crush came at about 2.40 pm (1440) and lasted till about

3.10pm (1510).     I would estimate that between those times I let

approximately 50 to 80 people who had no tickets, or had wrong tickets

which were for the West Stand.    There was absolutely nothing I could

do to prevent them from entering.     I could not send anyone back

because it was obvious what was going on outside.    People were passing

young children over the turnstile gate because they were obviously

very distressed.     I would estimate that approximately 600 people came

through my turnstile in the period between 2.40pm (1440) and 3.10pm

 (1510).
At 3.10pm (1510) everything went quiet and a police officer told me to

shut my gate which I did.

When I arrived at Lappings Lane at 11 am (1100), there were 100 to 150

police officers standing in the entrance at leppings Lane.    When I

opened up at 11.30am (1130), 2 police officers stood outside my gate

and one on the inside.

At that time, they were searching everyone who came through.      They

stayed there until about 2.00pm (1400).     After that I didn't see

anymore Police outside, but I can't say that they were not there.

I just couldn't see due to the density of the crowd.    The one on the

inside I can say was still there up until 2.30pn (1430).     They were

still trying to check people and do their job, but they had no chance

because they were coming through in droves.     They were also being

subjected to abuse focm the fans.   During the main crush, I was very

frightened I have never known a crowd like it at any other previous

match.

After I closed up I looked through into the enclosure behind the West

Stand and I could see fans sitting down.     It was obvious that they

were very distressed and that something had gone seriously wrong but

at that time I didn't know what.

I went out into the outside area of Leppings Lane at about 3.15pm

(1515) with                 ho had been on turnstile      I saw

ambulances and fire engines and quite a number of Police.     There were

a lot of fans milling about.

I went back into the turnstiles to go back to our office with them,

but by that time they had all gone.    So       and myself went back into

the enclosure outside the turnstiles and we tried to walk along the

gangway round the front of the South Stand, but we were stopped by a

police officer, so we walked out into Leppings Lane and round the
       streets past the park and into the offices in the South Stand by

       turnstiles 29-32.    In the South Stand, I saw a woman lying on an

       advertising board.    I couldn't see if she was dead but she was

       obviously injured.   She was being comforted by a man.

       I got back into our office at 3.35pm (1535). I didn't go into the

       stadium arena at any time before I got back to the office.

       I can say that my turnstile clocked up 1,049 people caning in, but

       that does not include the 50 to 80 people who gained unauthorised

       entry.

       At about 2.40pm (1440), at the start of the main crush, I saw a

       supporter cone into turnstile     which was manned by

       He was very angry and was shouting and bawling, and he punched the

       wire grill four times and then ripped the comer of the mesh down.      He

       then went off behind the West Stand.      At that time I was looking for a

       policeman to help us but I could not see any.

       On my way to the Ground at 10.50am (1050), the Public Houses and pub

       car-parks were full of supporters. I saw large numbers standing

       outside the pubs drinking beer from cans.      I did not witness any

       disorderly conduct or drunkenness at this time, but I thought to

       myself that there was still 4 hours to the kick-off and that they

       would be drunk by then.



STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME!:             DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                    POL DC[




                                                                                    41 1
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:      [


ACT! / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080489                                                            SIGNED)




           I have been employed at Hillsborough as a Turnstile Operator for

           seasons.   I have always been a turnstile operator at the

                                         I think I have only missed one or two

           games in the



           I was working on the 15 April 1989 (150489) at turnstile no      at the

           North Stand, Leppings Lane end.    I knew it was an all-ticket game,

           therefore all I had to do was collect the ticket frcm a spectator,

           make sure that it was valid for my stand, remove the ticket stub and

           then allow access to the ground side.



           When I started working at Hillsborough, the turnstile procedure was

           explained to me.   It is a simple task and I have never experienced any




                                                                                     412
problems.



I have no other experience of working at any other ground.



The only mechanical problem I have noticed at Hillsborough on

the turnstiles is at no    at the Leppings Lane end.   On the odd

occasion it sticks and can click a number on without a spectator

going through.   You soon get the knack and can operate it better on

the next occasion.   I have never reported the fault to anyone at the

Ground, but it is caiman knowledge amongst the operators.    People

joke, saying, "Which lucky so and so has got No    " I have never

experienced any other problem.



I believe that I was working at                          on the

turnstiles.



The turnstile that I was in meant that I was standing




I arrived at Hillsborough on the 15th (150489) at about the same

time as                                                  at about 11 to

11.30am (1100 to 1130)



We were given a collective briefing by a senior police officer before

the game and we were told that Liverpool fans would be caning in our

end and he told us to acquaint ourselves with the police officer who

would be stood outside our turnstile.



I am not, and never have been, issued with a radio or any other form
                                                                            3


of comnonication. If I needed anything I would just shout.



I am aware that in the event of an emergency at the ground, there

would be a coded Public Address System message.



As far as I am concerned it is more for the stewards and I would

be given verbal instructions if I had to take any particular

action.



On the day of the match on 15th April 1989 (150489), I took up

my position in turnstile No.      at the Leppings Lane end of the ground,

at about 1.15pm (1315).   At first it was just a steady stream of

spectators like any normal Saturday afternoon, and they were all being

searched outside by the two police officers outside.     There was also a

police officer near my turnstile on the inside of the ground.     At this

early stage there were a number of people who were trying to get into

the Ground via my turnstile, either without tickets or with tickets

for another part of the Ground.      I could deal with them easily by

just sending them back with instructions where to go.



I remember at about this time 1.30pm (1330) I had to get the

assistance of the police officer inside the ground, to prevent

two Liverpool fans getting into the ground by both getting in a

single section of the turnstile together.     The police officers just

pushed them back and they went away.



On about three occasions, fans entered my turnstile, obviously

without tickets and tried to get in by offering me money to let them

in.   I saw that they had money in their hand but I don't know how
much.   I refused them entry and refused the cash.



A big change took place at about 2.35pm (1435), when it became

obvious that the crcwd outside the turnstile was getting very big.

I could hear people shouting for the operators to hurry up and I

could see fans climbing over a blue fence just outside my position.

They were getting into the ground.



At this time I realised that the police officers who had been

outside searching fans had gone.     They just could not search people

anymore, there were just too many of them.      It was about this time

people started to push into the turnstiles, either without a ticket or

the wrong ticket, but by then I could not send people back as they

just could not get out.



I remember I looked for the policeman inside the Ground, as I had had

to let two people through without tickets but I could not see him.       A

short time later, he came back and said to me, "I saw that, just watch

it."    I indicated to him I had no choice, and he seemed to accept it

and I did not see him again.



From then on till about one or two minutes past three (1501) (1502) I

was just passing fans through, most had tickets, but I would estimate

a hundred or more had West Stand tickets, but I could not send them

back.    I just had to let them through.     I also had to let a lot of

people in, who I did not know if they had tickets or not, but the

crush was so bad all I could do was let the people who got into my

turnstile into the Ground.     There was just no way I could send them

back.




                                                                             415
                                                                           5




During the last half hour I noticed a number of the fans smelt of

drink.    There were some who were obviously distressed, through being

crushed outside the ground.    They were sweating, red faced and scxne

were out of breath.    I was not personally assaulted but I was

continually abused by the fans about the fact that it was difficult to

get into the Ground.



At just after three o'clock (1500) the crowds suddenly disappeared.

I have no idea where they had gone.     I did not see any gates opened

and if the fans did get into the Ground I don't know how they got in.



Shortly afterwards, a policeman came to the turnstiles and told us to

close them up.     I stayed at the turnstile for sane time, then

         same round and told us to get back to the office.   I went out

and round the outside of Hillsborough Park, back to the office under

the South Stand.



I did not see any of the surges or crushes in the terraces.        I did

eventually see a couple of people lying on the ground being attended

to.



I would just like to say that it appears to be the popular view that

the Liverpool fans were in no way to blame for what happened.        I

don't agree with that.    At 2.30pm (1430) that day they were just a

crowd of people, sane who had been drinking

          , intent on getting into the football ground at any cost.



I have marked on a plan of Hillsborough Football Ground the position
       of the turnstiles I was operating on 15 April 1989 (150489)



       Description of statement maker:




^^TEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:   080489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DC




                                                                     417
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589




           is                                                      This is

           lodgings.    I don't own a car but do have access to one, my mother's

           when I am in Sheffield.



           I am Sheffield b o m and bred and was educated locally.   I have been

           courting a local girl                                         Sheffield

                 for about a year.   She is a student in Sheffield and lives with her

           parents.    Obviously, with me being in                      being in

           Sheffield, we don't get to see a lot of each other, but I do try and

           return every other weekend and, of course, holidays.



           I have been employed by Sheffield Wednesday football club at

           Hillsborough for                  started at the beginning of the season

                years ago.

                                     le the job and I was happy to accept. My




                                                                                        418
reasons were two-fold, first of all I am a teen football supporter of

both Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United, secondly, when I first

started I was a schoolboy and the pay was                         This was

ray only source of income.    Having said that, I have always been

provided for by my parents and have never been kept short. Taking the

job gave me my first taste of independence.    I started straightaway as

a Turnstile Operator, I have never been called upon to do any other

duty than that.



More recently, being at                I travel heme every other weekend

by train.   The fare is #8.    I get #12 for 3 hours work which pays for

my fare and leaves me #4 in my pocket.     I also get to see my

girlfriend and the match.



On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I left                 on the

     train, arriving at Sheffield at 0942.     I went heme and dropped my

luggage off.   I left            house at about 10.30am (1030).    My

mates,                                  balled around for me in

car and we drove to Hillsborough. We parked in a small side road

just off Middlewood Road.     We then walked to the ground.



My job at the ground is a Turnstile Operator.     I stand in the cubicle

and when a spectator arrives and presents me with the correct ticket,

I rip off the counterfoil, press the pedal which allows the turnstile

to be turned allowing access to the ground.



I have never received any formed training, but when I first started, I

was assigned to a turnstile.     My mate      showed me what to do and I

 just got on with it.   It is a pretty simple job and I think after
years I perform it well.    I have never been asked to explain any

discrepancy or irregularity, and to my knowledge there have never been

any.   At the start of each season we do have a briefing collectively

by the Police, and Fire Brigade.    This is also the opportunity to

register for the coming season. We are given #5 and a pie and pea

supper. I think there is a separate briefing for the gatemen.



I have only spectated at other grounds, but having seen Villa Park,

Bramall Lane and a couple more, I think Wednesday's turnstiles are as

good as any.    They are old and probably could be improved but they are

more than adequate.



During the past 18 months at turnstile No 3, we change frcm match to

match between turnstiles 1-8, I have noticed that on scxne occasions

the gate appears to turn slightly further than it should.    On

depressing the pedal it will not necessarily allow more than one

person in, but it does register 2 activations instead of 1 on scxne

occasions.     I have reported the matter to                at the ticket

collection office.



On the 15th of April (150489) I was in turnstile        |at the lappings

Lane end which gives access to the North Stand.    There was no

mechanical problem with that turnstile on the day.



I was present at last years' semi-final, again at Leppings Lane end,

taking tickets for the North end.     I was on my own at turnstile



 I arrived at Hillsborough at about 11.15am (1115) on the 15th of April

 1989 (150489).    We all reported to the South Stand by the players'
entrance where we signed in.   We were briefed by a senior police

officer Who I hadn't seen before and also by                  I stood at

the front of the room and was able to hear most of what was said.      I

would add that the policeman had a quiet voice and he couldn't have

been heard at the back of the roan.    More importantly, he didn't

really try to make himself heard.     There was probably 200 people in

there, it wasn't a captive audience and there was never complete

silence firm the listeners. The two points that I heard him stress

were, that it was expected that a number of fans may try to enter the

ground by climbing the fence or by offering money.    This was to be

resistered as is usual.



We were also told that a number of Liverpool fans had been issued with

tickets for the Kop.   They were to be refused entry at lappings Lane

and would be dealt with by Police.     We were told that we were to have

more Police on duty than usual, to deal with these fans.



             nerely reinforced the fact that we were not to let people

in without tickets or to take money.     I think more people heard____

        han the police officer because he was louder.



We are not, and never have been, provided with a radio or arty other

form of communication. If we want something we just shout - not that

it always brings a response.



I am aware of the coded message that is announced over the Tanncy that

tells me that something is wrong.     It is, "Mr MEADOWS is urgently

required at the secretary's office."     This would give the ground staff

 forewarning, and whatever message it was would follow.    We had the one
and only practice of this in March (000389).    The coded message was

announced and all the ground staff Who are uniformally dressed in

waistcoats, stood up.    There was no follow up message and about 5

minutes 1      it was announced, "Mr MEADOWS is no longer required."



My norm al hours of work are 12.30pm (1230) to 3.15pm (1515). On semi­

final day it was 10.45am (1045) to 3.15pm (1515).    I always sit in the

South Stand after this and watch the game.



I did not see anyone bring alcohol into the ground or consuming it.

I saw fans outside my turnstile with cans and bottles of beer.    The

Police had provided large plastic dustbins outside the gate.    As the

fans were arriving, they could see that they were going to be seached

and were dumping cans and bottles of their own accord.    I could only

see this early on, but later I couldn't see out of my turnstile

because of the sheer number of people.



I saw no problems up until about 2.15pm (1415), when it was obvious

that a large number of fans had arrived together.    The congestion got

heavier.    Normally, the turnstile is cold and I was beginning to sweat

profusely due to the heat and the tension.     A crush started outside

the gate and I just could not get people through the gates quick

enough due to the pressure. There were points when the pressure was

so great that there was no roan for the gate to turn round.



During the period 2.15pm (1415) to 3pm (1500) about 12 or so people got

in through my turnstile by pushing into the revolving gate at the same

time as the fan in front had tendered a ticket and I had pressed the

pedal allowing access.    I would say that about 25 people tried to do
                                                                            6


this, some I was able to prevent, others I wasn't.      I would say that

of the 12 or so who did get in this way about 8 or more were dealt

with by the police officers at the ground side of my turnstiles.



Before and after the crush, I was offered cash by maybe a dozen or so

fans, to let them in the ground.      I refused on every occasion,

firstly, because it was an all-ticket game and, secondly, because I an

an honest person and don't steal or 'fiddle'.



I did not see any of the gates in question open at any time.



I could not see outside the turnstile, but from the shouts at me to

hurry up and the heat that was coming off the crowd, I knew that a

crush was happening from about 2.15pm (1415) onwards.



I did not see any ticket touts outside the ground.



I left my turnstile at 3.15pm (1515) there were no fans outside.      I

was told to shut my gate by a male special constable.      I then waited

round the left of the West Stand.      I was on my way to hand the tickets

in.     I heard a policeman shout over a hand-held loud hailer, telling

the crowd at the back of the West Stand to move back.      I would

estimate there were probably 2,000 fans there.      I thought it strange

that there were so many fans that side of the wall and very few my

side.     I was aware that the game had stopped because the cheering had

ceased.    At this time, I was with                         and another 3

gatemen.     I was aware that something had happened but wasn't aware of

the enormity of it.
The only death or injury I saw was as I left my gate.    I saw a man to

the left of the West Stand being tended to by Police and fans.    I

don't know if he was dead or injured.



Sometime between about 2.30pm (1430) and 2.40pm (1440), a man was

pushed up against my turnstile by the weight of the crowd behind him.

He couldn't move any way.   He was a big man, 18 stone, late forties,

5'9.   He looked very distressed.   He was out of breath, his face was

very red and he looked ready there and then to collapse.    The man who

was pushed up against him looked comfortable and I really think the

only thing on his mind was to get in and see the game.     He was a big

bloke, 20 stone, 6'3.   I was screaming at him to get back, but he took

no notice.   I was that loud that the policeman on the ground side of

the turnstile came in, pushed the other bloke back, thus allowing the

first man to get in.    I didn't have time to see if the first man

received any treatment from the policeman.



The only obstructive action I saw by any of the fans was at about

2.20pm (1420), a male aged about 30 years, white, 6'2 with blonde hair

came to my turnstile and pushed his hand under the wire mesh and

tried to steal some of the tickets I had taken.    I grabbed his arm and

held onto him until he dropped them.    The Police came and took him

away. I don't think he got any tickets.



The points and observations that I have made are contained in the

Steward's questionnaire I have completed.



 I have handed to                   the notes that I made when I got

hone at about 6.45pm (1845) on the 15th of April (150489).     They are
       concise (Item No              )(Ex No



       I have marked turnstile        m the map and handed it to I

                     I have signed the rear.



       Description of maker - a white male, 20 years,

       slim build,

       Fresh complexion. On the day he was wearing blue denin jeans,




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     PGL DS




                                                                                425
                                                                           STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by ms, is true to the best of iny knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                               SIGNED)




           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the ground to work on the

           turnstiles.            gravelled to the ground with me in my

                           car.    We parked off Berries Road and walked to the

           ground.   As we made our way to the ground I could see that there were

           a fair amount of Nottingham Forest fans about.     Notts Forest had been

           allocated that end of the ground, the Spion Kop.



           We got to the ground at about 11.30am (1130) and went into a roan at

           the players' entrance.    After about 20 minutes I was allocated

           turnstile        at the Leppings Lane end.    Turnstile        illows entry

           to the North Stand, which is a seating area only.     This area had been

           allocated to the Liverpool supporters.




                                                                                         426
Before we went to the turnstiles we were told that there had been no

notification of forged tickets.   We were warned that this was an

all-ticket match and to not accept any money from anyone to get into

the ground.



I went to my turnstile at about 12 midday (1200), and opened up my

turnstile immediately.



Up until 2.20pm (1420) I didn't have many supporters come through my

turnstile.    I remember counting my tickets and found that only 140

people had come through my turnstile.   I had been on turnstile No 1

at that same match last year and between those times last year it was

far busier.



No 1 turnstile is in the same block of turnstiles as         No 1 is

always busier because its nearer to where some supporters come in

Having said that, I was still surprised how much quieter        was to

last year.



I was working back to back in the same turnstile as the man in

I mentioned it to him that it was much quieter than the year before.

I don't know his name.



Around 2.20pm (1420) it suddenly became very busy outside the ground

with a large crowd pushing each other in an attempt to get to the

turnstiles.



There were no windows in my turnstile so I couldn't see how many

people were milling around.    By the amount of people trying to get in
my turnstile and the way they were behaving, I could see that there

was a big crowd.



People were getting to the turnstile and screaming, saying to stop

that pushing from behind, because of the amount of pressure from those

pushing behind.



There were times when I couldn't get people through the actual

turnstile because of all the people pushing against the ones trying to

get through.



At some stages people came through my turnstile with tickets for the

West Stand.    Because of all the people pushing from behind, I

couldn't tell them to go back out, so I told two Policemen what was

happening and they took those people to the West Stand, where their

tickets were for.   About 3-4 came in that way.



As people were coming through the turnstiles I could smell alcohol on

the breath of some of them.    Earlier on, before the large crowd

came, I put my head out of my turnstile and I could see people

drinking from beer cans.    The Police were outside, stopping people

taking cans, beer or pop, into the ground.



Just after 3pm (1500) the Police left and went into the ground.

Before that there had been two police officers to two turnstiles

outside and inside the ground.    After they had gone, I had about five

supporters jump over my turnstile and into the ground without paying.

I eventually managed to shut my gate and went back into my turnstile

to count my tickets. I found that I had taken in excess of 700
                                                                          4


tickets myself, and that meant I had most of my business within the

last 30-40 minutes.   You normally have a last minute rush but not as

busy as that was.



After I had counted my tickets I went through to the first gangway at

the back of the North Stand.   I intended to walk around the pitch to

the players' tunnel to deposit my tickets.



When I got to the pitch, I saw that there was a crowd of people on

the pitch, in the half near to the West Stand.    Most were standing

but sane were lying on the ground.



I didn't know what had happened and thought that the crowd had spilled

over onto the pitch for some reason.



I walked straight across the pitch, through the players' tunnel and

handed my tickets in.   There I met              ]and they told me that

they believed that sane people had died.   We decided to leave and

went out of the South Stand to Herries Road.     There we got our car and

went hone.



I couldn't describe the people I saw on the pitch.



When I was in the turnstile, I heard a voice over the Tannqy system

asking people to keep off the track, for ambulances.     I didn't realise

why at the time.



I feel that one of the main problems is people arriving without

tickets, because they clog up the area outside of the ground.
        Three people offered me money to get in that day, but I refused to

        allow any in.     I was offered #10 by one man, but I can't remember

        how much the others offered.




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   060589

^ N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                    POL DC
                                                                          STATION




AEORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             (SIGNED)




           part-time job as a turnstile operator at Sheffield Wednesday Football

           Club, Hillsborough.   I have been engaged in this capacity for about

                          As an operator I receive tickets or money at the

           turnstile and then allow one person at a time through the turnstile by

           me operating the foot pedal which releases the stile.    There is a

           clock system that is connected to the turnstile.    This registers the

           number of persons entering.



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on turnstile duty at

           Hillsborough for the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-

           Final.   At a briefing at about 11.30am (1130) I was posted to

           Turnstile       [jepping Lane end of the Ground.   I went to the

           turnstile at about 12 o'clock (1200) and opened my door when the

           Police arrived at 12.15pm (1215).   No persons came through my door

           until about 1pm (1300), and in fact, it was quiet until 1.30pm
(1330).    It got busy and there was a steady build up of Liverpool

fans about 2.30pm (1430) and onwards there was an exceptionally large

group of fans ccming through the turnstiles.   Then fans began to

surge forward and there was a frantic crush to get through the stile.

I was unable to stop fans from doubling up, that is two people going

through the stile at one turn.   Sane of these persons had no tickets,

but I tried to stop them going in but it was impossible because of

people behind who had tickets were just pushing forward and saying let

them in.    I must have had about twenty to thirty fans get into the

ground this way.    I also had fans jump and climb over the turnstile

about five or ten got into the Ground that way.    The Police did eject

some of those but as fast as they were doing that other fans were

getting in.



The tickets I was accepting were for the North Stand and marked with

           I did let seme fans through my gate with tickets for the West

Stand and Pens 1-7 on the terraces. It was impossible to direct them

to their correct entrance so I let about ten fans in with those

tickets.



It must have been about kick-off time or just after my stile was

quiet, but I was to remain until half-time, when about ten police

officers in uniform came over the turnstiles and disappeared into the

Ground.



I closed the gate than, because with the police officers going in, it

meant the fans could get into the Ground and they were running into

the turnstiles and jumping over without tickets or paying.    All the

operators closed their doors.    I collected up my tickets and walked
round to the North Stand and onto the pitch.    I saw that the pitch

was full of people, some were injured, others were lying down.      There

was that many, I couldn't say what was happening.     I was shocked.    I

just walked across the pitch to the players' tunnel to hand in the

tickets.   I could see people and police officers on the Leppings Lane

fence and the crowd behind that goal-mouth was packed in.



As I was on the pitch, I heard Liverpool fans, about three of them,

trying to incite others by saying, "Come on let's cut them."     I took

that to mean they wanted to attack the Forest fans.     I thought then

if they saw my badge they might attack me so I went towards the

tunnel.    By the tunnel I heard Liverpool fans threaten a Manchester

press photographer.   They said he was from Manchester.    I don't knew

hew they knew.    I carried on to the stile room and handed in my

tickets got paid and then I went for a cup of coffee.     I came back

and heard that two or three people were dead.    I thought, 'Oh God.'

I just left the ground and went home.



During the course of my duty, I did not see any alcohol being brought

into the ground or being consumed in the ground.    I did not see gate

'C' being opened or closed.



I did have people offer me money about five at the most.     It was five

pounds or ten pounds, I can't remember.    I refused the money, but I

did let them in.    I had to let them in because of the crush.
                                            IGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DS




                                                    434
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE (

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 190589                                                             SIGNED)




                                                           however, for the last

                        I have worked part-time as a Turnstile Operator at the

           Sheffield Wednesday Football stadium.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended at the stadium at

           10.20am (1020).     I went to the players' entrance and signed a

           'Stewards Sheet,' to indicate that I was ready to start work at a

           turnstile.



           I stayed within the ground and I was joined by another turnstile

           operator,                       We discussed the fact that both of us

           had been approached fcy a ticket tout whilst en route to the ground.

           The tout was a white male, about 5'7" tall, with fairly short mousey

           brown hair.    He wore blue jeans, a brown leather coat and he spoke

           with a Liverpool accent. He had asked if I wanted to buy tickets for

           the game, but when I told him I worked at the stadium, he said, "

           You're no good to me then".




                                                                                    435
Shortly after that, I returned to the room where we are allocated our

turnstile, and          the supervisor, shouted out my name and said I

was on turnstile              at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      I

was given a key to the turnstile and a sheet of paper with the

turnstile number on it.     I then went to turnstile         lich I have

previously indicated on a map of the ground.     I arrived there at about

10.45am (1045).



About five to ten minutes later, the turnstile operator arrived at

turnstile        which is facing mine.   I don't know his name, but he is

an elderly man.    At that time there were no fans waiting to enter the

stadium so I didn't open the turnstile.



The operator at turnstile        and I both opened the gates to our

turnstile at about 11am to 11.15am (1100) (1115).       It was my job to

take tickets for the North Stand which is all seating.      However, a

letter 'A' is screwed to the outside of turnstile        :o indicate to

fans that that turnstile was for use by persons entering the West

Stand.   I sent a message to         ind he said that         the

supervisor of the ground staff, had overlooked it.       In other words,

the lettering should have been changed.      Portable barriers were

erected on the inside of the ground outside number               turnstiles

to channel people towards the North Stand.      This emission meant that

at first people with tickets for the West Stand were trying to enter

through my turnstile. After I had pointed it out, the Police outside

were used to direct the various fans to the correct turnstiles.

Without this directing fcy the police, the fans would still believe my

turnstile was for the West Stand because the letter          remained on
the wall outside.



The only tickets which I should have been taking were an orange in

colour indicating that the bearer had reserved a seat in the North

Stand.   I should also add that there were Stewards at the portable

barriers next to my turnstile directing people to the North Stand.



We were very quiet until about 2.15pm (1415).   By that time I had

taken only 120 tickets.   Up until that time four or five people had

approached me and offered me various amounts of money up to #10, in

order to let them through the turnstile without a ticket. I refused

each time saying, "It is more than my job's worth".



All this time I could see Police officers, both inside and outside

of the ground, outside my turnstile.   They were searching fans and

everything was generally good humoured.   The fans were laughing with

the Police and with us as they came through the turnstiles.



Then at about 2.15pm (1415), the big rush started.    It seemed that

from virtually no one seeking admission, a huge crowd appeared.   My

vision was limited, but I could see a Police Officer being pushed

hard against the turnstile walls.



The situation seemed out of control at that stage and people were

squeezing in twos into the turnstiles.    I had to let them through by

operating the foot pedal, in order to allow the turnstile to revolve.

If I hadn't done so, I fear that people would have been crushed at

that stage.
                                                                           4


The mood of the crowd had changed.    Quite a few coming through my

turnstile were drunk and most were abusive to me, to the Police and

to themselves.



At seme time, I would say at about 2.40pm (1440), a Liverpool fan said

to me, "You'd better get this Policewoman inside, she's getting

squashed against the wall".    One of the policeman inside the ground

obviously heard this, because he leant over my turnstile and pulled

her into the ground.    She looked very pale and shocked.



The situation at that time was out of hand and dozens of fans were

just junping over turnstiles             in order to get in.   Also once

anyone entered the turnstile, whether or not he had a ticket, there

was no way for him to go other than into the ground, so I let them

in. The Police were still inside the ground outside my turnstile, but

they were trying to control the drunks who had been allowed in.



This went on until about five past 3 (1505), when I heard a big roar

from the crowd.   A Policeman inside the ground then told me to shut

the turnstile doors.    There were only a few people outside trying to

get in, but I was able to close the turnstile.



I started to count the stubs of the tickets and I counted 532.     I

would estimate that about 20 people without tickets had also entered

through my turnstile.



I then waited for a steward to cone and read the number on the counter

connected to my turnstile.     It's like a milometer, it clicks once for

every person entering through the turnstile.     At that stage I was
                                                                                5


unaware of what was happening in the ground.    Once the number had been

recorded, I padlocked my turnstile and locked my door.



I could see a number of Liverpool supporters sitting against the wall

of my turnstile, but inside the stadium, they looked very shocked.          I

then went to the beck of the North Stand and then onto the perimeter

of the pitch.     I could see the game had been stopped and a Steward

shouting to me, "Get into the middle of the pitch and help." I didn't

know what was happening.     All I could see were people being carried

on stretchers and masses of people on the pitch.



I put my bag of tickets in my coat and ran onto the pitch.        I ran

towards the West Stand and I saw a group of fans and Police lift a lad

in his early 20's onto a stretcher.     He wore jeans and a denim jacket

and he had longish fair hair.     His face was a purple colour.     I

helped lift him onto a poster board that had been ripped down.          About

6 of us then carried him on the board, to an area just outside of the

Gym.   I believe he was dead from the look of him.    We carried him frcm

a point in front of the goalmouth, but at the edge of the penalty box.



 I then ran back onto the pitch and assisted a lad with leg injuries

until firemen and ambulancemen helped him.      I then went down the

players' tunnel to return the stubs of the tickets t o t h e

 supervisor.     I told him that people had jumped the turnstile.       He told

me not to worry about it as there had been a lot doing it that

 afternoon.     Then as I was about to leave Doug I£CK, the Chief Security

 Officer, asked me to remain with a steward outside the players'

 dressing room, as he was having problems, mostly frcm the press and

 the odd supporters who got into the foyer.     I later returned heme,
        after attempting to comfort Liverpool supporters. It was about 5pm

        (1700) when I left the ground.



        I would add that although whilst operating turnstile              was

        offered money by Liverpool supporters.   At no time did I accept any.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

0         TIME:            DATE:    190589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DS




                                                                                440
                                                                           STATION

i^p::
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:                                       (PART-TIME TURNSTILE OPERATOR)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                              SIGNED)




           I have been employed as a Turnstile Operator at Sheffield Wednesday's

           ground for                 On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was

           also engaged as a Turnstile Operator in the Semi-Final between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.   I was engaged on turnstile

           which was for Liverpool fans to go into the North Stand.    The

           turnstile is manually operated and when a supporter goes through a

           number is clocked up on the machine.




           On that day I got to the ground at about 10.15am (1015) and at about

           11.30am (1130), I opened turnstile             to allow early arrivals

           to enter the ground.   During the time I opened the turnstile and up to

           about 2pn (1400), there was a steady build up of supporters entering

           the ground.   After 2pn (1400) the build up of supporters increased

           dramatically and by 2.30pm (1430) all I could see was a mass of bodies
outside, pushing and shoving.    When I first got to the turnstile and

opened it up there were two policemen by my turnstile outside the

ground, and two inside the ground.    After 2.30pm (1430) I did not see

the police officers as it was absolutely chock-a-block.    After 2.30pm

(1430) it was such a crush outside the ground that the Police told me

to let the supporters in for both the North Stand and the West Stand,

and that they would direct them as they came through as it was

impossible to send them back.



The situation got completely out of hand.     There were people junping

over the turnstile without tickets.    What tickets people had I took

and gave them part back.    I would say that a very large number of

supporters got into the ground without tickets.    As soon as the Police

caught one inside, another at least got away, into the ground.    Some

of them were coming through the turnstile in two's. I was unable to

do anything about these people, and all I could do was knock on the

window to let the Police know.    I have never seen anything like this

in over 25 years working on the turnstiles.     People were getting

forced into the turnstiles and they were very distressed with the

pushing, through people trying to get into the ground.     It slowed the

flow of supporters who had tickets, with those who did not have than,

trying to get in.   They weren't getting through as fast as they would

have had there been an orderly queue and they all had tickets.



Two or three minutes past three (1502)/(1503). a policeman told me to

close up.   I closed up and collected ray tickets, and left by the

corridor inside the turnstiles and walked behind the North Stand.       I

was not offered any money by anyone to let them into the ground.      It

was pointless anyway with what had happened after 2.30 pm. (1430).
                                                                                3




       After I walked back towards the Spion Kop and along the front of the

       stand, I could see what was happening and I walked between the Spion

       Kop and the South Stand and went to the office.   I left the ground at

       about 3.55pm (1555) and went home.




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

0        TIME:            DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     POL DC




                                                                                    443
                                                                         STATION




AEORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                           (SIGNED)




           For the past            I have worked part-time at Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club, Hillsborough as a Turnstile Operator.   For this I

           receive #12.00 for normal matches and #18.00 for bigger matches such

           as semi-finals.   Since I started at Hillsborough I have worked every

           semi-final that's been played there so I have experience of big

           crowds.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was on duty at Hillsborough

           ground for the semi-final of the FA Cup between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.   As usual I was not aware of ray posting for the

           match until the morning of the match when I booted on at the stile

           room in the South Stand.   On that Saturday (150489) I got to the

           ground at about 11.15am (1115). I booted on there and shortly after I




                                                                                    444
was given ray posting for the day which was turnstile      at Ieppings

Lane end, admitting fans with tickets with letter

seats.   I got to the turnstile about 11.45am (1145) and I opened up at

twelve (1200).



From then until about 2.20pm (1420), I only took about one hundred and

fifty tickets which I considered to be a bit unusual; a bit too quiet.

It's usually a bit busier than that at semi-finals.     Then all of a

sudden and frcm nowhere, came a mass of Liverpool fans packing the

area outside the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.   I thought at the time

that a train had arrived late and this was the result.



From then until I closed the turnstile, I can honestly say that it was

the worst experience of crcwd mass and crcwd crush I have ever known.

Everyone was being crushed into turnstiles, seme were being pushed

through sideways.   It was mayhem for about 40 minutes or so, most of

them smelt of drink and I believe that was the cause of this

crushing.



Prior to this crush I was aware of two policemen outside ray turnstile

searching fans as they came through, but as soon as this crcwd came

frcm nowhere I don't know what happened to them.



It was during this crush that I allowed fans with terrace standing

tickets through ray turnstile, as it was impossible to turn them away

because they would never have got out alive.    As I let them in I told

the Police they were for standing and they showed them through to the

terraced area.   As this crush increased, it got so bad, that the fans

were climbing over the turnstile to get in the ground.     Because of the
numbers involved in this crush I was unable to prevent these fans

getting into the ground.   I was also aware that at this tune my

colleague in turnstile                   las having a lot more problems

than I was with fans getting in without tickets by climbing over

turnstiles.



By about three o'clock (1500) or thereabouts, the crush had eased and

I was beginning to count up my tickets when, suddenly, a policewoman

cane into the turnstile.   Usually Police climb over, otherwise I

incorporate a count on ray turnstile but I saw there were about twelve

policemen behind her.    I thought something must have happened inside

the ground, so I depressed the foot pedal and let them through.       After

they had gone through I admitted a lady and a man who gave me two

tickets.   Then five minutes after that at about 3.08pm (1508) I was

told by a bearded policeman to close the gates.



All the operators in ray block closed up.    I collected ray bag of

tickets and made ray way with the others out of the turnstiles.       We

made our usual way back to the stile room which means going along in

between L e p p in g s Lane/West Stand and North Stand, through a gate onto

the track, around the pitch and down the players' tunnel.        However,

when we got to the area between the two stands, I became aware that

there was trouble with the crowd because there were loads of people on

the pitch sitting down and standing up.     The area around the goal­

posts at that end was just covered with masses of people.       My first

reaction was that Liverpool fans had been fighting between themselves,

and they had invaded the pitch and the match had been stopped.



We walked across the pitch towards the players' tunnel and as we
       neared it, I heard a Liverpool fan threaten a photographer because he

       was from Manchester.



       I got into the stile rocm and was told that one person was dead.       I

       still thought at that time that was because of fighting.     I decided to

       go heme then, bat before I left, I was made aware that the problem had

       been one of crushing rather than fighting.



       During my time in the turnstile, I was subjected to the visual sort of

       verbal abuse which I get at every match so that was nothing different

       but I wasn't threatened in any way.     Earlier on in the afternoon,

       well before the crush, I was offered money by fans without tickets to

       let them in.     This money was in the form of #10.00 and #20.00 notes.

        I told the fans that I couldn't accept money and turned them away.        I

       did not take money from any Liverpool fans that day although, as

       previously mentioned, quite a few did get through my turnstile who

       hadn't got tickets because I was helpless to stop them.




                                                                         ilGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL DC
                                                                          STATION




AEORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:       PART TIME TURNSTILE OPERATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                           ^ SIQJED)



                                                        I am employed on a part-

           time basis by Hillsborough Football Club as a turnstile operator.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I reported to the office in the

           South Stand at about 11.30 am (1130) on the same day, and I signed

           on.                  Who issues us with our work sheet, was already in

           the office when I arrived, and he issued me my work sheet for

           turnstile                 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.



           years.



           On receipt of my work sheet I then walked to my turnstile, and I

           believe it was about 12' o'clock (1200) on the same day that I

           arrived, and on arrival, the person opposite me was already in his

           turnstile.    I don't know his name.   As soon as I arrived I opened the

           turnstile gate to allow the fans to cane in.    At this time there was

           only a few fans entering the turnstile I was operating, not many at

           all.     It was from midday (1200) up until about 1.30pn (1330) that it
was comparatively easy going on my turnstile.



Fran 1.30pm (1330) onwards the flow of fans entering the ground

through my turnstile began to increase, and there was a constant flow,

and this continued up until about 2.30pm (1430) on the same day.    As

far as I am aware no persons gained unauthorised entry to ground

through my turnstile.   This particular match was an all-ticket match,

which required the fan to present to me his ticket to gain admission.

I then examined the ticket and provided it was in order, I tore it

along the perforations, retained the smaller half and returned the

larger portion to the fan.   I would estimate to get each ticket holder

through the turnstile took about three seconds at most.



Fran 2.30pm (1430) onwards there was a large amount of people

attainting to gain access to the ground through my turnstile.     I was

coping well but I thought at this time it should have been easing off,

not increasing.    It was during this period that I had two attempts of

persons without tickets attempting to get through my turnstile.     The

method vised is that a person with a ticket presents it to me, then a

person who hasn't got a ticket presses himself close up to the rear of

the first and then a third person who has a ticket then presses

himself up closely to the second person and presents his ticket.

Then, on operating the foot pedal to operate the turnstile, to allow

the first person access to the ground, the second person attempts to

 get in as well.   On both occasions, I called the Police who told the

 other persons waiting to cone in to go back, to allow the person

 without a ticket to get out of the turnstile.



 I also had the turnstile jam numerous times, due to weight being
                                                                          3


imposed on the turnstile gate by the persons queuing up to get in.

In order to get it to operate again, it requires the people to go

backwards in order to take the weight off the gate which allows the

mechanism to operate again.    Hie Police that I called, in order to get

than to move back, were stationed inside the ground.    The policeman

responded to all my calls for assistance to move the people away from

the turnstile gate.



At about 3.lOpn (1510) a club official, I don't know his name, came to

my stile and unlocked the automatic counter which is in all the

stiles. He then recorded the number on my stile and re-locked the

automatic counter. I then put my chain on the stile gate and padlocked

it and closed my stile door.     I then started to walk to the players'

entrance outside the ground to the players' entrance in the South

Stand.   I had with me all the ticket stubs I had taken.    It was whilst

I was walking to the South Stand, that I saw the first people who had

been injured.   Up until that time I wasn't aware that anything had

taken place inside the ground.     I carried on as normal to the South

Stand.   I went into the office and handed my stubs in.    I then went

into the South Stand to watch the match which is what I normally do,

but on my arrival there was no play taking place and I could see that

something was going on in the West Stand terraces.     I later learned

that the match had been abandoned so I made my way heme.



Whilst I am operating my turnstile my back is to

                         although I can't actually see them.
                                                  SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL DC   'M'




                                                           451
                                                                        STATION




AEORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address and I am employed b y __________________

           I am also employed part-time by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in

           the position of a turnstile operator.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I arrived at the South Stand

           turnstile office at about 1130 hours (1130), for the football match

           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-Final.



           On arrival I signed on as normal and I don't know which one, but it

           was either                        who gave me my turnstile for today's

           match and I was given turnstile                         I picked up my

           work sheet and went to my turnstile. I unlocked the gate and removed

           the padlock and chain from the turnstile gate.



           At about midday (1200) I commenced to allow the fans to enter the

           ground.   This particular game was an all-ticket match and no person

           without a ticket should gain entry to the ground, and we are not

           allowed to take payment in lieu of a ticket.
Fran the time the door to my turnstile was opened up until about 1415

hrs (1415), there was a steady flow of fans caning through who were

good mannered and in good spirits. Hie procedure when they entered

the turnstile was for the fan to tender to me his ticket.     I would

then tear the ticket along its perforation and hand back to the fan

the larger half of the ticket.     I keep the stub.   I then press the

foot pedal which allows the turnstile gate to operate and the fan to

enter the ground.     This operation, when there is a normal flow of fans

entering the ground, is a matter of seconds.



At about 1415 hrs (1415) the steady flow increased considerably and I

was working flat out to keep pace with the demand for entry into the

ground.   During this time to 1515 hrs (1515) about 6 (six) persons

gained unauthorised entry into the ground.     It was impossible to turn

than out of the turnstile due to the numbers behind them.      I couldn't

get the attention of the Police because they were engaged with other

people and, in order to keep the fans moving, I let them through,

otherwise I would have had a riot in my turnstile.



It was whilst I was in my turnstile, I don't know what time it was,

but I saw B gate opening.     The opening of the gate didn't alleviate my

problems because they were still coning in, in the same n u m b e rs . I

also noticed that the gate from Turnstile one to sixteen and

separating tumtiles A to G was also open.      This is inside the ground

and that's unusual for that gate to be open.     I did notice a surge

 just before I finished in the turnstiles of people heading for the

tunnel to the West Stand terraces.     I think it would have been about

 1500 hours (1500).    Again, due to the pressure, I hadn't got much time
       to look at that.      I also received numerous threats of violence and

       abuse from the fans during this period.         The most frightening time for

       me was when the fans were climbing over the top of the turnstile

       building itself to get into the ground.



        It was about 1515 hours (1515) that the turnstile doors were locked

       and I padlocked and chained the turnstile gate.               :ame round and

       took the turnstile numbers from the mechanical counting device

        attached to each turnstile gate.         I put my stubs in my bag and walked

       to the South Stand office, to hand in my bag.



       Whilst I was walking to the South Stand, I was in Leppings Lane and I

        saw three people lying on the pavement outside.        One appeared to be

       dead.      His face was black.   He was aged about 40 years.    He was white.

       He was a big, well built man,

                         I also believe the two others were dead but I couldn't

       be certain.



                                                                             SIGNED

^^TEMENT TAKEN
         PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:     070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                      DC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                        POL DC




                                                                                       454
                                                                            STATION

^pp:
ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                               (SIGNED)




           I have a casual job at Hillsborough Football Ground, as a Turnstile

           Operator.   I have been with them for about          On one or two

           occasions I have acted as              when they didn't have a

           turnstile for me.   I am normally on the turnstiles on

           On Saturday 15th April (150489) I was posted to the West Stand which

           faces Leppings Lane.   I am not sure but I think it was____________

           That is near to gate B.     I was in a small hut like a ticket office.

           There is two of us in there at two turnstiles, standing back to back.

           I didn't know where I was going to be put until the day of the match

           when I picked my tickets up.



           I arrived at the ground with                          who was on gate

       _________ Df the West Stand on that day, and                              who

           was put on the Penistone Road end, I don't know the number.




                                                                                       455
                                                                             2




I got to the ground at about 11am (1100).    We went to the stile room

which is situated underneath the South Stand.     I was there for about

half an hour.    I picked my tickets up and we were just standing

about.    We all made our way to our turnstiles at about 11.30am (1130).

I would say that there were about 200 or 300 people milling around

the Leppings Lane area at this stage.     In fact, there were people

milling around when we first arrived at 11am (1100).



After about 5 mins at the turnstile, I opened up.        There were only one

or two people coming through at this stage.     There were only about 30

people caning through in the first 15 mins.     It remained steady up

until about 2.15pm (1415).     That's when the crowd started to build

up.     There were a mixture of people caning through.     I don't think

there was anyone who was drunk at that stage.     It stayed like that

till about 2.30pn (1430).     After that it was like people appeared fron

nowhere.     Between 2.30pn (1430) and 2.45pm (1445), the crowd grew and

grew.



There were two Policemen on the outside of my turnstile and two others

on the inside.     It is the same for every turnstile.     I saw a few

Policemen there as well.     I could see they were having a job of

searching all the fans from about 2.30pn (1430) onwards.        I saw that

they took some beer off some of the fans.     It was about 2.30 (1430)

when the fans started to shove towards the turnstiles. Between 2.30pm

(1430) and 2.45pm (1445) I had two 'jumpers'; these are people who

jump over the turnstiles without paying.     There's nothing you can do

about it.     Both of the 'jumpers' were together they were about 19 or

20 years old.     I remember after I had the 'jumpers', I was offered
money from people who didn't have tickets.       As a matter of interest I

wrote down how much I was offered on that day and altogether it came

to about #300.     The highest offer I had was #40.    He started off at

#20 and then went up to #40.     The lowest offer I had was off a young

lad.   That was #5.   Altogether I would say that about 10 peqple

offered me money.     On each occasion, I refused.    They turned around

and left.     I don't know where they went.     I didn't accept any money

on that day.     I have never accepted money off anyone to get into the

ground.     If I did I would lose my job.     There are cameras looking into

every turnstile.    There are also beams which count the fans who are

caning in.    Also they can tell how many cone in by the number on the

clock at the turnstile. Every time someone cones through it registers

on the clock.



After about 2.45pm (1445) even more peqple turned up.        I would

estimate that there were about 2,000 fans outside on the Leppings Lane

end around about this time.     The crowd at first were all singing and

chanting.    They were in a pretty happy mood.     The mood changed when

they realised that they were not getting anywhere.       When they knew

that they were not getting nearer the turnstiles they began pushing

and shoving.     They were all pushing towards the front.    The Police

were try in g to hold them back but they were pushing through them.         It

got worse the nearer it got to the kick-off.        I didn't see anyone who

was drunk, but I could smell drink off their breath off many of them

when they were caning past me.



When the game started the situation got worse.        The fans outside could

tell that they had kicked off because the fans inside all cheered.

This made than more determined to get in.
I should like to add that about 5 mins before that I saw gate B open

up.   This gate is right beside me.     I saw about 40 or 50 policemen go

out of the gate and it closed behind them.     Nobody attempted to cone

in because of the Police coning out.     Although there were 40 or 50

Police, it didn't make any difference to the crowd.     They were all

pushing and shoving.



From where I was working, I can see the area which leads to and allows

access onto Pens 6 and 7.    There is a brick wall on the right.     Beyond

the wall is the area which leads to the tunnel and allows access to

Pens 1 and 2.    There is a metal gate in the wall which allows me to

see through to the tunnel entrance.      That gate was closed and manned

by a Steward.     I don't know who the Steward was.   I would say that he

was about                   old.   He was about 5'7" or 5'8" tall.   His

hair was                                          He was wearing his

yellow jacket.     I think he was wearing light coloured trousers.     He

has been employed there ever since I have been there.      He is one of

the regular Stewards who are always on the steps on the West Stand.

I remember on this day he was standing at the botton of the steps,

checking the tickets of people going up.      I should like to correct

something.   The gate is not normally manned by a Steward.     I only

remember this man because                                               at

the West Stand.



The gate is not padlocked it just has two bars which go into the

concrete floor.



A few minutes after the kick-off, I noticed a lot of fans running to
                                                                                5


the tunnel entrance.    I knew that they couldn't get through the

turnstiles that quick and that there must have been a gate open.         As

far as I could see, they all made their way to the tunnel entrance.

A short while later the whole of the area this side of the tunnel

entrance was packed solid with fans.



It was shortly after that, at about 3.05pm (1505), that the Police

told us that the fans were on the pitch and that wb would have to

close down.    We all closed down.    I collected up vny tickets and walked

around the back of the South Stand to the stile office.       I didn't

notice if gate C was open or closed.      There were still a lot of peqple

outside the ground.    At the office I saw              there, so me and

him waited for             He arrived after about 5 mins.    When I was

waiting for him I could hear fans chanting. I think it was the Notts

Forest fans.     I remember I saw a girl being carried past me on a bill

board.   She was holding her ribs and she looked dazed.      I can't

remember seeing anything written on the bill board.       It was being

carried by 5 or 6 people.    They were all Liverpool fans.    The girl was

in her mid-20s with dark hair.       She had a white T shirt on.   I think

she was wearing green tracksuit bottom, the baggy type.       I think she

was taken out of the directors' entrance, but I'm not sure.        I also

remember that there were about 7 or 8 people by the public 'phone, who

were arguing over who was going to use it and telling people to hurry

up.



It was at that stage that I decided to go out onto the pitch.          I knew

that there was something wrong and I wanted to see if I could help.           I

went out on my own.     When I got out I could see that there were a line

of Police across the pitch just about the half-way line.
                                                                            6




I saw a lot of people running about with bill boards and things.       I

also saw people being carried on bill boards.     I would say that there

were a few hundred on the pitch.     I can't describe any one person as

they were all running about.   I went up to a St John's Ambulanceman

and asked him if there was anything I could do.    He directed me to a

young lad aged about 15 or 16 yrs and a girl in her mid-20s.       They

were sitting down on the pitch.    There was nobody looking after them

at that stage.   They were just outside the penalty area on the coiner

of the box on the South Stand side.    The lad was wearing a red

Liverpool shirt and blue jeans.    I remember he had dark coloured hair.

He seemed winded and he complained that he was short of breath.       The

girl was wearing a red Liverpool shirt as well.     I think she was

wearing a pair of dark coloured trousers.    She had brown hair.      She

was complaining of the same thing.     I remember her hands were a bit

scratched on the palms.   I just asked them if they were alright.

They were asking about friends that were still in the West Stand and

did I think they would be got out.    These two didn't appear to be

together.



As this was happening, I could see people running around with bill

boards. I could see Police on the fence, lifting people over the top.

A short while later, the same St John's Ambulanceman came over and

thanked me for looking after them.     I left and looked to see if I

could do anything else.



I saw one girl taken on a bill board to just past the penalty area and

put on the grass. I remember the bill board was turned upside down.

It was being carried by about 5 people.     They were all blokes and all
Liverpool fans.    When she was put down they called over to me to help

out.    I went over to her.    I could see that she was finding it hard to

breath and whilst I was there she stopped breathing.       I knew something

of first aid, so I gave her the kiss of life.       I also called a St

John's Ambulanceman over and he took over.      The girl responded

and started breathing again.      The St John's man was about 50 years

old. He had his uniform on and he was wearing his cap.       I can't

remember anything else about him.      I would describe the girl as about

mid-20s medium build.     She had blonde hair? I don't remember hew

long.   I can't remember what she was wearing.      I was with her only for

a few minutes.



After that I noticed two lads with a girl.      She was lying on the grass

just inside the penalty box, in front of the goal. They were

Liverpool supporters.     They were between 18 to 21 years old.    One had

a red and white Liverpool cap on and one had a red and white scarf on.

I don't know how they were dressed.      They seemed very distressed about

the girl lying on the floor.      I went up to them.   The lads told me

that she had stopped breathing and they asked me if there was anything

I could do to help out.       I gave her the kiss of life and beat her

chest, but I couldn't get any response.       I was doing that for about 2

or 3 minutes.     She had a normal complexion; she wasn't blue or

anything.   A short while later, an ambulanceman came over and had a go

at the kiss of life, but he couldn't revive her.       I hadn't got a clue

what he looked like, even his age.      I would describe the girl as

between 18 and 21 years old.      I can't remember anything about what she

was wearing or what she looked like.       I was too distressed.



It was at that stage I went back into the players' tunnel and back to
       the stile room.    There I saw                          Together, we went

        to

                        We got there by walking out onto the car-park just

       outside the director's entrance and through the main gate onto

        Penistone Road.   There ware quite a few other people leaving the

        ground that way going back to their cars etc.



        I saw a lot of ambulances coming down Berries Kd ,turning right

       onto Penistone Road, and turning into the ground through the gates

        at the side of the North Stand.



        On that day, I was wearing a pair of       trousers,



                                                   I can't really remember what

                               were wearing.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
£         PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                       POL DC
                                                                             STATION

    E:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTO:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 080589                                                            (SIGNED)



                                                                I

           Part Time hasi s as a turnstile operator at the Hillsborough Football

           Stadium where I have been so employed for the past

           Basically the turnstiles are the same and there is very little

           difference in their operation.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 I left my house to report to our offices in

           the south stand Administration Block.   We had to be there for 11.30

           hours ready for the start.   We collected our ticket bags and signed

           on having been allocated our position by                 who is

           part of the office staff.    At 12.00 hours later that day I went to

           turnstile     ind opened up ready for business.   All of the operators

           opened up at about the same time.

           At about this time there was the occasional spectator caning through

           the turnstiles.   They were a happy lot of people and causing no

           trouble, most orderly you could say.    This carried on up to about 2.

           15pm fcy which time I had only taken 175 tickets.    At this time a large

           crowd decended on our turnstile area.    The pressure fron the

           crowd outside was so great that those who arrived at our turnstiles
without tickets could not be turned away because there was no where

they could go.   There was police officers on duty both outside and

behind the turnstiles but they were called away and were busy with

other things to do.   At one stage around 2.40pm I think seme of the

spectators were climbing over the roof of the turnstile building as we

could hear them on the roof above our heads.   My turnstile never

jammed but I was very heavy with customers and numerous without

tickets were trying to force their way in past the turnstile.

At about this time it was at its heavist with spectators being crushed

outside the front of the turnstile.   Occasionally I had spectators

arriving during this crush with tickets for other parts of the

ground which I had no option to do other than to let the but these

ware not very many.

At about 3.00pm later the crowd seemed to disappear and I thought we

had dealt with them all so shortly afterwards I locked up the

turnstile baged ray ticket stubs and made ray way outside the ground

towards the south stand administration offices.   At the time I

locked up I was unaware there had been any trouble at all.   It was not

until I got outside that I saw the ambulances and people staggering

about and obviously injured who were being treated by other people.

I made ray way to our offices handed in ray ticket bag and after being

paid made ray way heme.




                                                                          464
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:             DC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                  465
                                                                          STATION




AEORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                            (SIGNED)




           I have been asked about the events that occurred on Saturday 15th

           April 1989 (150489).



           For the past               have been employed, on a casual basis, at

           Hillsborough Football Ground.    I have received no formal training for

           ray position.   I can be posted to any part of the ground.



           I arrived at the ground at about 1115 hours (1115) on the day with



                                    I parked ray car in Fedding Road, off Leppings

           Lane.    Earlier on, on the previous match, we were told by people from

           the Club that all these roads off Leppings Lane would be blocked off

           but if we showed our passes we would be let in.    On Saturday 15th

           April (150489) I saw no evidence of the roads being blocked off.

                   and myself walked down Leppings Lane, through the main gate, and
into the ground.    We walked alongside the river at the rear of the

South Stand and into the stile office.     I noticed that there were a

number of Liverpool supporters already hanging around the Leppings

Lane entrance.     I would say that there were about 50 or 60 there.      We

went and collected our tickets from the office and we hung about there

for the next 40 minutes.     In fact, we went out to the pitch.   There we

saw a few supporters already in the ground.     I saw sane in the Spion

Kop and two old ladies in the seating area of the South Stand.



I got to my turnstile at about 12 noon (1200) or 12.05 (1205).          I was

allocated turnstile             on the Leppings Lane end.     That is one

office with two of us, back to back, in it.          <as in turnstile

number 16.                ^ears old.   He is          tall.    He has

             He was wearing




I opened my turnstile at about 1210 hours (1210).     At this stage I

vrould describe the crowd as very thin.    There were only a few people

caning through.     I remember that there was a policeman on every

turnstile outside the ground and there was a line of about 5 or 6

police officers on the inside.     I would describe as quite thin up

until about 1.30pm (1330).     I only took about 40 tickets up until

then.



After that time more people started arriving.     The Police were still

there checking tickets.     They were also searching them on the outside.

When they got in they were being searched again.



I noticed a bit of a difference in the number that were trying to get




                                                                                467
in at about 2.15pm (1415).    There was nothing out of the norm for a

match of this size.    At about 2.30pm (1430) I noticed that the crowd

had swollen.    There was thousands there by this stage.     There was a

crush on.    I didn't see anyone being injured at this stage.     I didn't

see any evidence of drink nor did I smell drink off their breath when

they were coming through.



When the crowd started we had seme 'jumpers' over the turnstiles.          I

even heard seme on the roof of our office.     I would say that I had

about 20 to 25 'jumpers', ov©c my turnstile, from 2.20pm (1420) till

about 2.50pm (1450).    When some of the fans were jumping over they

threw money at me.     I would say that there was about #30 altogether.

Most of them didn't throw any money at all.     One man came to me at

about 3pm (1500) and offered me #40 to get in.     I refused and he went

away.     I was at a loss as to what to do with the money so I put it in

my pocket.     The man who was in the same office as me, at turnstile

              :ame up to me afterwards and showed me a handfulof #5 notes

all crushed up.     He told me that he had them thrown at him as well and

he asked me what he should do with them.      I told him to do whatever he

thought fit.     I remanber he is a man about in his

          I know he has been in the job for        years.    I don't know

what he did with the money.



From where I was working I could see one of the main gates into the

ground.     I have been told that it is gate 'B'. I could not see gate

'C' from where I was.     At about 2.50pm (1450) on the day I saw that

the gate was open.     I remember that one of the policemen opened it.

He was in full uniform.     He was wearing a helmet.   I can't remember

what rank he was.     He may have been a normal constable.    He was one of
                                                                              4


the five or six who were standing in line inside the ground that I

have mentioned before.     I can't remember if he had a radio or not.

I didn't know at the time why he opened it but I now realise that

it was because of the crowd number.     In fact, when we had opened the

gate, it reduced the pressure on my turnstile to a great extent.

After about 5 minutes, when the crush wasn't so great, a policeman

closed that gate.     I don't know if it was the same officer or not.     I

remember he had a helmet on.



After that gate was closed the crowd remained quite thin.     It was just

like a normal match.     It remained like that until I closed the gate

at 3pm (1500).    Nobody told us to close the gate, I just closed at the

normal time.     I remanber that there were still people outside.   There

wasn't a lot, about 20 or 30, that's all.



I left my turnstile at about 3pm (1500) with           I normally walk

into the North Stand and around the pitch at the West Stand end to

get to the players' tunnel and the stile office.     However, on this

day, we were making our way around to the North Stand when a steward

stopped us and told us that we had no chance of going around that way.

He said that there were thousands on the pitch.     I could see that

people were sitting down holding their sides, and others walking

around helping others.     I didn't see anyone lying down.



We then went out to gate 'B'; it was still closed.     I remember we had

to open it.    It wasn't locked its only on a littlecatch.   When we

went through, we closed the gate behind us.     This brought us out to

the walkway which leads around to the directors' tunnel at the back

of the South Stand.     I saw that there were ambulances around.    It was
                                                                                  5


obvious that something serious had happened.



When we were walking past gate 'C' by the brick wall, I saw a number

of people who had been injured.    There wasn't many fans around there

at this stage, it was mostly ambulancemen and policemen.       I saw peqple

sitting by that wall who were obviously injured.     I saw one man, he

must have been in his 30's, who was lying face up on the ground.          I

couldn't see his face.    I remanber that he didn't have any clothes on,

apart from a pair of white boxer shorts.    He didn't have any shoes on

or anything.   There ware a number of uniformed persons around him.           I

couldn't tell if they were ambulancemen or policemen.       I didn't notice

any women there.   They were trying to revive him.    I knew this because

I saw his legs jumping when he was being thumped on the chest.       I don't

know if he was dead or not.    I also saw a num ber sitting on the

ground who had injuries to their legs.     At one stage,         shouted out

that he had seen a young lad about 16 years old who was dead.       He was

very upset and started to cry.     I didn't see the lad.     I thought it

best to take       away at this stage because he was very upset.



We walked around the back of the South Stand and into the stile

office.   We handed our tickets in and we got paid.    After a short

while we went onto the track alongside the pitch and stood at the

comer of the Kop and the South Stand.      At this stage, I vrould say

that the whole of the ground was still full of supporters.        I could

see that there were thousands of fans on the pitch.        At this time

nobody knew what was happening.    I didn't have a view of the West

Stand because of the number of fans on the pitch.     We stood there for

about 10 or 15 minutes.    I saw people rip billboards down and run to

the other side of the ground.     I saw people being carried on
                                                                              6


billboards but I couldn't describe anyone in particular.     I could see

that the people on the billboards were being taken to the comer of

the Spion Kop and the North Stand.     There were a number of ambulances

there.



When we were standing there, I saw a Nottingham Forest fan who was

standing in the Spion Kop near to the comer of the South Stand.           I

remember he had short dark hair.     He was wearing a blue shirt.     I

think he was in his mid-30's. He was standing just up frcra where

other fans were taking the billboards frcra.    He was shouting something

to seme young Liverpool supporters who were on the pitch.     I remember

that they were shouting scmething back at him.     I don't knew what that

was all about.



After about 15 minutes we walked back to the stile rocm.     I queued up

for the telephone to 'phone heme.     We stayed around there until about

3.45pm (1545).    We then went back to where we were standing earlier.

We stood there until about 4pm (1600).     There was still a lot of

people on the pitch.    We went back down to the office again.      At about

4.15 pm (1615) we heard that the match had been abandoned so we left

the ground.    We left by walking across the pitch through the North

stand and out via Leppings Lane.      I think we left by way of gate 'A'.

When we crossed the pitch there was still a lot of people around,

mostly Police.



I found that         had got seme money which was thrown at him by fans

earlier.    He asked me what he should do with it.    I said I didn't

know.    The following day I found that there had been a disaster fund,

        came around to me.   We both went to the Town Hall and put the
                                                                                   7


         money we had got into white envelopes and gave it to the fund.     I

          'phoned the ground on the following Tuesday and spoke to a girl

         there.    I don't knew her name, I told her what I had done.   I didn't

         give my name.




STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

           TIME:             DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

^ T C E R S SIGNATURE:                   POL DC




9
                                                                                       472
                                                                         STATION

j0E:

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION;


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                           (SIGNED)




           Since about October                I have been employed at the

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough as a Turnstile

           Operator.   I was introduced to the job via _____________________

                                                           For normal league

           matches I receive #12 for working 1.30pm (1330) to around 3pm (1500)

           but for larger matches, like semi-finals and perhaps Sunday matches,

           I would receive #18 for working 12 midday (1200) to about 3pm (1500).



           As I started part way through the season, I never attended any pre­

           season briefing or any instructions as to what to do.    I had to rely

           on                     to tell me what to do.    He advised me at my

           first match and my job consists of taking tickets, releasing the
                                                                            2


turnstile via a foot pedal and allowing access of the fans.



Fran visiting Bramall Lane (Sheff Utd ground) on various occasions

since I was 7 years of age, I would say they operate a similar system

but on a smaller scale.



On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) |~         collected me frcm heme at

about 11.05/10am (1105) (1110) and drove me to the ground.      He parted

the car inside a little side road off Leppings Lane and we waited to

the ground, entering via Leppings Lane entrance, walking round the

outside of the ground to the gateman's entrance at the Spion Kop end

of the South Stand.   At that time I only saw a few (25 or so) fans in

Leppings Lane.    These were well behaved.



I was allocated                          on Leppings Lane and

was on            We went over to the post at about 12 midday (1200)

and I opened at about 12.05pm (1205).    At that time nobody came

through and by about 2.15pm (1415), I had only taken about 45

tickets.    I know this as I'd spent the time counting them just to pass

the time.    I was quite surprised, as although I hadn't been given any

specific instructions, people had said to expect a lot of people.



However, at about 2.15pm (1415) or so, people just appeared frcm

nowhere in droves, just kept coning and ccming.    Before that, two

policemen were stood on either side of my gate on the outside,

checking tickets and directing people to the correct gates, etc, but

from about 2.15pm (1415) I didn't see them.



During this rush of fans, people either pushed or were pushed to the
gate by the sheer weight of numbers behind them.     They weren't

disorderly but people seemed 'bedraggled' as if they'd been pushed,

shoved etc., and it showed in their dishevelled clothing and red

faces.



People were coming through with full tickets, half tickets, both stubs

and the larger part retained by the fan.   Seme had 'A' and 'B' tickets

and seme had none at all.   Prior to 2.15pm (1415) I was refusing

everything, apart frcm                but after 2.15pm (1415) I was told

by a policeman inside the courtyard area to let                  pickets

in.   It was about this time I started to get what we call 'jumpers',

that is those that vault, climb or stride over the turnstile, and

then we got what we term 'doubling' or 'trebling' up through the gate.

This involves the first fan giving me a ticket and as I release the

pedal to allow the gate to revolve, the next person(s) in line rush in

and through the gate.    Seme threw #5 notes but a lot didn't.



The money that came through the counter hole, I put into my coat

pocket which I was wearing.    It was a                             jacket

and I put it into the two side pockets.    During my time on the gate,

I was only offered money for entry by one person.     I never, at any

time, asked for money, he just offered and I refused.     He repeatedly

offered and in the end, due to the agitation of the fans behind, who

appeared to be getting crushed, and on earlier instruction frcm a

police officer, when my gate was stuck due to pressure, I just let him

in. He left a #5 note.    I put that in my pocket.



Round about 2.30/35pn (1430)(1435) my gate was stuck, as mentioned

above, and at that time there was a fan without a ticket who I
                                                                          4


refused entry.   Due to the pressure behind him, he couldn't get out

and as such my gate was stuck.    The police officer obviously saw what

was happening and rein across, frcm inside, telling me to let the

people in.   I couldn't see what happened inside as the only window to

the inside of the ground was filled with frosted glass.    It's the

only window and measures about 30 cm square.   Also I didn't have

time, just concentrating letting people through, ticket or not.     I

would say the majority had tickets, but about approximately less than

10 jumped, about 25 doubled up, and around 6 without tickets went

through illegally.   It may be that there were more but I can't say for

certain due to the rush, etc.



At about 2.40 pa (1440) I became aware of the sound of people scaling

my gate wall and over the roof.    I can't put a number to them.



Suddenly, about 2.55 pm (1455), the crowd had gone.    They just

disappeared, leaving 2 or 3 fans wandering round out the front. I

didn't see them go, they just went, whereas earlier at about 2.20 pm

(1420) they stretched right back into Leppings Lane.    Looking through

the front opening of my turnstile, I only get a narrow view, seme



                                                 scxne 70 metres away,

and when the rush was on I could see people massed as far back as

that.



Looking out of the rear to inside the ground, I can only see very

little,

                                     I didn't look out the rear very

often as I was too busy.   In all, I believe I took about 800/900
                     _______                                                 5


tickets, the vast majority after 2.15 pm (1415).



At no time did I see any drink brought in or drunk inside, nor did I

see any obstructive behaviour to anyone, apart frcm I could see out

the front on one instance when two mounted policemen came into my

view.   They appeared to be pushed and jostled by the vast crowd.



I was only threatened once and that would have been around 2.40 pm

(1440) when a Liverpool fan, aged late 20s, 5' 10 tall, average build,

light brown curly hair just over his ears, and with a Liverpudlian

accent, shouted to me, "Let us in or I'll give thee a bloody," and

raised his left fist as if to carry out the threat.    He had no ticket

and I let him in as I'd been instructed by the PC.



Apart frcm the illegal entries, I saw no other criminal offences.



At about 3.05 pm (1505) the checker arrived and I closed up, after

counting my tickets, which I'd reached 500 prior to his arrival.

        said that there was seme trouble but I don't know   where   he got

that from, but I'd heard something over the Tannoy system and I

assumed it to be fighting.



           iad assumed the same and we went out the open Gate C and

alongside the river and into gateman's office.     On leaving through

Gate C, on my left I saw three people who were lying flat out and I

assumed they were dead.    One lad was very much like me, aged around__

   yrs, 5'10 tall, slim build, shaved hair, long at front, short back

and sides and the front piece was bleached yellowy blond but the rest

was light brown.    He was wearing denim blue shirt (faded) and jeans.
                                                                           6


Another was older, mid-20s, pot-bellied with a shock of curly dark

hair, and his tee shirt was up round his neck__

                          The other I don't recall.



Nearby was an ambulance and I saw two ambulancemen working, trying to

resuscitate another person but they gave up.    This was the last person

I described.   I thought they were dead due to their pale faces, eyes

wide open, glazed with no reaction.



We handed in our tickets and I received my #18 pay.      We then walked

out to the comer of the South Stand and Kop, where we viewed the

pitch and people rushing about, etc.    I was too shocked to move

following on frcm what I'd seen earlier, (the deaths). After a while,

around 5.45 pm (1745), we went heme in heavy traffic.



Around 5 pm (1700) I remembered the money in my pockets.      I felt

terrible and mentioned it to            . 1 don't     think he took itin

but he said that he'd got money, about #30.    I'd got about #40.      I

never counted it.



When I got heme I mentioned it to my mem and she was upset, asking me

why I didn't hand it in.     I told her I'd forgotten it and didn't

intend to have it anyway.     I assumed they'd set up a fund after

hearing on TV that there had been deaths.     I decided to put the money

to that.



I threw it in a drawer in my chest of drawers in my bedrocm on the

Saturday night.     Later that night my mcm took the money out and put it

in an envelope.     She kept it.
On the Monday, I told           what I was doing and he agreed to do

the same.   He then made an anonymous telephone call to the Club and I

gather the lady said it would be appreciated if we put it to the fund.

I don't know when, but         took it to the City Hall sometime in the

week or, at least, that's what I'm told.



In my opinion I couldn't stop the illegal entrants due to the sheer

numbers.    I don't know what happened to them.



I feel that if the Police set up a filtering system before the fans

reach the turnstiles, then trouble could possibly be avoided.      Also

there seemed to be a lack of cornnunication between inside and outside

and, of course, the late arrival of such numbers of fans prevented

their access.



Also for such large numbers, there are too few turnstiles, in my

opinion, as well as too few tickets for the numbers wishing to attend.

With regard to alcohol I didn't pay any attention to the fans and

whether they'd been drinking.    I didn't see any drunken fans.



At no time did I ask or intend to take money from anyone.



I have marked a 'X' on a photocopy plan of Hillsborough

No           ), my position in the turnstiles.



I would describe myself as a

                                                 I was wearing a

                           and I believe that I was wearing some
                                    I think I wore a

                            I speak with an average South Yorkshire

        accent.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 POL DC
                                                                           STATION




ADDRESS:
                                SHEFFIELD,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 014 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DAIED: 010589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address.      I am employed as a

                                                      Sheffield.   The 'phone number

           is Sheffield



           I also have a part-time job as a Turnstile Operator at Hillsborough

           Football Ground, the heme ground of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

           I have been doing this part-time job for the past

           normally work on a Saturday but I have done a few weekday matches. I

           normally sign on the ground at about 11.45 am (1145), then go and get

           something to eat and have a chat to the other lads.      I normally finish

           at about 3 pm (1500) and take either the tickets or money to the

           office under the South Stand.     I hand in my slip and they give me my

           wages.   I get #12 for a normal match.    I have been asked about the

           events of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) and the Semi-Final match

           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



           On that day I arrived at the ground at about 10.30 am (1030) or 10.45

           am (1045).     I signed on at the office underneath the South Stand.    I
entered the ground via the metal gates on Leppings Lane.        I noticed

that there were about 30 to 50 fans around the Leppings Lane end when

I arrived.   I also saw about 10 or 12 ticket touts.        That's more than

normal.   Seme as young as 16 years old.        All the touts were frcm

Liverpool.   Quite a few spoke to us.        It appeared to me that there was

one main man who held most of the tickets.        I knew this because some

of the kids would come up to us and ask if we wanted any tickets.

When we asked how much and things like that, they would run back to

this main tout and ask him.      I would describe this man as awhite man,

about 27 years old.      He was about 5'10" tall and of medium build.      He

had dark hair, nearly black, quite short, with curls.        He was wearing

a striped sweatshirt, sort of beige with blue stripes, tanned leather

jacket of good quality and blue jeans.         I think he was wearing casual

shoes.



As the friend I was with didn't have a ticket, he went to this tout

and asked him for one.      My friend's name is                 He lives at

                                Steffield.     His 'phone number is

I should really say that this tout approached us.              asked him

where he had tickets for.      He said anywhere, Kbp, North, South,

standing or sitting.           said that he wanted a ticket for the

Liverpool end.    I asked him how much were the tickets for the West

Stand.    He said #25 standing up, #30 sitting down.            said he

wanted a ticket for the sitting area but he would have to go heme to

get the money.   We both went back t o ______ came back and paid the

man.         went back    heme then.   I went to the office under theSouth

Stand and had a chat to a few lads I knew who also work at the

ground.
                     ______________                                           3


It must have been about 1 pn (1300) when I picked ray book of receipts

up and went to the gate that I was posted to.    That was gate number

21, situated on the corner of the ground between the South Stand and

the West Stand, just behind the Police control room.      I remember that

there was an old bloke on the next gate to me.      He was about

years old.   I don't know his name.



1 didn't open up till about 1.15 pn (1315).     I remember I was having a

chat to some policemen who ware by ray turnstile.     There were three at

first, but they were later joined by another two.      I remember that

there were three of them frcm Barnsley.    We were later joined by a

policewoman who was frcm South Anston by Worksop.      The three policemen

were on the inside of the ground, behind the sliding gate there.        The

other two were on the outside.



There were only four or five people who came into the ground before

2 pn (1400).   Tfrey all went in through the old bloke's gate.     It

started to pick up at about 2 pn (1400).    I got into ray office at

about 2.10 pn (1410).    I would describe the groups of people entering

as steady. Groups of 4 and 5 or so.    It was like this up until about

2.30 pn (1430).   After that it was a steady stream, but nothing

untoward happened.   At about 2.45 pn (1445), there was still a steady

stream of people coming in.   I would like to say at this stage that

about 30 of the people, after 2.45 pn (1445), were suffering frcm the

effects of drink.    I could tell this by the way they acted and the

smell on their breath.    I would also say, that of the 30    - 10 of

these were drunk.    In fact, I saw one girl who had to be hauled up to
All of these were Nottingham Forest fans going to the South Stand.        I

was receiving verbal abuse frcm seme of the fans entering at this

stage.



I stepped at my post until 3 pn (1500) when I shut my turnstile.      I

was aware that there was still a lot of people outside our turnstiles.

I would estimate about 50 to 80.



I then proceeded to bag all of my tickets up.



It was just about then that I noticed that there was semething wrong.

The crowd sounded, not like chanting, but screaming.     I could tell

there was scmething wrong.    I made my way to the iron steps just at

the side of the Police box.    It's narked on the map as pen No. 1.

There I had a view, over the heads of the fans standing there, right

along the West Stand.   I saw that a lot of Police were making their

way to the fence behind the gate between pens 3 and 4.     I saw people

being passed overhead at arm's length, over the crowd in the middle of

pens 3 and 4.   I also saw people climbing over the fence onto the

pitch.   The people who were being passed over were also being pulled

over the fence. I would say that there was about 10 people altogether

I saw going over the fence to the pitch.



I could also see a space forming around about pens 3 and 4, about 20

feet by 20 feet, in the middle.    I could see that there were people

falling down, falling inwards and falling outwards.    I couldn't see

anyone surging forward at this stage because you couldn't move.       All

the time there was screaming and panic.    I was only on the steps for

about 20 seconds.   When I saw what was happening, I made my way down
gangway 13, on the South Stand, and onto the pitch.



When I got onto the pitch there were people frcm the crawl being

pulled out, over the fence onto the pitch.     There were about 30 people

on the pitch side, pulling the others out.     Most of them were Police.

There were a few stewards and seme fans who had ccme frcm the South

Stand and the North Stand. I also saw people being        pulled up frcm

pens 3 and 4 to the sitting     area above.



I ran to the gate area.    By   then there was a lot ofpeople on the

pitch, both helping others in the crowd and those who had been pulled

out.   Seme were walking around dazed.     I also saw people lying down

injured.



I went up to the middle where everything was happening.       By then there

were hundreds of people on the pitch.      I went up to by the fence with

the rest of the crowd.    Together, we were handed over a lad, aged

about 18 years to 25 years. I remember there was a Liverpool lad

helping next to me.   I don't know if the lad we were helping was dead

or alive.   I know he wasn't moving.     He was limp.   I think he was

wearing blue jeans and a bright green T-shirt or sweatshirt. We put

him onto the pitch about as far as 25 feet or so.       I know that a

policeman came up to help him.     He said, "Put him down here lads."      I

would say that the policeman was in his early 20's, short dark hair.

He was on his own.



I then went back into the crowi behind the goal.        I remember that the

Liverpool fan was still with me.     He was about 5'11" tall, late 30's,

medium build.   He had blonde, short hair.     He was wearing jeans, white
shirt and a brown leather jacket.    There were people being handed over

all the time now.    I was amongst a group of people who were handed

another lad.    He was about 18 or 19 years old.     He was in a bad way.

He was like the first one, very limp.    His complexion was either

purple or bright red.    I can't really remember what he was wearing.

He may have had jeans on.    I can mainly remember the colour.     I

thought he was dead.    We put him on the pitch.     The first lad we put

on the pitch, just to the right of the goal, looking towards the Spion

Kop, about 20 feet in.    The second lad we put on the pitch further

over to the right, about 6 feet in.     We put him down and someone

shouted, "Oxygen." When we put him down I went straight back to the

middle.



Again we got passed another lad.     He was alive.    He was trying hard to

breathe.    There was me and two policemen had hold of him.     By this

time I wasn't aware of the Liverpool fan near me.       I can't really

describe the two policemen, other than to say that one had a jacket

on, the showerproof type, and the other didn't.       Neither had their

helmets on.    One was quite tall.   We took this lad onto the pitch near

to where we took the second lad.     I would describe this lad as a well

built lad, about 24 or 25 years old.     He had short cropped, blond

hair.     He was wearing a light coloured shirt.     I think he was wearing

blue jeans.    We put him down.   One of the policemen who helped carry

him, the tall one, stopped with him.



I went back again behind the goal.      I don't know what happened to the

other policeman.     Me and the crowd got passed another lad over the

fence.     This time I was with a young policeman.    He was about 18 or 19

years old.     I remember he had a flat hat on.    I think he may have been
                       _____________                                        7


a Special or something.    There was also a lad with a Liverpool shirt

on and another lad.    When we got this lad we carried him onto the

pitch, again to the right of the goal.     We put him down on the pitch

but nearer to the side than the previous two.     He was wacked out and

didn't move.     I had hold of his shoulders.   I remember his eyes were

closed.   He was about 22 years old.    He was about 5'8" tall, medium

build.    I remember he had dark, short, spiked hair, like Nigel CLOUGH.

He had thick set eyebrows.     He was wearing 'Reebok' trainers, blue

jeans and a light blue T-shirt.    We put him down.   A policewoman came

up to us.   The policewoman said to us that she wanted someone to

resperate him.     She said she wanted someone to push down on his chest.

I turned around to him and knelt down.     The other two, the policeman

and the other lad, left at this stage.     The policewoman said to me,

"Do you know what to do?"     I said, "Yes, I think so."   I put my hands

across and put them on the lad's chest.      I asked her if that was

alright and she said it was.     She then put his head back and gave him

mouth-to-mouth.     At the same time, I applied pressure to his chest.

We done this for about 4 minutes or so it seemed, then a male officer

came over and knelt down and checked for a pulse.      We carried on for

about another five times or so.     The policeman then said to the

policewoman, "Forget it love, he's dead."



She turned and put her head down.      He looked at me and shook his head.

I sat back.    The policeman then took his jacket off and covered the

lad's head and upper part of the body.



I would describe the policewoman as not very tall, about 23 years old,

dark hair. I think it was long because it was up in a bun.      She was

wearing a hat.     She may have been frcm another Force because there was
something different about her badges.     I would describe the policeman

as about 29 or 30 years old.    He was about 6'0" tall.     He had his

helmet on.     I think I may know her again if I saw her.



After a short while, I returned to behind the goal.       By this time

there were many hundreds of people on the pitch.     I could see that the

crowds were thinning around the middle behind the fence.       At this

stage, there were people being carried off on billboards.       I remember

that there were 3 lads who had picked up a billboard that had 'FINLUX

TELEVISIONS' written on it.     On the board was a man in his 20s.       He

was screaming, holding his leg.     I helped pick the board up.    We were

joined by sane others then.     We started to move towards the corner of

Spion Kop and the North Stand where they were taking them to the

sports hall.     As we got further up the pitch, we were helped by

others, so at about half-way I left it and went back behind the goal.



I could see that the crowd had been thinned out by then.       I walked

back, looking about me at what had happened.     I saw much confusion.

I saw people lying down, seme were alright.     I saw people crying,

same shouting and seme holding onto others.



I ended up just right of the goal.     I saw a young lad aged about 14

years old.     He was lying on the pitch to the right of the goal towards

the South Stand.     He was near the comer flag, about 10 feet towards

the goal and about 5 feet onto the pitch.     He was not very tall, about

5'0" tall.     He had darkish hair, medium length.   I can't remember what

he was wearing.     I think he had a dark coat on.   He was lying face

down.   His right a m was out in front of him and he appeared to have

been put in the prone position.     I remember his right leg was broken;
                                                                             9


you could see that because of the shape.    He was alive.    I could hear

him wheezing and there was stuff caning out of his mouth.



At this stage, I saw a man come up to the young lad who was lying on

the ground.    He had white trainers on and jeans on.    He was wearing a

jacket which looked like a wax cotton but it was like a stormproof-

type, the kind the police wear but it was green.       It was 3/4 (three

quarter) length. He was about 25 years old.      He had longish hair,

brown in colour, that came over his collar.      He was carrying a large,

expensive looking camera.     The lens was about 6" or 7" long.    I got

the impression that he was a press photographer.       He went up to the

young lad and moved about as if to focus his camera.      He then adjusted

his lens.     A fairly big lad came up to him.   He was well built.     He

was wearing a Liverpool football shirt.     He went up to the

photographer and hit him across the side of the head with the back of

his right hand.     The photographer staggered back.    The Liverpool fan

then told him to fuck off or he would do him seme real injury.        He

called him a vulture.     The man with the camera said that he was sorry

and that he was only doing his job.     He was walking backwards as he

was saying this, with the Liverpool fan walking towards him, holding

up his fist.     I caught hold of the photographer.    I put my hand on

his shoulder because he was only about 5'9" tall.       I swung him around

and I said, "I'd fuck if I were you."     He went off towards the centre

of the pitch.     I calmed the Liverpool fan down and he went back

towards the goal.



I went back to the West Stand up to the seating area and found my

friend,                 Together we went down back onto the pitch.      We

went along the pitch towards the players' tunnel so we could use the
                                      I                                        10


'phone there to 'phone home.    I remember there was a cordon of Police

right across the pitch from the North Stand to the South Stand.       After

we 'phoned, we were making our way along the track at the side of the

pitch towards the West Stand.    As we were walking along I saw two

Liverpool fans who were 'falling down drunk'. One tripped up on the

turf and fell over.    He looked up at his mate and said, "That's a

foul." His mate could hardly pick him up as he was so drunk.         Both

thought it was very funny.     I looked about and I saw that there

appeared to be a lot of Liverpool fans who were worse for drink.           I

also saw evidence of people being abusive towards others.        I saw one

Liverpool fan shouting at a senior policeman at the players' tunnel.

He was in his late 40s, with a flat hat.



On that day I was wearing a

trainers.



When me and        were leaving the ground, but still on the pitch, a

very tall policeman came up to us.        I remember he had a ginger beard.

He asked us if we were alright and had we found everyone that we had

cane with.    We had a chat for a while.     He told us that he was in the

North Stand when it all started.     He said that they all went to the

fences at the West Stand to see if they could help.        He told us that a

senior officer told them to form a cordon at that time.        I think he

went to the North Stand to stop people coming onto the pitch fron the

North Stand.    The policeman told us that the officers told the senior

officers that people were dying in the West Stand and they needed

help, so they all went over there.



After that I went out of the ground with            and up to his house.
                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:               DC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 POL DC
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:       U _____________
                        I SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H:                       ~

OCCUPATION:    TURNSTILE OPERATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I work at Hillsborough Football Ground for the Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club as an Turnstile operator.



           I was working on the day of the Semi-Final FA Cup between Liverpool

           against Nottingham Forest and I was asked to came in early, so I was

           coming into the Hillsborugh grounds at about half past ten to quarter

           to eleven (1030) (1045), and when I reached Penistone Road at the part

           where the River Don goes underneath, I saw a white man wearing jeans

           who was selling tickets to people.    I heard the people who he was

           talking to say, "How much?"   I didn't notice his accent so I can't say

           if he was fron Liverpool, Nottingham or Sheffield.



           When I got to the ground I went straight to turnstile         idiich was

           at about half past eleven (1130).    My job was to admit ticket holders

           only at this turnstile.   During my work period I had approximately 20

           plus youths offering me money to let them in, which I refused.    I had

           one man offering me #100 to let in 10 of them.    I had another man

           offering me #25 to let him and his friend in.    I have never had so




                                                                                      492
                                                                                  2


       many people offering me money to let them in.   It would indicate that

       there were quite a few people about without tickets.



       The bribery started about twelve o'clock (1200), when one of the

       youths showed me a twenty pound note held in his palm and said, "This

       will let me in won't it."   I told him, "No it won't.   Not in this one,

        it's tickets only."



        They were frcm both Liverpool and Forest supporters and mostly Forest

        supporters.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:    020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   _____________________

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                         POL PC
                                                                         STATION

l^E:

ADDRESS:
                        SHEFFIELD? S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                            (SIGNED)



           On match days I am employed as a turnstile operator at Sheffield

           Wednesday Football Ground.   I have done this for



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was working turnstile no 44

           in the Spion Kop End of the ground.    This end haD been allocated to

           Nottingham Forest Supporters.



           I started work in my turnstile at about 11.15 am (1115) and stayed

           there checking tickets until about 3.10 pn (1510).



           During that time, I was approached by about 3-4 people offering me

           money, to allow them into the ground.    I never willingly accepted any

           money frcm any person to allow them into the ground, without a ticket.

           There were occasions when people would present me a ticket and when I

           press the pedal to open the turnstile, a mate of theirs would push up

           close behind them and go through with them.    Once I'd opened the

           turnstile, there was nothing I could do to stop them.    About 5 people

           got in that way.




                                                                                     494
                                                                                   2




       At about 3.10 pm (1510), I took the ticket stubs to the office tinder

        the South Stand.     I then went and stood by the comer of the Spion

        Kop and South Stand.     I could see the people on the pitch and I

        realised something was wrong.     Ambulances came onto the pitch and took

        people away.



        When I was at my turnstile, one man offered me #20 to get in.     I

        wouldn't let him in but he came back a while later with a ticket and

        told me that he had paid #25 for it.     I don't know, but I presume he

        bought it frcm some kind of ticket tout.



        I did work the same match at last year's Semi-Final between the same

        teams.      I worked on a different turnstile last year, so I can't really

        compare the two matches.      I didn't really see the incident at the

        Leppings Lane End.




                                                                          SIGNED

J^fenSMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:    010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     POL DC
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                         SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and am employed on a caused basis by Sheffield

           Wednesday Football Club at Hillsborough ground as a tumsitle

           operator, a position I have held for



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was at the Liverpool v

           Nottingham Forest match as a turnstile operator.     I was posted to

           either number            gate.   My job on that day was to take tickets

           frcm fans, tear off the stubs and give them the tickets back.    My

           instructions were that I was not to take any money, just tickets.



           At approximately 2 pn (1400), I saw a fan get through my turnstile

           without paying.    I do not know who he supported as he didn't have any

           regalia on.    He got in without paying, by getting up behind a fan who

           did have a ticket. When I pushed my pedal to operate the turnstile,

           they both pushed hard together and got in.     I tried to stop them but

           they got away.



           Five or ten minutes later, a fan came up to my turnstile and placed a




                                                                                     496
ten pound note on the counter and said, "Alright mate to get in." I

said, "No, more than my job's worth."    This fan then took his ten

pound note away and left.    Again, I did not know who this fan

supported.    This fan was about in mid-twenties and was very quiet and

casual.



At approximately 2.30 pn (1430), I had a second fan who entered the

ground through my turnstile without a ticket.    This was done in the

same way as the first incident.    I could not tell you which club he

supported.    Just a few minutes later I had a fan put #15.00 on my

counter and said, "Any chance of getting in?"    Again I refused.     Again

I could not tell you who he supported.



After this incident, I told the policeman positioned outside my

turnstile, to check tickets as two had got in without paying.       After

that I had no problems.



At approximately 3.10 pn (1510), I was waiting just inside my

turnstile as I had shut up and was waiting for the turnstile number

man.     I was suddenly aware of a great number of fans came into the

ground fran the direction of the concertina gate situated next to our

turnstile block.     I looked round the corner and saw the gate three

quarters open and fans rushing through.    At this time I knew the game

had been stepped and I thought that Liverpool fans had invaded the

pitch.    Outside the gate, which was open 5-6 metres had, a policeman

and policewoman were stationed either side of the gate.     I can't

remember seeing stewards at the gate, butthere normally is.       I did

not see the gate opened.     I could not recognisethe two police again.

I can't remember having seen them before.
                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             POL PC
                                                                         STATION

1^ !   :


ADDRESS:
                           SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and live at the above address with

                      I am employed by Hillsborough Football Club as a Turnstile

           Operator on alternate Saturdays.    I have worked there for about




           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was working in turnstile

           No: 64, Spion Rep end of the ground for the FA Cup Semi-Final between

           Liverpool and Forest.    At about a quarter to three (1445), three

           different youths approached my turnstile, offering me cash, #10.00, to

           get in into the stand.    They were all told by me, " No way, you've

           both to have a ticket." These lads left my turnstile.



           At about ten past three (1510), a policeman asked me to shut my

           turnstile, which I did.    I then made my way to the ticket office to

           cash in.   After doing this, I made my way into the South Stand

           seating.   I could see there had been trouble at the lappings Lane end,

           as Police were running towards that end with stretchers.    I then saw

           seme, what I took to be, Liverpool fans, running across the pitch from
       Leppings Lane end, towards the Nottingham supporters in the Spion

       Kop.



       These youths had their arms and fists raised and were obviously

        looking for a fight.   They got close to the fence, but a line of

       police officers stepped any confrontation.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

®        TIME:             DATE:     020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:              PC'

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL PC
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:______________

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am a married man living with my                        at the above

           address. I am employed as

                where I have worked for the last                I am also

           employed on a Saturday for heme games at Sheffield Wednesday football

           ground as a turnstile operator which I have been doing for the last 5

           seasons.



           On Saturday the 15 April 1989 (150489) I was employed in the role at

           Sheffield ground and I conmenced work at 1130 hours (1130) which is

           slightly earlier than normal due to the match being a semi-final

           between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool Football Club.



           On arrival at the ground I was given my posting for that day which was

           operating turnstile number    at the Penistone Road end of the ground,

           alongside the Spion Rep.



           At about 11.45 hrs (1145) I took up my position in the turnstiles.      It

           was very quiet for a while and I stood in the turnstile looking about.
                                                                          2


I saw about 100 Nottingham Forest fans sat on the garage wall across

Penistone Road.   Some of them were drinking cans of beer, but they all

seemed in good humour and quiet.



At about 1 oclock (1300) seme of the fans started to enter the ground.

It was about that time when I took my first ticket.    I had two

policemen to the left of my gate and they were stopping fans entering

the ground with any drinks.   They told them to either drink up or

throw the cans away.   They also searched any fans with bags or

ought.



It was pretty steady up till about 2 oclock (1400) to half past two

(1430) when there were a large build up of fans and it was very

crowded by the turnstile.



At about half past two (1430) the trouble started.    Fans started to

offer me money to let them in the ground, anything from #5 to #10.

They became abusive when I vrouldn't let them, but they just

disappeared into the crowd waiting to came in.



One lad I remember offered me #10.00 and I refused.     He said something

like, go on, have a drink, no one's looking.     I refused.   He then

offered me #20.00 and kept upping it to #40.00 - all I refused.      He

then became very abusive and threatening, but I still wouldn't let him

in.



It was just shortly after this I had about five - six fans jump

over the turnstile and get into the ground, without offering any money

or tickets, except one fan who had a ticket.     I told him he didn't
have to jump over, but he was drunk and just jumped over without

leaving his ticket and ran off.    Both the policeman by this time had

left the gate area so there was no one around to stop the fans leaping

the gate.    I don't know whether any of these fans were ones who had

offered me money or not.



I then managed to shut the gate and stop any more fans getting in

without tickets.    I left the gate shut for about five minutes and till

the fans had quietened down and then I opened it and carried on as

normal.



At about 3.20 pn (1520) a security man came down and told roe I could

finish and shut the turnstile down.    I had counted up my tickets so I

bagged them up and took them to the office under the South Stand.       By

this time, I knew there were fans on the pitch and the game had been

stopped.



Myself and other people in the office thought it was because there had

been fighting in the crowd.



I handed my tickets in at the office and collected my wages.

Everything seemed quite normal.



I usually go down and watch the game and walked down to stand on the

touch line.    I went between the North Stand and the Kop and onto the

pitch.     I could see something had happened, there was a line of

Policemen across the pitch.     I could also see people lying all over

the place.     I went up to one of the policemen and he said, "We can't

move frcm here, you can go and see if you can help out." I went into
the crowds of people on the pitch towards the Leppings Lane end.      As

I did, I saw two Liverpool supporters giving kiss of life and pumping

a chap's chest, who was lying on the ground.    This was happening in

the penalty box area of the pitch and slightly left of centre as you

look towards Leppings Lane.   The chap who the two blokes wex^e trying

to resuscitate was a white male about 25-30 years wearing a white open

T-shirt and jeans.   I stood directly over, watching, then one of the

men shouted, "We've done it, we've done it."    It looked as if the chap

had started to breathe on his own, so I left them and walked towards

the edge of the pitch.



I saw about 4 to 5 men putting a man onto sane advertising boarding

they had ripped down.    I didn't see much of him because they then

covered his face with a black bcniber-style jacket.   They then picked

up the boarding and started to run across the pitch towards the Police

line.    It looked like they were going to drop him, so I grabbed hold

of part of the boarding and helped carry it across the pitch towards

the 'gennel' (entrance to the left of Spion Kop up to gymnasium).       On

the way across the pitch, about twenty other people followed.    When we

got to the 'gennel' there wasn't enough rocm for us all to go up it,

so I ran back across the pitch towards the Leppings Lane end.



Just past the half-way line there were some more lads carrying a bloke

on sane boarding, so I helped them up towards the gymnasium area.       He

was conscious but didn't speak.    He was a big bloke, wearing a white T-

shirt.    Outside the gymnasium I let go.   There was about twenty people

sitting and laying around that area.



I again ran back across the pitch.     This time there was an ambulance
                                                                           5


putting injured people in the back.



I assisted with carrying one chap into the ambulance.    He was a white

male, about 20-22 years with black hair, wearing a burgundy leather

jacket and jeans.    He was also conscious but in seme pain.   About six

people were put in the ambulance. Then they shut the doors and it

drove off.



I then went and assisted a group of supporters put a young lad onto a

piece of boarding and carried him to the 'gennel'. All the way he

kept saying he'd be alright, he just wanted a drink.    I again left

them at the 'gennel' and ran back across the pitch.



This time I saw the canteen staff with bowls of water and cups, so I

grabbed a bowl of water and cups and had a drink and handed out the

rest to people sitting or lying around who wanted a drink.     When the

water had gone, I walked around to see if I could help anyone, when

some lads were running past with a body face down on a board.     The

body was of a white man, well built, just wearing jeans and no top.

As they past me one of the lad's slipped and the body started to slide

off, but I managed to grab the board and stop it.     I then ran with

than across the pitch, but then fell myself over same oxygen bottles.

The other lads carried on running with the body.



By this time I had had enough and walked around aimlessly for a while.



I then left the ground via 0 gate behind the Kop and out onto

Penistone Road.     There were loads of people and ambulances bringing in

stretchers and things to the ground.     I offered to help an ambulanceman
                                                                               6


       but he said there were enough people.   It was about 5.00 pn (1700)

       by this time.



       I left the ground shattered and caught the bus heme.   I arrived heme

       about 6.30 pn (1830).



       During the time I was on the pitch I never saw any violence or

       criminal acts, everyone was just helping everybody else.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   030589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                 PC___

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL PC




                                                                                   506
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                         SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: _________________

OCCUPATION:                TURNSTILE OPERATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a turnstile operator that worked at Sheffield Wednesday Football

           Club Hillsborough Ground on the day of the disaster on 15th April 1989

           (150489).



           As I said in the questionnaire, I was working at the turnstile j____

           on that day and at about 2 o'clock (1400) there was a large crowd

           outside the turnstiles and one or two people would approach me with

           money in their hands and asked me to let than in.    I told them it was

           tickets only.    There were mostly Forest fans.   I'm almost 100   sure

           they were Notts Forest fans, and frequently, seme would jump over the

           turnstile without showing me tickets or anything else.



           At about five to three (1455) there was a disturbance just inside the

           ground near to ray turnstile and about four or five policemen came over

           the turnstile into the ground to deal with the disturbance.    At which

           point about twenty youths (Forest fans), jumped over the turnstile and

           went in.    I then shut the door to prevent anyone else getting in.




                                                                                     507
         It was just before this twenty youths jumping over the turnstiles that

        Forest fans came to me and said, "I'll give you #40 if you let me and

        my friend in." I told him no way, it was tickets only, and they were

         not allowed in.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:   010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

O N C E R S SIGNATURE:                       ]PO]IL PC




                                                                                  508
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I'm a married man living at the above address with

                        I employed as

                    Sheffield.



           I also have a job as a turnstile operator at Hillsborough Football

           Ground employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and I have been

           doing this since 1983 (000083)



           On Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489) I was posted to turnstile

           number       for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Nottingham Forest and

           Liverpool.    I arrived at the ground at 11 am (1100) with my friend

                    and he was posted in the turnstile opposite me number          We

           went onto the post on the turnstile 11.30 am (1130).



           When I opened up the turnstile there was nobody there.    It was

           probably half an hour before anyone came in and it steadily built up

           until 1.30 pn (1330) to 2 pn (1400).    It was about 2.30 pn (1430)

           towards 3 pn (1500) that I had a lot people come to my turnstile and




                                                                                        509
                                                                             2


offered me #5 and #10 for me to let them ccme in.   It was

approximately a couple of dozen.   I just refused,it's not worth it.

You have security cameras watching, security men and I was talcing

tickets and the turnstile shows how many pass through.     I count my

tickets and it should be the same number shown on the box as people

gone through the turnstile.   All these people trying to get in were

Scousers.   I could tell by their accents. I also had three men at

different times rush the turnstile and jump over it.     They hadn't got

tickets.



So then I also heard people climbing over the roof of my turnstile box

to get into the ground and over the side walls.



At 3.05 pm (1505) we had a lot of Liverpool fans outside my turnstile,

and on seeing this, we closed the doors and locked up.     We did this

because we didn't want the Liverpool fans forcing their way into the

end where the Forest fans were.



I took my tickets round into the ticket office in the South Stand.       I

made my way round back of Spion Kop, and into the Accident office

situated under South Stand.



So      and I then made our way out of the South Stand via the

officials and players entrance and made our way to the lappings Lane

end as that's where I had parked my car.   The only thing I knew at

this stage was that Liverpool fans had broken down a gate at the

Leppings Lane end.   We walked down the passageway by the river.     As we

 got to the end of the South Stand, the Police had put up barriers to

 stop people going to the Leppings Lane end.   It was manned by either
       a Policeman or Policewoman, I cannot remember, but           and I showed

       the officer our pass to get past the barriers.



       As we walked along the passage, I saw people laid by the fence next

       to the river.    There was about half a dozen.    I saw an ambulanceman

       banging on a man's chest.      Hie man had no trousers on.



       Other people laid on the floor were moaning and groaning, and people

       stood in groups watching.      I was in hurry to get out.    We made our way

       to Leppings Lane and got to the car and I was tome for 3.40 pm (1540)

       or 3.45 pn (1545).




                                                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:     010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 *GL PC




                                                                                      51 1
                                                                       STATION

N ^:

ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                          SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my wife,        and




           I am employed on a part-time basis at Sheffield Wednesday Football

           Club as a programme sales organiser, and I have been employed as such

           for the last    _



           I have worked at the ground in this capacity at every semi-final

           match since



           I was employed as such at the equivalent semi final



           I am responsible for distribution and sales of programmes and receipt

           of monies which I hand over to Security firms.



           I distribute the programmes to teams of sellers at the ground.

           I don't actually sell programmes myself.




                                                                                   512
Due to complaints made to me at the equivalent semi-final

             , in which programme sellers on the Leppings Lane end

had complained of the conduct of Liverpool supporters at that end,

the sellers this year had requested seme sort of protection to

prevent them being abused or provoked.



Hie complaints made by the programme sellers at the match in \

          consisted of one female seller having been pushed to the

ground and injured.   There were complaints of Liverpool supporters

physically trying to steal programmes from sellers.   There were

complaints of Liverpool Supporters urinating against the grounds

walls near to sellers and verbal abuse towards sellers.



Because of this, this year I had asked the Club to provide

Portacabins at the Leppings Lane end, in which the sellers could

stand inside to sell programmes.



I wanted the Portacabins, four of them, in the area inside the

turnstiles between the turnstiles and West Stand area.



On the evening of Friday 14 April 1989 (140489), I went to the Club

to check on the Portacabins and found that due to the size of the

Portacabins it had been impossible to get two o f them into the area

through gate C, because the Portacabins were too high to get through

so those two had to remain in the North Stand entrance having been

taken through gate A. The two other Portacabins had been left in the

area by the metal fencing dividing the North Stand walkway from

Leppings Lane forecourt to the stand area.
 I next returned to Hillsborough ground at 7.15 am (0715), Saturday 15

April 1989 (150489).



I parked my car originally in the car parking area behind the South

Stand and I waited up to the metal gates at the front of the Leppings

Lane entrance.   I wanted to see how the turnstiles had been allocated

to allow entrance for the fans.



On looking at the turnstiles from the outside, I was particularly

interested to see at turnstiles 1 - 1 6 , which on the outside are fed

via eight pairs of gates, that above the first 3 pairs on the right

as I looted at them were boards above each pair, indicating entrance

to the West Stand area.



The remaining five pairs of turnstile entrances had above them boards

indicating entrance to the North Stand area.



The first 3 and remaining 5 pairs of turnstile entrances were divided

by metal barriers, stretching from the turnstiles to the metal gates

at the lappings Lane main entrance.



This particular set up at the turnstile area 1-16 surprised me, in as

much as I expected them to be divided into the first four pairs for

the West Stand and the remaining four for the North Stand.



What I failed to understand was, why everyone for the Leppings Lane

and standing area had to go through turnstiles A to G and those for

the West Stand area through the first 3 pairs of gates in turnstile

area 1-16.




                                                                         514
I would have thought a better way would have been to allocate sane of

the turnstiles in the 1-16 row for supporters wishing to go to the

lappings Lane standing area, to avoid having to pass through the

inside dividing wall to get to the outer standing area.     This would

also have better directed supporters to the outer standing area and

would have also avoided supporters for the standing area caning

through turnstiles A to G and seeing the centre tunnel to the

standing area directly in front of than.



I don't know what system was used at last year's equivalent Semi-

Final.



I then returned to the South Stand area and collected my papers such

as programme dockets and cash bags from the office there.    I returned

to my car and drove it round to the area behind the gymnasium where I

parked up and walked into the gymnasium.   This was between 7.45 am

(0745) and 8 am (0800).



In the gymnasium at this time was a number of Police Officers and I

approached a Senior Officer who may have been an Inspector, I'm not

sure of his exact rank.



I asked him to go with me to the Leppings Lane to the area behind

turnstiles 1-16, so I could position the two Portacabins without

causing problems for the Police.



I had arranged the previous evening for             Df the ground

staff and two others to meet me there to assist positioning the
Portacabins.



I went with the officer and met the ground staff at the area behind

turnstiles 1-16, and an agreement was reached with the Police as to

the positioning of the Portacabins, and they were placed, one at the

 dividing gate between the West Stand and North Stand walkways, set

back from the gate itself, and one against the dividing brick wall

below the gate thoroughfare.



I have indicated the positions of the Portacabins as they were placed

on a sketch plan (now produced Exhibit Reference       ) (Exh No




At this time I mentioned to the Police Officer about protection for

the programme sellers on the gate C and turnstiles A to G area, as we

could not get Portacabins onto that side.



I had positioned by this time three metal barriers on that side, two

up against the brick dividing wall above the gateway and three

above gate C against the wall for the programme sellers to stand

behind at the appropriate time.



These were among several metal barriers which are usually standing

around this area.



I then walked with the Officer to the gymnasium and left him there

and I walked around the ground into the South Stand office.   This was

now about 8.30 am (0830).
The programme sellers began arriving at 10 am (1000) this date, and

they reported to me at the South Stand Office.



I used the Club's transit van to transport a number of programmes to

the Leppings Lane end.   I had borrowed the key to gate C, unlocked it

and drove through, and through the gateway in the dividing wall,

stopped, and placed the programmes in the Portacabin.    I also left

programmes behind the metal barriers I had placed in the area behind

turnstiles A to G.



At this time a number of programme sellers, including

were in this area.   This was about 11 am (1100).



I drove the van back to the South Stand car-park area, returned the

key to gate C to someone in the office.    I can't remember who it was.



I then saw to the other programme sellers and distributed programmes

to them.



Up until 12.30 pm (1230) this date, I busied myself, making

preparations in the gymnasium for when sellers returned with monies.



At about 12.30 pm (1230) I decided to walk round the ground's outer

perimeter along Penistone Road and into the South Stand car-park

area.   1116 Penistone Road and South side turnstiles were open for

Nottingham Forest supporters.



There was a steady and orderly flow of Notts Forest supporters

through the Penistone Road and South side turnstiles.
There was no trouble or disorderly behaviour at those locations.

 I waited up towards the Leppings Lane end and by the turnstile area

 19-22 for the South Terrace area there were metal barriers across and

Police at the barriers.



I got permission frcm them to pass through.



There were no supporters at all in the area leading up to these metal

barriers at this time.



As I got to the lappings Lane area, the turnstiles were open, a small

number of supporters were going through the Leppings Lane turnstiles

and there were a number of groups of supporters who were Liverpool

supporters standing about in the street in Leppings Lane.   They were

orderly, a number of canned drinks were being drunk by these

supporters in the street, but I could not see if they were alcoholic

drinks.



Between 12.30 pm (1230) and about 2.20 pm (1420), I made a number of

return visits to the Leppings Lane end to see the sellers and I

noticed during these times that the sales of programmes frcm the two

Portacabins for the North Stand supporters were virtually sold out,

but the sale of programmes for the Leppings Lane stand and terracing

area were not as high as would be anticipated and there was only a

steady flow of people through the terraces into the Leppings Lane

end.



At about 2.20 pm (1420) to 2.30 pm (1430), as I returned again to
Leppings Lane end, the Steward on gate C told me he would advise me

not to go through gate 4 again, as there was likely to be trouble.

He did not elaborate.



I could see that by now a large gathering of Liverpool supporters was

building up outside the area by turnstiles A to G and spilling around

towards gate C.



There was a lot of shouting and jimping up and down in the gathering

and a number of supporters were on the top of turnstile A to G walls,

trying to climb over into the ground.



I would not have been able to get through this crowd and I was unable

to see into Leppings Lane.



I'd gone through gate C into behind the turnstile area and I saw

about a dozen policemen and policewomen at the turnstile A to G area,

searching supporters as they came through.



As the supporters came through the turnstiles at this time, they were

doing nothing untoward, but making their way into the ground.



I approached one officer and asked if he could make sure that an eye

was kept on the programme sellers in that area because of the monies

they may be carrying.



I then walked off back down the rear of the North Stand and into the

gymnasium again.
I did not see what the crowd situation in the ground itself was at

this time.



Just after 3 pm (1500) I decided to go to the rear of the South Stand

area to see ray wife who was there to see how the sales had gone.

I walked frcm the gymnasium down the walkway between the North Stand

and Spion Kop and along the edging path behind the Spion Kbp end

goal, and as I walked around I was watching the match and saw that a

Liverpool player, John BARNES, strike the crossbar at the Spion Kop

end with the ball and a loud roar went up, and I looted over to the

Vfest Stand and terrace area and saw what appeared to be a surge

forward on those terraces.



I was quite seme distance away, so could not really see what was

happening, and I thought no more of it and waited into the players'

tunnel to the South Stand area hut and met ray wife.



Three or four minutes later I waited back towards the pitch via the

players' tunnel, by which time the players and officials had cone off

the pitch.



I looted to the Leppings Lane area and got the impression Liverpool

fans had got onto the pitch and stopped the game.      I saw fans on the

pitch at that end standing about on the pitch.



Police were stood facing the fencing, I could not see much because I

was so far away.



I waited round in front of the Spion Kop and back to the gymnasium.
                                                                           10


By then seme programme sellers were in the gymnasium, counting the

money, and there were Police in there also.



I heard someone in the gymnasium shout to the officers, "Move all

those tables back, drop what you're doing and get out."



A few minutes later, a man not in uniform, came into the gymnasium

and told us to move our tables and money to the top end of the

gymnasium, which we did.



By this time bodies started to be brought into the gymnasium being

carried on stretchers or wooden hoardings by a mixture of Police,

First Aid people and fans.



I can only recall one body really, this was that of a man aged about

25-30 yrs.   I had a good look at his face and it stuck in my mind.    I

can't describe his clothing.   He was clean shaven.



A couple of days later, I saw a photograph in either the Daily Mirror

or Sun newspaper.



It was a shot of part of the Leppings Lane terracing and I saw this

same man in the crowd, about a third of the way back from the fencing.

He looked exactly as he did when I saw his body in the gymnasium and

I believe fron the photograph that he was dead at that time.



I never had any dealings with any of the bodies or injured persons.



I left the gymnasium two or 3 times to go to where my wife was and on
                                                                      11


each occasion I saw different people taking people on stretchers or

wooden hoardings towards the gymnasium.



I didn't go near to the Leppings Lane end.



I stayed at the ground until 7 pn (1900), and then I went home.




                                                                           522
                                                     12




                                            SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:      070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             8309




                                                          523
                                                                         STATION
^pE:
ADDRESS:
                        KEIGHLEY, W YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                          (SIGNED)



        I live at the above address, together with my common-law wife.

       For the past      _________ I have worked at Sheffield Wednesday

       Football Club, as a Programne Seller.     Although I am not directly

       employed by the Club, I work on a commission basis and my wages

       depend upon the amount of programmes that I sell.



       Last year, I again was working as a Programme Seller and the Semi­

       final was between the same two Clubs, Liverpool and Forest.     Although

       I was at the same location with              we didn't have the

       Portacabin.     On the 15th of April 1989 (150489), I was again selling

       programmes, but this time I was in the company of my frip-nHg

                and another friend named                        was doing the
       running between the cabin and              who was located at the gate

       which is situated on your map between turnstiles A/G and 1-16.     The

       system that we had in operation was such that        oould go to my

       father with an empty bag, collect the takings that              had.
       Together with                   he would then return with the money

       into the Portacabin, which would remain locked, thus being a place of




                                                                                   524
safety for all the takings.    The Portacabin had been placed in such a

position as to give not only myself but, to both of ny friends, a

clear view of the turnstiles numbers 1-16 and to gate 'B', which as

you look through the windows is located to my left.



On that day I started vrork at about 10.30am (1030) and a few minutes

later the Club van arrived, carrying the stock of programmes.      I gave

the driver seme assistance to distribute them between the various

sellers near to the cabin.    During the rest of the morning, Liverpool

fans began to arrive in small numbers and I think the gates were

officially opened about twelve o'clock (1200).



It would be about one o'clock (1300) that I began to notice that more

fans were arriving and a queue had started to form at the turnstiles,

although this could have been caused by the police who were searching

them as they arrived at the ground.   The general mood of the fans

appeared to be good humoured and although I could smell alcohol on the

odd fan, nobody appeared to be the worse for drink.



It was about an hour later that things started to get out of hand, the

crowd had increased and there were big queues forming at the

turnstiles. I noticed then that people were starting to get

inpatient, and I saw at least 10-12 fans climbing over the wall above

the turnstiles and they just sat on the wall.    I saw and heard

various Policemen ask the fans to cane down, which they did and the

Policemen asked them for their tickets.   Seme of them just shrugged

their shoulders and frcm their gestures ,it seemed to me that they

didn't have any tickets, and in fact, I didn't see any tickets taken

frcm anyone.   Although I would like to point out, that in my opinion
at this stage the situation was such that there wasn't enough room or

time to eject the fans back into Leppings Lane.     It was then I saw a

senior Police Officer who I would describe as being about 5'9 - 5'10

wearing a flat cap.    I think he either had a moustache or was clean

shaven and he was aged between late thirty's or early forty's.       I

didn't notice what rank he was but I saw him carrying a radio in his

right hand.    The officer climbed onto the roof of the turnstiles

number 1-16 and was close to gate 'B'.     I didn't hear what

instructions he gave to the radio but he was speaking into it for

quite a bit.   While he was there, more and more fans kept caning over

and he was shouting for the fans to get down.     I would estimate that

at least another 30-40 fans again got in that way.    While this was

going on, I could hear fans walking on our Portacabin roof and I can

only assume that more fans got in without tickets. Because of the

situation which seemed to be getting out of hand,        refused to go

and collect any more money from            L so we asked a Police
Officer who did what we asked.    While all this was taking place, I

heard a crash and a fan had trod on the edge of sane asbestos

guttering and the whole lot had cane crashing down.    The Police again

tried to move the crowd away fran the debris, but there was no way for

them to go, so I can only assume that the Police themselves moved it

away from the fans.



I began to notice by this time a change in the mood of the crowd.

There were more people arriving, aged between 15-30, where before it

was mainly family groups and older fans.    Sane of the fans smelled

strongly of booze and there was one or two very drunk, although I

didn't actually see anybody drinking frcm cans.    There was one youth

who came to the Portacabin window, who I would describe as follows:-
Aged between 20-21, 5'10, scruffy appearance, with a bit of stubble

and I think he may have had a moustache.    His hair was unkempt.    It

appeared to be very dry and it didn't appear to have been washed for

seme time.   It was shoulder length and was light brown.    He was

wearing a denim coloured sweatshirt.    It had two or three buttons at

the front and a white collar, and he may have been wearing either a

white T shirt or shirt under it.    He was also wearing very baggy denim

jeans.   I particularly noticed the jeans because the seat of them was

nearly on the floor.   This youth had a strong Liverpool accent and

after speaking to him, he either was very drunk or thick.     The youth,

upon reaching the cabin window, first asked for a programme, but

didn't offer any money.   When I asked him for a pound, which was the

cost of the programme, he told me no and he told me to give him a

programme.   I refused and I think he went to        who was to my

right.



It would be only a few minutes later that the same youth came back to

me.   He had his fist clenched and again asked me for a programme.     I

asked him for his money and frcm his clenched fist he dropped 2p

into my hand.   I gave it him back and I told him the price of the

programme.   He just looked at me with threats in his eyes, trying to

stare me out and he then I think tried the same approach on

He then came back, threw the 2p into the cabin and said, "Programme."

I picked up the two-pence piece and gave it him back. He then stared

at me again and then said, "Never mind, I'll get you at half-time."

He then grinned at me and left.    I noticed then that he just stood

about ten yards away frcm the cabin, waiting for friends, and I

started to get worried in case he returned with some of his mates.
After the incident with the youth, I lost track of time, but anyway

the fans kept coming and we were kept busy all the time and I heard

fans shouting frcm behind the turnstiles and everybody was just trying

to get in.   I did notice then that gate 'B' being opened by the

gateman and a Policeman was present.     The construction of the gate is

such that one half of the gate opens towards the Portacabin and the

other half towards turnstiles 1-16.    When the gate was opened, the

reason I believe was to relieve the pressure frcm outside, about

200-300 fans ran through the gates and frcm where I was I then lost

sight of them.



There then seemed to be a silence, which was very strange after all

the noise and shouting.   The gates were then almost closed, just

allowing no more than two people at a time to enter or leave, closely

supervised by a Policeman and Gateman.



Fran what I could see between the gap, there appeared to be no more

fans waiting to get in frcm that particular area, although people

were still coming in a bit at a time through the turnstiles.     I think

I made sane comment to the other two in the cabin to the effect that

it appeared as if all the crowd were in and that we would not sell

many more programmes.



We all then started to check what programmes we had sold and to start

counting the takings.   We were joined then by

They first of all came in with their money and they then returned

unsold programmes which they passed to us through the window.



While we were counting the money,         .eft to go and watch the match,
                                                                          6


and I think that's when I heard over the PA system for a 'Mr MEADOWS'

and then there was a message which I didn't hear.



Hie reason I can remember the words MEADOWS, that is the key word

that is used by the Club in an emergency, and that's when the Police

have to go to a particular area.   When the message came through, I saw

at least 10-12 Police Officers run frcm the turnstiles 1-16 through

the gate at the right-hand side of the Portacabin and disappear frcm

out of my view.    I remained in the cabin with the programmes as the

other three had taken all the takings to the gymnasium for checking.



It was only a few minutes later I saw people coming back frcm the

West Stand area.   Same of them were obviously in pain, others were

just complaining about being squashed.   They started to ask me for

drinks and water, and I think I was then joined by             who then

left either with prograimes or more money.   I gave sane of them

orange, and frcm the general conversation I had with them, the general

complaints were of overcrowding and of being badly squashed.



As more people began to come out, there were then conversations about

deaths or the possible bad injuries, and people were being aggressive

towards any groundsman or anybody in authority.



People were saying and showing tickets with them intact, stating that

there had been no control over people coming in without tickets.

At the same time I saw a group of about six youths carrying a lad

face down.   They walked across the back of the West Stand away frcm

me.   They then returned with the youth still in the same position,

walked across the front of the cabin, through gate B and into
Leppings Lane.



Hie youth they were carrying appeared to be of heavy build.      He was

wearing a black sweatshirt, black jeans and he may have had either a

white lining or white T shirt underneath.    I would estimate his age

as being about late teens or early twenties. Hie lads who were

carrying him all appeared to be of the same age group and also

appeared to be friends of his.    Fran the brief glimpse I had of him,

I couldn't see if he was dead or what injuries he had.



After they had gone, I was joined by          and from the crowd who

were caning past the Portacabain, I felt that the mood was getting

very ugly and there was a feeling that somebody was going to get

seriously hurt by the crowd.



I locked the Portacabin and I went with         to the North Stand

gym, and it was then I realised the extent of what had happened and I

saw a large group of people who were obviously dead outside the gym,

most of whcm were covered by their own clothing.



I waited at the entrance of the gym until I could enter without

getting in anybody's way.   Once inside, I again saw bodies along a

third of the gym and they had been covered by white sheets.

Hie far end of the gym were the rest of the Programme Sellers,

including



After a brief conversation with           ~| I discovered that       had

not returned so I went looking for him.   I went through the side

entrance, back under the North Stand and onto the track by the side
                                                                           8


of the Spion Kop.   I then saw a line of Police Officers across the

full width of the pitch.     I walked towards the West Stand and through

a group of Policemen.



Upon returning back towards the Kqp end, I was stopped by a

Policewoman who asked me where I was going.    I told her who I was and

that I was looking for a friend.    She let me through and I saw dead

and injured people being cared for by the various emergency

services. I then returned to the gym where I spoke to            ind we

both agreed to leave.



On the 23rd of April, (230489), I was reading the Sunday Mirror and in

the centre page were pictures of the people who had been killed at the

ground.   Hie first picture on the page, top left-hand comer, the

youth shown looks like the same youth who had thrust the 2 pence

piece in my hand and had threatened me.



I have been shown a map of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground

and I have indicated where the Portacabin is situated (Exhibit

No          )(Reference No
                                                    9


                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:             POL PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             POL PC




                                                        532
                                                                           STATION




ADDRESS:
                  SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DAM! OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                              SIGNED)



           I am the above named and I live at the above address wth my [




           I am



           I am also a Progranme Seller at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground at

           all of the home matches.



           I have been employed as a Progranme Seller for the last



       At approximately 11.00am (1100) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489),

           I went to Hillsborough, Sheffield Wednesday's ground, to sell

       progranmes for the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and

       Nottingham Forest.       On my arrival at the ground, I went frcm Penistone

       Road to the South Stand, then through the players' entrance to the

       room where the progranmes are stored.       I collected some progranmes and

       put them in the back of a small van that is used to get things

       transported around the ground.       My father,               then took me
up to the area at the rear of the West Stand and we unloaded the

programmes which I then placed up against the wall that runs frcm

behind the South Stand to Leppings Lane.      I then stood with the

progranmes. I had my back against the wall and I was facing the West

Stand.    Directly to my left was gate C.     I have marked my position on

a sketch map of the ground which I now produce as reference number

         Exhibit Number (                ).



I stood inside an area of about 16' wide at its widest point and I

could see through the turnstiles that there were people walking about.

There wasn't any trouble.     I had barriers all around me.



At approximately 1.00pm (1300) the turnstiles were opened and there

was a steady flow of supporters.



At approximately 2.20pm (1420) there was a great crowd gathering at

the turnstiles and supporters weren't able to enter the ground quick

enough.     I saw the Police Officers at the turnstiles checking

everyone and searching everyone for alcohol, and I think this caused

the queues to form outside.    They just couldn't get the fans in quick

enough.    The supporters then began climbing over the top of the

turnstiles. They looked like they had tickets because they were

showing something that looked like a ticket to Police Officers.



When they jumped down into the ground, the Police Officers opened gate

C and made these fans go back out into the crowd that was awaiting

entry. When the Liverpool fans entered the ground and came to me to

buy a progranme, they were saying how bad it was trying to get in.
At about 2.45pm (1445) I suddenly became aware that gate C had been

opened and that about 300 people had run through.     I don't know who

opened the gate.     Seme of the people who had dashed in through the

gate went to the Steward with the white hair and asked him what he was

going to do about the people outside.



Fans were still climbing over the turnstiles and the Police were

letting them stay inside the ground.     I also saw young children being

passed over peqple's heads and through the turnstiles to safety.     Seme

of the Liverpool supporters had been slightly injured in the crush

and they seemed to be taking it all in good humour.    There wasn't any

fighting.     The crowd outside the turnstiles at Leppings Lane appeared

to be getting bigger and they were chanting and shouting.



At approximately 2.55pm (1455) I saw a police officer open gate 'C'

and a great rush of people entered the ground.    I would estimate that

there were somewhere between 1,500-2,000 peqple who came rushing in.

The majority of these people waited in the area before reaching the

West Stand, looking for peqple, and seme were 1inping about.    I don't

know where the rest of the supporters went.



I cannot describe the Police Officer at all who opened the gate C.

All I saw was the uniform.    I don't even know what type of hat he was

wearing.



Because of the amount of peqple in the area at the rear of the West

Stand, I gathered everything together and I went past the rear of the

West Stand, around the rear of the North Stand and into the gymnasium,

for safety.    I didn't see any trouble with any of the fans and I
                                                                           4


didn't see anything that happened in the pens in the West Stand.



I was in the gymnasium, helping cash up the progranme money, when

there was a bit of a cormotion and suddenly peqple were carrying dead

bodies into the gymnasium on stretchers and they were placing them

about 6 feet away frcm me.              who was cashing up with me, told

me to move everything across to the other side of the room, which I

did.



Altogether, I saw about 30 bodies being brought into the gym with

about 4 persons who had been injured.    The injured ones had drips

attached to them and I think one had a broken leg.



Whilst we were cashing up, a man came into the gym and said, "How can

you count money when peqple are dying," and he threw the table up in

the air, knocking all the money to the ground.    I cannot describe this

man at all.



Other fans were caning into the gym and they were very upset.     People

were giving them drinks.



At approximately 3.45pm (1545) I left the gym and looked out onto the

pitch.   I got onto the track and walked in front of the Kop and round

towards the players' entrance.   There were still people lying on the

pitch in front of the West Stand.   I don't know whether they were dead

or injured, it was all very confusing and I think I was in shock.     I

didn't understand what was really happening, I was so confused.



I then went through the players' entrance to the South Stand where my
________                                                                 5


                          was selling her programnes.   I was going to

take the money back to the gym, but, because of all the people on the

pitch, I decided that it would be safe to leave it.



I then walked back to the gym, but there was a line of Policemen

outside and they wouldn't let me go in because of the dead bodies.

I eventually got back into the gym, by which time there were dead

bodies everywhere and the programme sellers were all sat down in

shock talking about it.



I don't really remember much else about what happened everything

seems a bit vague.



I believe that the Police and the Stewards are all contributory

negligent and there are things that happened that day that should

never have occurred.



I wouldn't have liked to be the one who had to make the decision.

By opening the gate it was a breach of duty in the care of fans,

and consequently, people were injured, and in fact died.



I think that when it happened the Police did all they could to tend to

the injured.   I don't think they could have done anymore.



If the Liverpool fans had left the pubs earlier and not left it so

late to try and get in, maybe none of this would have happened.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             POL PC




                                                  538
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:
                             ROTHERHAM

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                          (SIGNED)



           I am a married lady living at the above address with my husband

                   I am employed




       For about five years now,

                     has been employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,

        selling match programmes.    The Club's ground is called Hillsborough

       and is situated in Penistone Road North, Sheffield.      I have also been

       employed by the Club selling match programmes, but only for about




                 sells programmes at all of the Club's home First Division

       league matches and I do nearly the same, occasionally missing the

       quieter matches.



       Both            and myself also sell programmes at Hillsborough on FA

       Cup Semi-Final days.     Prior to this years Semi-Final, I have worked

       two previous FA Cup semi-finals, including last year's, when the same




                                                                                   539
                                                                           2


teams as this year, Liverpool and Nottingham Forest played.



Generally                     and myself work together at the ground,

usually just                                                 turnstiles

close to gate C.



On Saturday April 15th 1989 (150489), with              ] I got to the

ground, Hillsborough, at about 10.30am (1030).    We would normally

arrive at 11.30am (1130) for a Saturday league game but we always

start earlier on FA Cup semi-final days.



When we arrived at the ground this year,          picked up our

programmes, three thousand in number, from the collection point, and

met me back by the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.



I took up a position outside the ground in Leppings Lane, close to the

perimeter wall looking in the direction of turnstiles which I think

are letter A to G and which I can see the rear of the West Stand

through.    I also had a reasonable view of the road outside Leppings

Lane.    I could also see turnstiles which I think are numbered 1 to 16,

but I could not see through them.     I stood in this position outside

the ground for about thirty minutes, from just after 10.30am (1030)

till about 11 am (1100).     I was kept quite busy and I sold one

hundred programmes during my first half hour.     Having worked two

previous FA Cup semi-finals, I would say this was my busiest, for it

was still quite early.     During this period, I was asked by about 20 to

30 supporters, mostly Liverpool fans, which pub they could go for a

drink.     I told them all the local put® would be closed because of the

match.
Just after 11am (1100), I went inside the perimeter wall via gate C.

I was let through the gate by a steward but I cannot remember which

one.   I don't know any of the stewards by name, but I know them to

look at.   I also know that whilst gate C is open, it is never left

unattended and there is always at least one steward on it.



I would describe gate C as roughly nine foot wide, by about seven and

a half foot high, blue/grey in colour, metal concertina-type which

opens at the centre, although I have only ever seen the right-hand

half of the gate opened, looking at it from inside Leppings Lane

turnstiles.



Gate C has also got a small perspex viewing panel on the right-hand

gate, measuring about six inches by ten inches and placed towards the

centre of the gate about five foot off the ground.



Once inside the gate, I stood with                   and another

programme seller I only know as       behind three sets of portable

metal crash barriers,                  had made the barrier to give us

sane protection.   I stood with my back towards the brick wall facing

the rear of the West Stand with my view looking directly at the

entrance tunnel to the enclosure and about three foot to the right of

gate C.



       went outside the ground and he rejoined myself and      behind

our makeshift barrier, sometime between 12 noon (1200) and 12.30pm

(1230), when Liverpool fans started to enter the ground through the

Leppings Lane turnstiles.
                                                                          4




Liverpool supporters were entering the ground fairly regularly and

normally via the turnstiles at this time, and the fans purchasing

programmes were generally good-humoured.



For the next hour or so, everything seemed normal for a semi-final

match, with supporters being searched just inside the turnstiles by a

group of about eight police officers.   There was also other police

officers walking around the area behind the West Stand, although there

did not appear to be as many as in previous semi-finals.



During this time, gate C was manned by at least tvro stewards and

sometimes three, and they were close enough to me to have an

occasional general conversation.   The only description I could give of

these stewards is, one was about __________________________________



The second steward was about



            The third steward kept coming and going and I really

cannot describe him at all.    There was also another older steward who

I believe is in charge of the gate at the bottom of the stairs, at

the rear of the West Stand.



Everything appeared normal till about 1.30pm (1330), w hen I noticed

that supporters seemed to have stopped coming through the turnstiles

nearest to where I was standing, that's turnstiles A to G, but the

other set of turnstiles appeared to be functioning normally with

crowds of supporters entering.
I could s e e through the turnstiles closest to w h e re I was standing and

saw masses of supporters waiting outside but none canning through into

the ground.



Supporters who had entered via the furthest turnstiles appeared

distressed.   Some were sweating heavily and appeared out of breath.

Some complained to me angrily and others spoke of the poor

organisation and crush outside the turnstiles.     One supporter even

said that he had been waiting right fcy the turnstile gate for forty-

five minutes before he gained entry.



At about the same time, I saw a police officer climb over the

turnstile nearest to me and the one closest to gate C into the ground

and speak to the turnstile operator. No other person entered the

ground fcy this turnstile.



I also saw teenage Liverpool supporters climbing into the ground fcy

climbing the perimeter wall and over the top of turnstiles A to G.       I

would say about fifty Liverpool supporters entered this way.      Some of

these supporters had tickets for the match.     Most of them were caught

fcy the Police and they were put out of the ground, through gate C,

back into Leppings Lane.



Supporters were still climbing over the wall into the ground and the

situation was getting out of hand; the Police unable to cope with the

numbers involved.



Various conversations took place between police officers and ground

stewards but, because of the noise, I could not hear what was being
                                                                         6


said.   For the number of people who were milling around between inside

the turnstile and the rear of the West Stand we did not appear to be

selling many programmes.



Many of these supporters were aggrieved and agitated and still

complaining generally about the poor organisation.



At about 1.55pm (1355) we began to get worried for our safety and my

               spoke to a police officer, and as a result, the police

officer stood at the side of us between our makeshift barrier and gate

C.   It was quite frightening even behind the barrier at this time

because of the number and mood of the Liverpool supporters.



Around 2pm (1400) gate C was opened and I would estimate over two

hundred supporters surged into the ground.    It was obvious to me from

the way these supporters surged in and the obvious relief on their

faces and the general conversation, that they had been tightly packed

outside.   I did not see who opened or closed gate C.



I saw a boy of about ten years with heavy scratches to the side of his

face and chin, which appeared to have happened when he was pushed

against the wall outside.



Many of the supporters who had entered when gate C was opened,

appeared breathless and in an obvious state of panic.



Between 2pm (1400) and 2.30pm (1430) the area where I was selling my

programmes became very crowded and the Liverpool supporters' attitude

in general appeared to change.   Ifeny of these supporters had been
                                                                          7


drinking beer, seme excessively, but I could not say if they were

drunk.



Again, gate C was opened.   I would only be guessing if I said at

about 2.40pn (1440).   Again, I did not see who opened or closed gate C

but there was police officers and stewards standing by it. I would

say over five hundred supporters surged into the area between the

opened gate and the West Stand before the gate was closed.   This group

did not stop once inside the gate, but seemed to run altogether

towards the tunnel situated below the West Stand in the direction of

the enclosure.   Not long after this, but I do not know the exact time,

there was a slight lull and                   |
                                              E decided, for security

reasons - we were in possession of #2,600 - to finish selling

programmes, and we made our way towards the gymnasium which is

situated at the rear of the cantilever stand, and which is the

designated itoney counting area for Programme sellers. To get to the

gym, we walked to the left of the rear of the West Stand, past the

side enclosure to the back of the cantilever stand.



During our walk to the gym, I heard an announcment over the public

address system to the effect that persons were on the pitch at the

Leppings Lane end and I inmediately thought there had been a pitch

invasion fcy Liverpool supporters. I should also have said that I

could tell the game had conmenced by this time because of the noise of

the crowd.   I would say the game had been in progress for about five

minutes.



As we walked towards the gym entrance I saw a large number of police

officers cane fran the gym and run towards the area of the pitch.
       Once inside the gym, which I would estimate as about seventy-five

       yards long, we went to the very far end frcm the entrance door and

        proceeded to count the programme takings.



       We were not in the gym very long when police officers and first aid

       personnel and others were carrying stretchers in with people on, which

       they were laying on the floor.    It appeared that seme of these

       people's faces were covered by blankets and coats.



        Someone inside the gym had a radio on, and frcm the transmissions I

        heard ,1 thought the fans had rioted.   I was very frightened and

        people on stretchers were still being brought into the gym.



        I left the gym and Ground with                    it around 5pm (1700),

        still not aware what had taken place.   I was not aware fully what had

       occurred until I returned to my home and saw the incident on the

        television news.   I was deeply shocked and extremely upset.



                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL PC
                                                                          STATION

N^p:
ADDRESS:
                ROTHERHAM, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a                  and I reside at

                    with my wife



           Although I am a                                 I also sell football

           progranmes on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.



           I sell progranmes within the football ground, which is situated in

           Penistone Road North, Sheffield, and this normally takes place at all

           First Division heme games and I normally perform my duties in the same

           place each time, which is in the Leppings Lane area of the ground.



           I have been employed as a programme seller with the club for

           approximately four years.



           My                          is also a programme seller and she also

           performs her duty with me in the same area, but only when a large

           number of spectators are expected.
She has been employed in this capacity for approximately three years.



On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

were hosts to the Football Association Cup, Semi-Final.



On this occasion, the two football clubs participating in this game

were Nottingham Forest Football Club and Liverpool Football Club.

This fixture was the same as lest year's Semi-Final, in the same

competition, when I was also present in my capacity as a programme

seller.



To my knowledge that particular game passed without any serious

incident taking place.



On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club, arriving at approximately 10.30am (1030) with my wife,

Maureen.    On our arrival we went to the programme collection point,

which is a small room used for storage and is located under the 'South

Stand, next to the 'Riverside Suite'.



I collected enough programmes for myself, my wife and a youth named

Noel.     The numbers collected were three thousand.



We deposited the programmes at our selling point, which was inside the

Leppings Lane entrance, adjacent to turnstiles A-G and approximately

eight yards fran the blue sliding gate, known as Gate 'C'.



The perimeter wall which runs fran the turnstiles in Leppings Lane

along the riverside, was behind us.
                                                                        3




Whilst the football ground was still closed to the public, I took it

upon myself to acquire six safety barriers fran within the lappings

Lane end, to make myself a safety box for our personal safety.



This particular thing is a normal occurrence, but instead of using

three barriers, I used six barriers in order to make the safety area

double in thickness.



Once the barriers were put into position in a triangle effect, we

stood in the middle of the box with the perimeter wall iirmediately

to our backs, so that no one could get behind us.



At approximately 11.00am (1100), together with another programme

seller who I know to be             I went outside the main entrance

of the Leppings Lane end and sold programmes to members of the public

in the area outside.   We entered and left the ground via blue gate

 'C' which was being supervised by stewards and police officers who

were in the immediate vicinity.



We came back into the ground at approximately 12.30pm (1230), during

which time we only sold about 350 programmes each.   Whilst selling the

programmes, although there was not so many people outside the ground

as last year, there did not appear to be as marry police officers as

 last year.



At 12.30pm (1230), I re-entered the Leppings Lane end and took up my

 position behind my safety box, with         and the youth I know as

          I remained at this point until just after kick-off time at
                                                                        4


3.00pm (1500).



Between 12.30pm (1230) and 1.30pm (1330) the number of people entering

the ground via turnstiles "A-G" was not very many.     There was a steady

flow but not excessive.



At approximately 1.45pm (1345), I looked through the doors of

turnstiles 'A & B' to see the number of people had increased to

such a point that they were tightly packed together.



Also at about the same time, I saw two persons being ferried across

the heads of the people, which indicated to me that the numbers

outside were so great that the two persons had fainted or had been

injured as a result of the volume of people waiting outside.



Also at this point, about 3 or 4 youths, possibly 16-18 yrs old,

then climbed over turnstiles 'A-G' and onto the roof covering the

entrance.



I don't believe they got entry into the Ground due to about 8 (eight)

police officers searching people inside the entrance as they entered.



At approximately 1.50pm (1350), another group of youths climbed onto

the turnstiles wall/roof.   On this occasion, there were about 15

(fifteen) of them, again aged about 17-20 yrs, tried to jump off

the roof.   When one or two jumped, police officers tried to eject

them and the others gained access to the terracing by means of

running through the tunnel under Leppings Lane stand and behind the

goal area (shown map and indicated area Pens 3 and 4).
Whilst this happened, supporters who were already in the ground were

cheering them on.



At around this time, I was talking to a nan who had purchased a

programme and I could see that he appeared to be in a state of shock.

He was white and breathing heavy.    He was also sweating badly.     He

stated to me that the position outside the ground was very bad and

people were getting crushed.    He had been crushed against a turnstile

door for about forty-five minutes, before he eventually got access

into the ground.



It was at this point I felt for my own safety and asked a policeman

if he could stand by me.



At approximately 2.00pm (1400), blue Gate 'C' was opened and

approximately 200-250 people came inside.     People at the front

appeared to be pushed in and the remainder appeared to ease

themselves in.     Although I saw the gate open and both police officers

and stewards were present, I could not see who actually opened it or

in fact closed it.     This gate was not open for any longer than a

minute.



Once the crowd had cleared I saw a young 10 yrs old boy with his

father and he had a large graze across the side of his face and chin.

I believe this happened when he made contact with the side wall.



During the time between 2.00pm (1400) and 2.50pm (1450), a large

number of people entered the ground via the turnstiles.     It was
evident to me by the fact that they were speaking to me in an abusive

manner and they smelt strongly of intoxicants, ie. beer, etc., and

they urinated up the perimeter walls, that approx 25   to 50   as it

approached kick-off, had been drinking.



Also at this time, I saw a nan aged about 25 yrs lying on the floor

inside the turnstiles 'A.' People were attending to him, but I

couldn't exactly say what had happened to him.   It was also at this

time that two youths climbed onto my safety barrier to look over the

perimeter wall.   One of the youths looked as though he had lost

someone.   After a short period of time, both the youths got off the

barrier and disappeared with the crowds.



The atmosphere at this point appeared to be very tense, with large

numbers of spectators, making their feelings known, some in an

aggressive and abusive manner to both the stewards and the police who

were within the ground by the turnstiles.



One of the points made was that people were still in possession of

their match-day tickets and that the tickets had not been checked

and collected.



At about 2.50pm (1450), Gate 'C' was again opened in the presence of

stewards and police, although I did not see who opened it.



On this occasion I would say that about 800-1200 (eight hundred to one

thousand two hundred) people surged into the ground through this gate.

A lot of these people were in a distressed condition, sweating and

gasping for their breath.   Because of the large number of people who
                                                                         7


entered at this time, the surge forward forced the majority of them

past the point where we were selling the progranmes.    The surge caused

them to go directly towards the tunnel area in the middle of the

Lappings Lane stand.



After they had passed us, there was a lull in the numbers of people

who entered the ground.   It was at this point I decided to take the

programme takings, which amounted to about #2,600, to the designated

counting area which was the gym.



The gym is situated behind the North Stand, and in order to get there,

together with                      I walked round the back of the

Leppings Lane end, passed the terracing in sections 6 & 7 and around

the back of the North Stand.



Whilst we were walking around to the gym, a message was announced over

the public address system.     The content of the message was similar

to, "Will the Liverpool Supporters please get off the pitch and return

to your places on the terracing."



I thought that a large number of supporters had started to fight, and

as a result of this, I went straight into the gym and commenced

counting the day's takings.



A large number of police officers who were in the gym at this time

left and ran towards the playing area of the ground.



After being in the gym for about 15 minutes, people were being carried

into the gym on stretchers and were covered with blankets and coats.
                                                                         8


I did not know exactly what was happening but the people appeared to

be in a distressed condition and were very upset.   I still did not

know what had happened and I was convinced the game had been

interrupted by hooligans fighting.



I eventually left the gym in the ground at about 5.00pm (1700) and

travelled home.



On arrival at hone, it was only at this time that the reason for this

tragedy was made knewn to me by the news on the television.



I was still under the impression that the game was disrupted due to

public disorder prior to this time.



In addition to what has already been said, may I say that approximately

twenty-five police officers ran from the turnstile known as 1-16, ran

between the gate in the dividing wall and towards the area of sections

1 & 2 of the Leppings Lane terracing.   This occurred about 2.55pm

(1455), but I do not know why this happened, because I did not see or

hear of any problems in that area.    This was strange to me because I

did not see this many police officers on duty in this area on this

particular day.
                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             POL PC




                                                   555
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:
                       | SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

P&E / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am the above named and I live at the above address with ray wife,




           I have been a temporary Programme Seller at 'Hillsborough', the

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, for the last           ^ears.



           At approximately 11.00 am (1100) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489),

           I went to Hillsborough to sell programmes for the FA Cup Semi-Final

           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



           On my arrival at the ground, I went to the Portacabin which is at

           the Leppings Lane end of the ground at the rear of the West Stand.

           The Portacabin is positioned on the dividing wall which runs from gate

           B to the West Stand and it faces the turnstiles to the left of gate

           B.



           At approximately 12.00 midday (1200), the turnstiles were opened and

           the supporters began to be admitted to the ground.
                                                                         2




As the supporters enter the ground via the turnstiles nearest to gate

B, they pass the servery-type hatch on the front of my Portacabin,

and then they can either go to the left which affords access to pens

6 and 7 of the West Stand or they can go right.



If the supporters turned to the right they were then able to go

through a small gate which is approximately five feet wide which is

situated in the wall next to the Portacabin where I was working,

giving access to the area in front of the tunnel, and ultimately, Pens

3 and 4 of the West Stand, or they can go through the small gate past

the entrance to the tunnel and round to the right of the West Stand

which gives access to Pens 1 and 2 of the West Stand.



Between 12.00 midday (1200) and 2.15 pm (1415), business was very slow

and I remarked to the other Programme Seller who was in the Portacabin

with me,              that all of the supporters were very late in

getting to the ground and             said to me, that he thought that

because the fans would be arriving late, this would cause seme

problems.



At this time the atmosphere was very jovial and everyone appeared to

be in good humour.



At approximately 2.15 pm (1455) the supporters coming through the

turnstiles appeared to be coming in faster and were all Liverpool

supporters.   It was noticeable that seme of these supporters had been

drinking and the occasional one would ccme to the Portacabin and say,

"Give me a programme or else." No one actually used any violence
                                                                          3


against me.



At approximately 2.30 pm (1430) I could see that a large crowd was

gathering at the turnstiles and that the staff on the turnstiles were

having problems getting the supporters through quick enough.    At this

stage, supporters began climbing over the top of the turnstiles and

were waving their tickets at the Police Officers.    They were saying

that they had tickets and they were only climbing over because they

were getting crushed on the Leppings Lane—side of the turnstiles.



Initially, the Police were refusing the supporters access and then a

higher ranking Officer who was wearing a flat hat and had pips on his

shoulders, went to the Officers already at the turnstiles.     This

higher ranking Officer then climbed up onto the turnstiles and spoke

to about a dozen fans.   He checked their tickets and then allowed them

to climb down and get into the ground.    There was a great deal of

confusion and shouting, and frcm the Portacabin, I could see that the

crowd was very tightly packed and people were struggling to get

through the turnstile in time to see the kick-off.



At a time between 2.45 pm (1445) and 2.50 pm (1450) I then became

aware that someone had opened the gate known as gate B which is

between the two banks of turnstiles.     I don't know who opened the

gate, but I would say that it was open for only a couple of minutes

and that at least a thousand supporters came dashing and jostling

through.   It was as though the pressure of the crowd behind them just

pushed them into the ground.   No one was able to check any tickets.

 If they had have tried, they would have been trampled under foot.

After this couple of minutes, the crowd thinned out and as I looked
up I saw that gate B had been closed.



I was aware that there were still a great many people outside

awaiting entry.   However, I cannot be specific as I was too busy

trying to cope with the rush of fans who wanted to buy a programme.



'Hie rush of people through gate B when they had cleared the

Portacabin, seme went to the left and sane to the right.



At about two or three minutes past three (1502) (1503), I began to

collect everything together, and then two of the Liverpool supporters

came and sat by the turnstiles.   One was crying and the other was

comforting him.   One fan came to the Portacabin and told us that

people had been crushed and that two people were dead.     I gave the fan

a drink, but I didnt realise quite what had happened.    I carried on

with my duties and I went over to the gymnasium at the rear of the

North Stand with the leftover programmes.   Fans became abusive and as

I walked over to the gymnasium, they were shouting, "There's people

dying and all you care about is fucking programmes."



I heard the Tannoy system saying firstly, "Get off the pitch," and

then I saw another squad of Police Officers coming into the ground

and they went into the back of the West Stand.   I also heard over the

Tannoy system someone saying, "Get back," and that there were people

hurt.   This was aimed at the pens at the front of the West Stand.      I

then went to the gymnasium.



I would like to say that the bank of turnstiles between gates A and B

on this particular match, had been reduced by at least two turnstiles
       because of the metal fence which was opened up and a low barrier put

       in its place, to allow North Stand ticket holders access to the North

       Stand.     This caused extra congestion to the turnstiles next to gate C.



                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   300489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL PC
                                                                          STATION

N^p:
ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                            (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I went to the Hillsborough

           Football Ground, to help a friend of mine,               to sell

           programmes at the FA Cup Semi-Final Match between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.    We went to the ground at 11.30 am (1130), in

           order to get ready for the game.    I was working with__________

           and brother-in-law.



           We were using a Portacabin adjacent to the turnstiles that give

           access to the West Stand.    Behind our cabin was another cabin that

           was being used by the Police, for confiscated items from searches

           made at the turnstiles.



           Up till about 2.15 pm (1415) we had very little trade as the other

           programme cabin was sighted nearer to the gates.



           There were at least a dozen Police Officers just inside the

           turnstiles, searching the incoming fans.     I witnessed officers

           confiscating a number of items from fans, including flags, cans, and
in one instance, what I thought was a large jack knife.    All the

items were labelled and taken to the Police cabin.



About 2.30 pn (1430) our trade started to pick up and I became aware

of a build up of noise and an increase in the crowd.    I saw one or

two fans climbing over the wall to get into the ground and walking

along the wall to find a suitable place to drop down into the

ground.



Same of these were waving what appeared to be tickets at the officers

inside the ground as if to indicate that they had a legitimate right

of entry.     Initially, the officers managed to cope with this, but it

soon became out of hand and it was obvious that the officers could not

cope with the amount of fans climbing over the gate.



The crowd had increased to such a degree that it seemed as if the

officers could not possibly continue to search the fans because of

the volume of fans.



At about 2.45 (1445) to 2.50 pn (1450) the concertina gate between

the two sets of turnstiles for the West Stand was opened.     It was only

opened for a couple of minutes and a few hundred fans did ccme into

the ground.      Both Police Officers and Stewards were on duty at the

gate, but I am unable to say who actually opened the gate.    Seme of

the crowd let in went through the wall opening, heading towards the

centre or right-hand side of the terrace; the remainder went towards

the left-hand side.



I noticed at this time that there seemed to be an increase in the
volume of people caning through the small permanently open access

gate fran the A-G Section to the 1-16 Section, as indicated on the

attached map.



There was a small amount of mild verbal abuse towards us but nothing

drastic.



I did notice that same of the fans had obviously consumed same alcohol,

but I didn't see anyone carrying any or drinking any.



At about 3 pn (1500) there seamed to be a lull in the activity.      I

then became aware of shouting and saw a number of Police Officers run

through the area in front of our cabin and from the turnstiles

through the wall opening in the A-G Section.    There were then no

Police Officers to be seen.



I then became aware that fans were climbing over the turnstiles.

There was no one to prevent this.



I started to count our cash and when I looked out, I noticed that a

large amount of people was milling around and standing and sitting

in the area outside our cabin.    Seme of them appeared to be dazed or

under the influence of alcohol.     Some of them were beccming rather

agitated and were being verbally abusive about the Police and

Stewards.



Due to this, I became a little apprehensive about my safety.



At this time a couple of Stewards came to our cabin, and were so
       fearful of their safety, that they left their Stewards' coats at the

       cabin and went away.



       I collected my cash and programmes as best I could, and as a group of

       Police Officers cane into the ground, I joined them and walked to the

       North Stand to the gymnasium.



       When I got to the North Stand, it was obvious to me that in spite of

       the situation, the area under the Stand had far more people in than

       the situation warranted.   This area to my mind should have been kept

       clear.



       I deposited the progranmes I had got and then returned to locate the

       people I had been working with.   I was not in a position to give

       assistance to anyone injured in the incident.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
 0        PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:    010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                POL PC
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS
                 SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                           SIGNED)



          I am the above named and I live at the above address with my wife.



          I am

          and at the heme matches I sell programmes fran a Portacabin situated at

          the Lepping Lane end of the ground which is next to gate A.   I have

          marked this position on the sketch map which I now produce as exhibit

                 Exh No



          At approximately 09.30am (0930) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489),

          I was on duty at the FA Cup Semi-Final Football match between

          Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, and I spent my time collecting the

          programmes fran the main offices by the players' entrance in the South

          Stand.



          At ll.OOhrs (1100) the same date, I went to the Supporters' Club

          Office in Penistone Road where I began to sell progranmes between

          11.00am (1100) and l.OOpn (1300).   I saw a large amount of supporters

          who were consuming large quantities of alcohol.   I cannot say which
                                                                                  2


       fans they were as both teams' colours are red and white.    Whilst I was

       at the Penistone Road office, I was approached by Liverpool fans who

       asked if I had got any tickets.    They offered me #100.00 for two #6.00

       tickets.



       Although I moved around the ground, I did not see any crowd crushing

       or crowd surge.



       At approximately 1.30pm (1330) I went to the Portacabin which is

       situated behind the West Stand next to Gate A.    Up until 2.20pm (1420)

       sales of programmes were very slow, and then, at 2.25pm (1425) until

       3.00pm (1500), it was very busy with large crowds entering the ground.



       At approximately 2.30pm - 2.35pm (1430-1435) I saw gate A being

       opened.     It was open for approximately 30 seconds and only about 30

       people came through. I didn't see who opened the gate.



       At approximately 3.00pm (1500) I went to the gymnasium at the rear of

       the North Stand to count the money taken from the sale of programmes,

       therefore I didn't see what happened in the West Stand pens.



                                                                        IIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   020589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL PC
                                                                          STATION

N^p:           MALCOLM ADRIAN
               HURST

ADDRESS:
                         '   SHEFFIELD, SOUTH YORKSHIRE.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                  M A HURST (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my family.     On a Voluntary basis I am

           a Committee Member of Sheffield Wednesday's Supporters' Club.     I have

           been a member of the Supporters' Club for four years, during which

           time I have been a Committee member for three years with a year's

           break after the first year.



           On Match days at Sheffield Wednesdays Football     Club, I am always

           selling programmes to hone supporters on the inside of     the groundat

           the Spion Kop end, just inside the turnstiles. On normal match days

           there are programme sellers both inside and outside the ground.

           I did not attend the Sem-Final of the FA Cup Match held at this

           ground in 1988 (000088).



           For the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-Final on Saturday

           15th April 1989 (150489), it was decided, as per normal semi-final

           days, that for security reasons, all programmes would be sold inside

           the ground.   To facilitate this, all programme    sellers who normally

           work outside the ground, would sell programmes     on this day behind the
HURST                 MALCOLM ADRIAN                                        2


Spion Kop at the South Stand and West Stand inside the ground.



I was posted to sell programmes from a Portacabin situated behind

the West Stand, behind a fence separating West Stand Supporters from

the North Stand.   It was my understanding, that programmes sold by me

fran these Portacabins nearest gate A, were for fans entering the

North Stand.



I arrived at the ground at approximately 11.10am (1110) on Saturday

15th April 1989 (150489), where all members of the Supporters' Club

met at the Supporters' Club Office in Penistone Road North.    We had a

small briefing, consisting of What to do with the money when

programmes were sold, and like matters concerning the selling of

programmes.    It was from this meeting I was posted to the above

Portacabin.    I have never been briefed on evacuation procedure.    I

arrived at the Portocabin at about 11.50am (1150).    It was our

understanding that the gate would open at 12 mid-day (1200), which

gave us the opportunity to set up the Portacabins.    At this time it

was quiet and there was no build up of fans, just a few supporters

milling around outside the ground.



Fran the Portacabin I had a direct view of gate A, and about six

turnstiles to the left of the gate as I looked towards the gate.

Once the turnstiles were opened only a few people came in.     This is

normal for the stands as ticket holders have allocated seats.       There

was at least one policeman to every turnstile, who made searches of

people entering the ground.    I saw three Stewards at the gate A.    At

this time the Stewards, as is normal practice, were opening the gate A

to allow Police and Ground staff into the ground.    On these occasions
HURST                 MALCOLM ADRIAN                                      3


the gates were only opened a few feet to allow one person at a time

into the ground.   It was about 1.30pn (1330) onwards that I noticed

there was a steady build up of fans entering the ground.     It really

started to get busy from 2pm (1400) onwards.     During the course of

selling programmes at about 2.30pn (1430), I noticed that gate A, a

concertina-type of gate, was acting like an accordian musical

instrument.   There was obviously a large number of people outside

this gate, which was confirmed by the number of people outside the

turnstiles.   From my viewpoint of gate A there was either people

being pushed up against the gate under considerable pressure or

persons were trying to force open the gates from the outside, or

indeed, a combination of both these factors.



It was at about 2.40pn (1440) that I saw about forty to fifty

Policemen arrive at the gate all at once.   They formed up either side

of the gate, to make a kind of walkway for the supporters.     Fran the

positions of the Police Officers, I was of the opinion the walkway was

leading to Pen six and seven, as there is a transfer gate to the right

of the Portacabins which is usually manned by a Steward, although on

this occasion, I cannot say if there was a Steward there or not as

I could not see.   The gate A was then opened.    I cannot say whether

it was Police Officer or Stewards who opened the gate A, but as soon

as the gate was opened, I would estimate that about between 700 and

800 fans carte through the gate in a reasonably orderly fashion.

Although initially it appeared as if these fans stumbled through the

gates rather than walking in, they were directed by the Police

Officers along the walkway created.    The gates were then shut after

about five minutes.   Fran what I saw, there was no apparent difficulty

in closing these gates afterwards.
HURST                  MALCOLM ADRIAN                                      4




In the Portacabin selling programmes with me was, initially,

                              the Supporters' Club.   At about 1.30pm

(1330) I was joined by another Committee member,                 Then at

about 2.35pm (1435) we were joined by                   the Supporters'

Club,                  who was also assisted selling programmes.

However,                 lad made several trip® to our Portacabin for

the purpose of collecting cash and taking it to the gymnasium.     We

finished selling our programmes shortly after gate A had been shut at

about 2.45pm (1445).    We waited in the Portacabin until the crowd had

gone into the ground.    Then at about 3.10pm (1510), all four of us

left the Portacabin at the same time.   We walked underneath the North

Stand and into the gymnasium.    We entered the gym via the Penistone

Road North entrance side of the gym.



On entering the gymnasium, I could see that the gym had been split

into three sections.    The first section was allocated to the Police

with tables set out and refreshments on had.    There were about twenty

five Policemen in there.    The atmosphere at this time was relatively

relaxed.   I knew the game had been held up after kick-off because a

public address system announcement was made on two occasions.      I can't

remember the exact warding but it was to the effect that the crowd

were asked to move as there was crushing.    There was mention also

relating to the Liverpool Supporters on the West Stand on the public

address system.   These annoucements were made just prior to us leaving

the Portacabin.   Whilst in the gym we made our way to the centre

sections allocated to all the programme sellers at a rendezvous point;

the third section was empty as far as I can remember.
        HURST                  MALCOLM ADRIAN


        At about 3.15pm (1515), as we were preparing the counting of the money

        collected, I saw a senior Police Officer enter the gym.   There was a

        sense of urgency about him and he shouted the Police Officer in the

        building who suddenly had a sense of the urgency.   All the set out

        tables in this section where the Police were, were cleared to one

        side. We moved our tables into the far end of the empty section, and

        in a very short space of time, injured persons were brought into the

        gym.    I noticed the injured were being carried and seme were brought

        in on makeshift stretchers made from the advertising boards.



        I stopped in the gym until 4.30pn (1630), assisting in any way

        possible.   During the course of my duties, I was not subjected to any

        threats of violence.    I did not witness any alcohol being brought into

        the ground, or consumed in the ground.     M A Hurst



                                                            M A   HURST SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   300489

VjjpiESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL PC
                                                                               STATION

N^p:
ADDRESS:
                           SHEFFIELD        S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                                 (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I reside at

           Sheffield,



           My address is a private house, and I reside there with my girlfriend




           I have been to Hillsborough Football Club on a number of occasions, in

           the capacity of a supporter of Sheffield United Football Club.



           A friend of m    i   n   e   ,   p   o     resides at

                     North Keighly, North Yorkshire, is a regular member of the

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club programme-selling staff and on

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I visited the Hillsborough Football

           Ground and assisted                      in this capacity as a programme

           seller.



           At approximately 10.30 am (1030) I m e t o u t s i d e             the

           football ground in Penistone Road North, and together, we walked to
                                                                          2


the rear of the 'South Stand' and to Leppings Lane entrance.



When we reached a point next to the turnstiles known as "A - G", we

entered the ground via a large gate to the right of these turnstiles,

which I believe to be 'Gate C' (shown map of ground - point of entry

marked on map) (Exhibit No.       ) (Ref No.       )•



We entered the Leppings Lane end and proceeded to unload a van which

contained the match programmes.



I unloaded the match day programmes and put than in a Portacabin which

is situated in the Leppings Lane end of the ground in the middle area

of turnstiles 1 - 1 6 and next to a blue gate which I believe to be

'Gate B'.



The gate ('Gate B') is of a concertina type, which slides from side to

side, opening from its centre.    I would say that it was approximately

12' (twelve) high and approximately 16' (sixteen) wide.



At approximately 11.00 am (1100), together with_____________ I went

to the gymnasium which is situated behind the cantilever stand (North

Stand). We went to the gymnasium for the purpose of collecting money

bags, and once we had collected than, we returned to the Portacabin.

Due to the fact the turnstiles did not open until approximately

1.00 pm (1300) for the purpose of allowing supporters into the

ground, I generally had a walk around the Leppings Lane terracing and

entered this point through the tunnel which gave direct access to the

terracing into the sections marked 3 & 4 on the map (Exhibit No           )

 (Ref No.         ) of the Leppings Lane stand.
When I entered the terracing/ which I believe to be about 11.45 am

(1145), there was in fact approximately 24 (twenty four) Liverpool

supporters already in Section 3 of the terracing.    To my knowledge,

officially the turnstiles had not been opened, but for some reason

these people were inside the ground.   I did not speak to any of them.

Although they were wearing the colours and scarves of Liverpool, I

could not give any distinctive description of any of than.    They

ranged from 16 yrs to 24 yrs of age and they were sitting down in a

quiet manner.



I, personally, remained on the terracing for only 2 or 3 (two or

three) minutes before going back to my Portacabin.



Between this time and the time the turnstiles opened, I just generally

made conversation with other people in my area.



At approximately 1.00 pm (1300), the turnstiles opened and I began

to perform my duties within the Portacabin as a programme seller.



The Portacabin was positioned in such a way that 'Gate B' can be seen

if you stand directly behind the counter of the Portacabin.    It

also overlooks turnstiles 1-8 so that people can be seen entering

the ground at this point.



When the turnstiles opened, very few people entered, however, whoever

entered, whether they be male or female, they were searched by mixed

uniformed police officers, directly by the turnstiles.    To my

knowledge, I could see about two officers to each turnstile performing
this duty.



Up to approximately 2.00 pm (1400), the number of people who entered

the ground was few in number, but most of these were generally happy

and obviously looking forward to the game.   The numbers consisted of

families and young couples.   From 2.00 pm (1400) the number of people

entering the ground via the turnstiles started to increase to a steady

flow, and although I cannot give a precise time, about 15 (fifteen)

youths aged between 16 yrs to 20 yrs started to scale the wall above

turnstiles 1-16.   When they got on the roof of these turnstiles they

attempted to dodge the police officers in order to gain access to the

ground.



Several of these youths were stopped and ejected from the area, but

sane managed to run away into the stand area.



A short time after this, people who entered via the turnstiles did not

go straight away into the stand area but remained just inside the

turnstile area.    They appeared to be very agitated and in addition to

conversing with each other, they also spoke to police officers and

appeared to be expressing their annoyance at something, but I did not

witness anything inside the ground which would be cause for concern.



At approximately 2.30 pm (1430), a police officer wearing a flat

cap, appeared in the area and spoke to 2 or 3 (two or three) officers

wearing helmets, who had been present throughout the afternoon and

appeared to be discussing something. After this, the flat capped

officer climbed on the turnstile wall and looked over it into the area,

the other side of the turnstiles. Although he was observing
something, I don't believe he gave instructions to anyone on either

side of the turnstiles, but I do believe he spoke into his personal

radio which he held in his hand.



He climbed down from the turnstile roof after about 2 or 3 (two or

three) minutes, but I cannot say what he did after that.



At this point I had occasion to leave the Portacabin as I had done on

two or three previous occasions, to collect money for security

purposes from other programme sellers within the immediate vicinity.

When I returned to the Portacabin, about one or two minutes later, I

could see a continual flow of supporters on the turnstile roof of Nos

1-16 and also on the turnstile roof, I believe to be turnstiles A-

G.



At this time, sane supporters were showing tickets prior to junping

down, but sane didn't show anything and just jumped down off the roof

into the crowds.   The number of people entering the ground, by this

means, greatly outnumbered the police officers who were on duty in

this location.



The atmosphere was very tense and the people who had entered the

ground were shouting at police officers and stewards, although I could

not hear what was being said.



A lot of the people were arguing amongst themselves and, although they

were not drunk, it was evident that a lot had consumed intoxicant

liquor.   At approximately 2.55 pm (1455), a large number of

spectators, about 300-400 (three hundred to four hundred) in numbers,
                                                                        6


suddenly rushed into the area fron the left side of the Portacabin.

The people at the front came into the ground very quickly, with the

people at the back coining in quicker than walking pace, once they

were passed the Portacabin. Although I did see it open due to the

sudden rush, I did not see 'Gate B' opened or closed by an individual

person.



The numbers who had entered the ground through 'Gate B' quickly

disappeared to the right side of my Portacabin, where a gate divides

a wall, directly behind us and gives access to entry points under the

main West Stand and to its right, giving access to areas 1 & 2 (one

and two) of the Leppings Lane terracing.



After 'Gate B' had been opened, no other people came into the ground

at this point and it was deserted of people, including police

officers.



I can remember looking at my watch to see it indicated 3 o'clock

(1500) and a sudden roar of the crowd made me believe the game had

started.



About two or three minutes later, one of the programme sellers who I

don't know, stated the Liverpool supporters were on the pitch.



It was at this time              told me to c a n y on and watch the

game.



I walked out of the Portacabin across the area to the left side of the

West Stand and through a gate, controlled by a steward, which gives
                                                                         7


access to the walkway underneath the cantilever stand (North Stand).

I walked under the stand for its entire length to a point where it

meets the Spion Kdp.   I gained access to a gangway at the end of the

cantilever stand and saw that the football game had stopped.    It

was about 3.10 pm (1510) at this time, and I decided to go back down

the gangway to underneath the stand.    I could see a lot of police

officers, the majority on foot, seme police dog handlers and about

five mounted police officers.    They remained in this location for at

least ten minutes, after which I again went back into gangway on the

cantilever stand (North Stand).



When I got to the top of the gangway, I looked towards my right

and the Leppings Lane terracing.     I could see people lying on the

pitch and a lot of activity appeared to be happening in the area of

Pens 3 and 4.   People were crying, consoling each other, and at this

time supporters were removing advertising boards to assist in the

carriage of injured people.     The injured were brought to an area

directly in front of me and it was evident that seme were seriously

injured.   Seme were given heart massage and seme were just lying there

with no signs of life.    It was evident at this time that people had

died.



I went back down to the area under the stand and it was very busy

with people being carried into the gymnasium with injuries and people

who were on stretchers covered totally by blankets/coats.



My intention was to see                 who was counting money, in the

gymnasium, but due to what was happening I left the ground and went
                                                                                    8




       I r e a l i s e d what had happened after my family had been watching the

       incident on the television and informed me that this appeared to be an

       accident rather than an act of public disorder.



       Whilst I was at the ground, also with me was my girlfriend's young

       brother,                      He is          old.   Whilst in the ground

        selling programmes, he always remained in the Portacabin, although he

        did see seme of the incidents which took place whilst we were in the

        cantilever stand (North Stand).



        Other than, what I've already said, I do not feel that I can give any

        further information about this tragedy.




                                                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:    100589

f^pE S S TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:       POL PC
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my wife and daughter.



           I have been employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at their

           Hillsborough Ground as a Programme Seller f o r y e a r s .



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was on duty in my capacity as

           a Programme Seller at the ground.



           I arrived at the ground at about 10.00 am (1000).



           I had requested that a Portacabin be hired, in order to sell the

           programmes fron.



           When I arrived at the ground, I was allocated a Portacabin in the

           Leppings Lane end of the ground between gates A and B.



           In this Portacabin besides myself was two persons helping me.
There was                                     Sheffield, and

                                      Sheffield.



When I arrived along with others, I set the Portacabins up with

programmes.



I was all ready at about 11.15am (1115)



The gates to the ground were open at about 12.30pn (1230) and there

was a few people that started to arrive.



At about 2.15pm (1415) we had sold only 300 programmes at the most,

exit of 4,000 programmes I had stocked the Portacabin with.



Last year at the equivilant match, I was in the Leppings Lane end

supplying programmes to the West Stand, and by 2.15pm (1415) on that

day I had certainly sold at least 3 times the amount I had on

15.4.89 (150489).   This was one of the reasons I asked for a

Portacabin because last year was so busy.



The Portacabin is the type where the window drops down and so from

where I serve the programmes, I have a clear and unobstructed view of

the area looking towards Gate 'B'.



We started to get busy at about 2.25pm (1425) when more and more

people started to arrive.



At about 2.35pm (1435) I saw people climbing onto the top of the

turnstiles that are by gate 'B'.
                                                                           3




They were showing a Policeman in the ground that they had got tickets.

I saw between 12 and 20 persons climb over these turnstiles.



I cannot say if any were thrown out because I was selling programmes.

At about 2.45pm (1445) to 2.50pn (1450) I noticed a sudden rush of

people.   I looked up fron selling and I saw that gate 'B' had been

opened.



Not all of the gate was open.



Gate 'B' opens each way fron the centre and fron the direction I was

looking at Gate 'B', it was the left-hand side that was open.



The gate was not open for long, only about 2 minutes at the most.     It

appeared as if it released the pressure fron outside because I saw a

Policeman close the gate and he did so quite easily.



Trade continued normally at a steady rate after this surge and at the

time of the kick-off I had approximately 2,000 programmes left.



I knew the match had started because I could hear the crowd shouting.



I began to take the surplus programmes back to the gymnasium which

is at the rear of the North Stand.



I had a feeling that something was wrong because people were walking

around saying that they couldn't get onto the terraces.
I went through a connecting gate into the area served by Gate 'A' and

walked around the back of the North Stand to        the gym.



I made about 3 trips to the gym on my own.



It was on the 2nd trip that I heard over the PA system that they were

asking people to clear the pitch.



I also heard the PA system asking for doctors.



On my last trip on my own when I got back tothe Leppings Lane and I

saw that the Fire Service was being let into the ground.



I could only see Gate 'B'. This was closed and so I can only presume

that the Fire Service had been allowed in through this gate and then

the gate closed.



On the last trip we used a trolley to take the remaining programmes

and cash back to the gym.



We all went together.     There was me,

                                          who lives at

             Sheffield.



When we got to the gym it was obvious that something tragic had

happened.



Police, ambulancemen, supporters, in fact everybody, was bringing

people into the gym.
 There was a a lot of people injured and I saw one person who had

 obviously died.            saw this person and she broke down.



 Vfe left the programmes and got out of the Gym.



 Vfe still had a lot of cash with us from the sale of the programmes

 which had to be got into the gym.



 It was quite a while, but we eventually got in and sorted the money

 out.   Vfe had to count the money and hand it in.   When we had done this
we left the gym.



There was no other way out of the gym but passed the injured and
dead.



Vfe got out as fast as we could and left via the Penistone Road end

and walked to our car and left.



Whilst we were at the gym and in the surrounding area, I saw Ptolicanen

and Ambulancemen giving people the kiss of life on the floor of the
gym and outside of the gym.



I would like to mate a ccnment about this incident.



I have been a football fan for many years, I have watched football all

over the country.   It was obvious to me that there was a lot of people

still to arrive at the ground at about the kick-off time.
I feel the match should have been delayed and the fans outside told

this, in order to stop any rush.



The lappings Lane end is used for away supporters only.   It is penned

off and when you enter through the tunnel there is a dividing fence.

If it is only used for away fans, I cannot see the need for separating

the fans.



The main thing I feel was a contributory element to this disaster was

that the Liverpool fans arrived far too late.   There are a couple of

things I would like to add.



When I was taking the spare programmes to the gym, being afootball

fan, I went to have a quick look at the game.



I saw in the North Stand, which is seating only, people standing in the

gangways.   They could have only got in there with a ticket, so someone

must have used forgeries.



When the surge came, when people ran through Gate 'B', they went up

the stairs to the seating area of the West Stand.



I cannot believe that all these people had genuine tickets.



I last thing, I wish to add is that on one of my trips back from the

gym, when I got to where the Portacabin is, most of the Police in this

area went through the dividing gate which leads to the area contolled

by Gate 'C'.




                                                                          585
        Because there was very few Police now by Gate B, fans were again

        climbing over the turnstiles in that area.



        To emphasise the point about people arriving late on 15.4.89 (150489),

        about 5 years ago when Coventry played Leeds, I was selling programmes

        in the same area.   It was a capacity gate and it was all-ticket. On

        that match I sold 5,000 programmes and I saw most of the match.



        The point I am trying to make is, that at that match people arrived

        early and at a steady rate, so that by the time of the kick-off,

        everyone had been in the ground and there was no overcrowding.



        I have been shown a plan of the Hillsborough Football Ground and

        I now produce this showing my position (Ref RMS 1) (Exhibit No

                   )•




                                                                         SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACEj

          TIME;             DATE:   010589

\^IESS TO SIGNATURE:                PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      PC
                                                                             STATION
    NAME:         ERIC
£                 WOOD

ADDRESS:
                  SHIREGREEN, SHEFFIELD,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                   E M C WOOD (SIGNED)



             I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, as a Programme
             Seller.



            On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was employed in this capacity at

            the Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.     I have been

            employed by the club for approximately thirty five years.    My hours

            of work on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) were fran 10.30 am (1030)
            until I finished.



            My position in the ground when ccmmencing work was in the enclosure

            between the West Stand and gates A and G turnstiles.   I had my back

            against the dividing brick wall and was facing the direction of the
            River Don.



            Whilst selling programmesM, a Liverpool supporter stole one of my

            programmes, but he was seen by a Policeman who brought him back to me

            and made him pay for the programme.   This fan later returned back to
            me and punched me in the face.
At no time whilst selling programmes did I witness any alcohol being

brought into the ground or being consumed by Liverpool fans.



At about 2.50 pm (1450) I saw gate 'C' being opened, but why, I don't

know.    At this time a large number of Liverpool supporters did get

into the ground with or without tickets.    I did not see gate 'C'

being closed, but at around 2.55 pm (1455) gate 'C' was again opened

and Liverpool fans started to pour into the ground and headed towards

the tunnel which is under the West Stand leading to the pens behind

the goal.    I did not witness any deaths or persons being injured.



tty only observation with regard to the disaster is that a large

number of Liverpool fans arrived at the ground late and without

tickets, and that a large proportion of these fans had been drinking

alcohol.    These fans who had arrived late, tried to gain access into

the ground by climbing over the turnstiles A to G.    If at the time

gate 'C' had been opened for the second time, there had been more

marshalls or Police to direct the fans to the comer pens instead of

letting them rush into the tunnel, the disaster may have been

averted.    I left my post at around 3.05 pm (1505) and was unaware

that a disaster had occurred.



The other Steward who was with me at the start of my tour of duty

was a|



I produce a plan of Sheffield ffednesday FC Ground, showing my position

in the ground (Exhibit No          ) (Identifying Mark EW1).
        WOOD              ERIC                               3


                                          ERIC WOOD SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    020589
WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                 589
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with ray wife              rnd ray four

           children.



           For about the last three years I have assisted in the sales and

           counting at Sheffield Wednesday football ground of official programmes.

           I don't receive payment for this work, but I do get a pass for nyself

           and one boy to watch the football matches at Hillsborough.      I work and

           assist                 of                          who is employed by

           Sheffield Wednesday as an official programme seller.



           I attended last year's Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest. I sold programmes to the Spion Kop end that time and had a

           fairly uneventful day.      I was able to watch the match frcm the

        cantilever stand which was a section of the North Stand.        Liverpool

        won the match that year, and                      at the end of the match,

        went outside the ground to sell more programmes, thinking that the

        Liverpool fans would probably want to buy seme more programmes.

                    was mugged by Liverpool supporters at the back of the North
    Stand on that day.    They took seme programmes frcm him and seme money

    and assaulted him.    I know this incident was reported to Sheffield

    Wednesday Football Club.     I don't know whether it was reported to the
    local Police.



    I attended Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989

    (150489) for this year's Semi-Final.



    I arrived at 9.30am (0930) on that day and set up selling programmes

    outside the main entrance to the football ground in Penistone Road.

    I stayed here for about 30 minutes until I was relieved by

    ______     1 then changed my position and went into the ground and set

    up at the rear of the Spion Kop Stand by a Police box and near to the

    toilets.   I remained at this post until the match kicked off.



A few incidents occurred during this time which corns to mind.



A man I know who works at the ground, called            and lives in

passed by. I asked him if he was alright he said he
_




wasn't and told me why.        He was upset that he hadn't been allocated a

turnstile to operate.       I knew he was a regular turnstile operator with

Sheffield Wednesday.       He went on to say that he had been down to the

Leppings Lane end and had seen four operators on the turnstile that he

had never seen before.       As a result he was now going to find a steward
to complain.



I was selling three programmes to three Nottingham Forest supporters

who were then joined by a fourth supporter.       He said he had paid ten

pounds to get into the ground, he used the words "to get through".
___________________________                                                  3


From this I inferred that this supporter had paid the turnstile

operator ten pounds to get into the ground.



There was a row of about three turnstiles to the North Stand side of

this Police box that I beleive he would have cone through.



Generally, the fans were well behaved a lot of families attending and

they all seemed to cone early to the match and by about 3pm (1500) I

would say most people were at their places.



It was about 3.10pm (1510) now and somebody had mentioned that there

was a crowd invasion on the pitch.     I didn't really take much notice

of this and it was about this time I started making my way over to the

gymnasium to hand over my money and any programmes I had left.     I was

joined by                                  who is                       As

we got into the courtyard area between the North Stand and the Spion

Kop Stand, we saw a few dog handlers coining into the ground from

Penistone Road.     They were heading towards the entrance to the pitch

in this area.     These handlers were then followed by a few mounted

police officers who appeared from around the gymnasium area.     They

also went onto the pitch.     I could see a small area of the pitch as I

walked across the courtyard.     I could see that the match had been

stopped but I couldn't see many people on the pitch, due to the fact

probably that I couldn't see much of the pitch.



We went under the North Stand and into the gymnasium.    The gym was

divided off into three sections by like a type of net curtain.    The

first section was like a Police 'mess' area with tea-making facilities

and a few tables.    There were a few policemen there having a drink, I
                                                                           4


would say about 20 all told.



We went through the curtained area into a middle section which was set

up for the programme sellers.     My                              was

seated at a table here, assisting with the counting.      Since I had

been at the Ground this was the first time I had seen             as

         usually looks after him. __________        is another assistant

and he lives at                                        He's a student

about                           then told                   that they may

as well go and find a seat to watch the match.     They both left the

gymnasium,    tfyself                   ten took up the task of

counting.



        paid to me a short time after that, they had declared this area

an emergency hospital and within a very short time we watched the

Police move tables and things around, making space for this

conversion.    They worked very hard and were ready in minutes; they

were unbelievable.      We were asked to move to the far end of the

gymnasium.    Just before this, I witnessed a policewoman and a

policeman carrying a young man about early twenties into the gym.

They carried him around past the curtains and laid him down at the far

end of the gym.    I thought this man was at first drunk, but when I saw

then covering his face up I realised it was much more serious than

that.



We were now positioned in the far comer of the gym.      The body of the

man was moved som ew here next - I don't know where.



One thing I do remember vividly is that a young Liverpool supporter
came into our area.    He was obviously very distressed and turned one

of the tables over, scattering all the money on the floor.     He said,

"There are people dying there and all you are doing is counting

fucking money." He just then carried on walking as though in shock.

A couple of the programme sellers went up to console him.



Eventually we got all the money and programmes sorted out.             dent

home and          went to find           and        so we could make

arrangements for going home.     While         vas doing this, I went and

had a look around the gym.     Up until now I had been unaware of what

was really happening due to the curtain being drawn across.     I saw in

the middle section a lot of people crying and in shock and others

trying to console them.    There were a few police officers there, seme

of them were crying.    I didn't actually see anybody being given

medical attention at this time.     I then went back to the end section,

where the money and programmes were still left.



         returned and stated he would stay here and told me where

and            were, and told me to go.



I waited through the middle section of the gym into the other end

section by the door.    As I walked into this end section, I was shocked

by what I saw.    There were a huge number of bodies, all having their

faces covered up.     I would estimate there were about forty plus people

there.     I had had a pocket radio with me during the time I was at the

ground and I had heard that nine people were dead.      It suddenly

occurred to me that it was a lot more serious than that.      I was very

distressed and left the gym.     I went to        and           and took

them out of the Ground by the gates near to Vere Road, Penistone Road.
All I can say when I left the ground is I was very distressed, but I

was inpressed with the way the road had been blocked off and I could

see ambulances making their way to and frcm the Ground unhindered.

We made our way down Herries Road to where              had parked the

car.    I realised before we had got to the car that I had still got

          keys, so I told                        to make their way home,

and I returned to the Ground again.      I was still wearing my white

smock top which had my identity card on.



I walked in easily through the gates and back to the gym.      I gave

        the keys, and left him in the end section as I came into the

middle section.      I saw a man, I think an ambulanceman, giving oxygen

to a supporter who was on his side.      This supporter seemed alright.

I walked into the other end section.     There were still the bodies

laid out as before.     I saw a policeman who was bending over the bodies

He had something in his hand, I think maybe seme tags.



As I was leaving by the gym door, an ambulanceman entered carrying

same green blankets or large bags which he started distributing out to

the police officers there.



At this point, I left the gym, entered the courtyard outside and I

took my smock and identity card off.      I did this so as not to bring

any attention to myself; it seemed the sensible thing to do at the

time.    I walked at first down along Herries Road, initially hoping to

catch          and           up.   However, I changed my mind and went to

the back of the bus station and back onto Penistone Road.      I then went

to the bus stop by the Gate Public House and eventually caught a bus

hone. I saw a lot of supporters both Liverpool and Nottingham Forest,
________________________                                                  7


but I didn't see any disorder or drunknness.   Everyone seemed shocked

and there was an atmosphere of 'silence' about everywhere.



I would like to add that when I was initially outside the main

entrance to the ground at about 9.45am (0945), a Liverpool supporter

came up to me and said, "I've just bought a ticket frcm a chap up

there." He pointed towards Penistone Road by the North Stand area.

He asked me if I could tell him if it was a genuine ticket.     This I

couldn't do and I informed him, so he left with that walking towards

the town centre.   I would say that in all the time I witnessed what

was happening during this disaster, that I never saw any of the

emergency services personnel panic.   Everyone went to their tasks very

professionally. I was very inpressed with the way the Police turned

the gymnasium into an emergency hospital. They were quick and very

professional. I felt the ambulances were hindered a bit trying to get

into the Ground and onto the pitch by the layout of the Ground.    They

had to do a lot of reversing in to get around onto the pitch.     I would

like to see better access for them.



I think that the Liverpool supporters should have had the Spion Kop

end of the ground because they have a larger following and,

traffic-wise, I don't think it would have been that difficult.    They

could have been directed frcm Stockbridge onto the new Motorway

section down through Grenoside, and into Sheffield, and to the

Ground.   By the same token, Nottingham Forest fans could have been

directed through Tinsdale onto the Middlewood Road.



I still don't think we should have dividing fences in the Leppings

Lane West Stand standing areas, because these stop fans from moving to
        the side to escape crushing.




                                                     IIGNED

STATEMEOT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:              PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                         POL PC




                                                              597
Incident    102   050190 OP227         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S671A

                                                                           Station

Surname           LOCK

Forenames         DOUGLAS    JOIN

Age                                          Date of birth

Address
                              S YORKSHIRE,

Occupation

Telephone

 IC               Height                     Build

Hair colour

  jir type

      35                                     Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses           Use                        Accent

Number of Pages 17

 Dated            230589                                            D J LOCK Signed


           I, Douglas John LOCK, of                       Barnsley, South Yorkshire,

                   will state:-



           My date of birth is                               I am presently Chief of

           Security with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at their ground at

           Hillsborough.    My employment in that post is part-time and my main

           duties are on match days, but I work on a part-time basis through the

           whole year - not just confined to the football season.



           tty main career was in the Police Force for seme 30 years, until I

           retired on 28th February 1985 (280285).     At the time of my retirement

           I had the rank of Superintendent, in the South Yorkshire Police Force,

           and I was promoted to Superintendent in about 1979/80 (000079/000080),

           after spending one year as an Acting Superintendent.
                                                                   PAGE    2
                                                                   S671A



I was based at Hammerton Road Police Statical, working in FI Sub-

Division which covers the northern area of Sheffield, including

Hillsborough.   Fran Football Season 1982/3 (000082/000083) until I

retired, I was under the direct command of the Chief Superintendent,

in charge of policing the Hillsborough Ground.    For the 3 seasons that

I was the Superintendent in charge of policing the Hillsborough

Ground the Club had 1 year in the Second Division, 1 year when they

were promoted from Second Division to First Division, and then in

1984/5 (000084/000085) a season in the First Division.    During this

period there were matches with seme very big crowds, for even in the

first of those years the Club was contending for promotion to the

First Division, although ultimately it did not succeed in that year.



During that spell, Inspector Clive CALVERT was my Liaison Officer and

he and I had a good deal of contact with the Sheffield Wednesday

Club.   Such liaison was mainly with the Secretary of the Club - in the

early stages               and latterly,                 ■ and each game

that the Club played throughout the season was categorised according

to the gate which we would expect, not least, dependent on the kind

of following that the visiting team would have.   As I recall the games

were categorised as A, B or C.   A category C game would involve

crowds of up to say 20,000 people; category B up to 30,000 people, and

category A where yet larger crowds would be expected.    There would be

meetings with the Club prior to the start of the football season

proper, w hen the fixtures would be known, and the categories for each

game would be agreed.   Each category involved a consequent minimum

level of policing, and since the Club have to contribute to the cost

of policing, they have a financial interest in the matter.    I would

say, however, that in my dealings with Sheffield Wednesday they have
                                                               PAGE     3
                                                               S671A

always been prepared to accept the level of policing which we thought

proper and not tried to influence us to keep the numbers of Police

Officers down for cost reasons.   I should also add that even though

the games would be categorised at the start of the season if, for any

reason, during the season, things changed - e.g. if one of the Clubs

involved had a successful run so that a larger crowd might be expected -

we could and did re-categorise matches.



Other factors were also involved, of course, in the level of policing

we might require.   We would typically liaise with the Police Force

for the visiting clubs' hone town, for added intelligence from them as

to the fans that might be expected.



About 2 weeks prior to each game, Inspector CALVERT and I would have

meetings with the Chief Superintendent and the Deputy Chief

Superintendent, to discuss the policing for the forthcoming match, and

then, having established the contingent of Officers required, we would

go to the Football Liaison Office at South Yorkshire Police

Headquarters at Snig Hill, Sheffield, to arrange extra manpower from

other Divisions - e.g. from Road Traffic Division, Mounted Police, and

(where necessary) Dog Handlers.   Within a week of the match we would

normally have confirmation of the extra manpower available to us, and

then Clive CALVERT and I would discuss the whole matter and draw up an

operational plan to be put into operation on the day of the match.

This operational plan would include, in particular, deployment of

Police officers within and outside the Ground.



Our policy was to use officers from F Division, in those areas where

there was likely to be pressure or problems because of their

familiarity with the Hillsborough area.   Thus, we always tend to use
                                                                 PAGE    4
                                                                 S671A

the same group of officers for duties on the pitch, not least because

if trouble were to arise their faces would be well recognised by

regular fans who would perhaps be more ready to approach them and

report matters.   Officers would also be deployed on duty for off­

loading coach loads of visiting fans and escorting them to the Ground

from particular areas, and likewise, in relation to special trains.

When large crowds of visiting fans were expected we would control

their arrival by close liaison with the Traffic Division, who would

direct traffic along a particular route; coaches coning off the Ml

would, for example, be asked to exit at a junction at Tankersley where

there is a very large lay-by and they would be stopped in that lay-by

and fans on board would have tickets checked.   Care would be taken to

co-ordinate the arrival of coaches and trains so that, for example, if

a train-load of fans was expected, the arrival of a group of coaches

might be delayed until those fans arriving onthe train had been

escorted to the Ground.   Furthermore, coaches were always directed to

offload in a particular area, then to follow a particular route around

the Ground and park in Cole Road.   After the match, all visiting fans

would then be escorted from the Ground back via Cole Road to the

coaches or trains, as the case may be.   When the operational plans

were drawn up, copies would go to each particular groups of officers -

i.e. Traffic Division, Mounted Police, etc., and they would detail the

duties for each particular section of men.   A copy of the Operational

Plan was always given to the Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Fotoball

Club in advance of the match.



On Match Day, before kick-off, I would brief all the officers on duty.

Those briefings normally took place within the Ground, either in the

vicinity of the Police Room or in the gymnasium, depending on how many

officers were involved.   After a general briefing to all, the
                                                                  PAGE    5
                                                                  S671A

Inspectors and Sergeants would then be separately briefed in more

detail, but all briefings essentially broke down the operation into 3

phases:-



1.   The period up to kick-off;

2.   The period from kick-off until 10 minutes before the end of the

     match;

3.   From 10 minutes before the end, to dispersal of crowds.



During my 3 seasons in charge we never had an FA Cup semi-final

played at Hillsborough and, to my recollection, the largest crowd we

had was one of about 48,000 people for an evening match with a 7.30 pm

(1930) kick-off.    On that occasion, I recall that the crowd of fans

arriving was such that it became obvious that we could not get

everyone into the Ground in time for kick-off.When that was reported

to me by my officers, we approached the Club Secretary - I believe

it was then                - and asked him whether the start of the

match could be delayed so that all the fans could be brought into the

Ground.    We received prompt agreement to that request, the start was

put back for 15 minutes and we announced this over the PA system to

the crowd.    This relieved the pressure, and in fact, by 7.35pm (1935)

or thereabouts, all the fans were in.    Because of my experience of and

interest in policing football crowds, following my retirement from the

Force I wrote a series of 3 articles for a local newspaper, the

Sheffield Telegraph, on this topic.     Subsequently, I did appear on

television on a couple of occasions, in discussions on football and

the football supporters, hooliganism problems, and I wrote seme

articles for the Police Review.



It was after the tragedy at the Heysel Football stadium in Belgium,
                                                                PAGE     6
                                                                S671A

that I recall I was contacted by Superintendent John FREEMAN of the

South Yorkshire Police who told me that he was calling at the request

of             . to enquire whether I might be interested to join

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as their Security Officer.   Having

retired from the Force, I was not working at that time and I went to

see               and following a discussion with him, I accepted the

appointment.



In my post as Chief of Security, I was involved with general matters

of crowd safety and I was, of course, familiar with the Green Code,

the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, and the recommendations of the

POPPLEWELL Inquiry.   I, therefore, had these matters very much in mind

in performing my task as Security Officer.   One of the early things

that I did after my appointment was to check all the gates around the

stadium and to change the padlocks on those gates to a common padlock

so that every gate could be opened with the same key.   The Police were

supplied with 2 of those keys - I gave them to Inspector CALVERT -

so that they could copy as many as they wished.   I also provided keys

to each of the stewards within the Ground who were manning gates.

I also checked in relation to fire precautions and I found that a

number of alarms and extinguishers were not readily accessible on

match day - the position was that the Fire Brigade would inspect the

Ground without a full crowd present, and during matches certain gates

may be locked which would otherwise be open, or other changes made

which the Brigade apparently had not realised.    I arranged for those

matters to be put right.



All matters relating to the erection of perimeter fences, gates in the

fences, the siting of crash barriers in the standing areas etc., were,

I believe, dealt with between the Club and the Committee set up by the
                                                                 PAGE     7
                                                                 S671A

Local Authority, pursuant to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.    I

know, for example, that up to 1985 (000085), the central pen at the

West Stand (Leppings Lane) end was not divided by the fence which new

runs from the centre of the mouth of the tunnel under the Stand, down

to the perimeter fence. There was a crush barrier about 12' in from

the mouth of the tunnel entrance, and my recollection is that the

positioning of that crush barrier relatively close to the entrance

from the tunnel was capable of causing a build-up of fans at the mouth

of the tunnel, and it was often necessary to deploy a Police Constable

on either side of the tunnel, to ensure orderly dispersal of the crowd

within the pen.   Subsequently, however, that crush barrier was removed

and the fence erected, presumably at the request of the Safety

Committee.



The gates in the perimeter fence are closed, but not locked during

matches so far as I am aware.    The gates are so designed that the

latch cannot be easily opened from inside the pen, and the position is

that the gates would normally be manned outside by stewards and police

officers.    The gates opened outwards onto the pitch area, and to open

them it was merely necessary to press down on the spring-loaded latch

to release it.    I do recall that after my appointment as Security

Officer, I was a little concerned that some of the advertising boards

on the perimeter of the pitch extended partly across the mouth of

those gates and could create an obstruction, and I arranged for the

boards to be moved or, if necessary, reduced in length, to prevent

any possibility of an obstruction arising.



I also took steps to upgrade the Public Address System at the Ground

and indeed, last year, the PA System was completely replaced with a

new, more powerful, system.     Part of the reason for this was that I
                                                                 PAGE     8
                                                                 S671A

was conscious of the fact the PA System was an essential part of the

emergency evacuation procedures at the Club.   Standing rules provided

for a coded message to be announced over the PA and this

announcement would be an indication to police officers and stewards

that emergency evacuation procedures were in force.   The stewards were

then required to take up positions at their exits and gates, and to

open those gates.   I made sure that this evacuation procedure was

tested on match days, to be satisfied that it would work efficiently

in the event of an evacuation.   Indeed, in the 1988/89 (000088/000089)

season which is just drawing to a close, we have had 2 emergency

evacuation tests in which the Police were also involved.   Their part

was co-ordinated via Inspector SEWELL and, on the occasion of these

tests, the coded message would be broadcast and then we would check

quickly round the Ground to see that all the gates had in fact been

thrown open and were manned by stewards.



Following the POPPLEWELL report, the proper training of fit and able

stewards was a recommendation.   In fact, many of the stewards at

football grounds are older men who may perhaps have retired or be

approaching retirement from their regular work, so that it is not

always possible to have stewards who are fully fit from the point of

view of youth and fitness. Where possible, however, younger

candidates were recruited as stewards, and I did take steps to ensure

that training was available to them.   Thus, at the beginning of the

season, for the last 3 seasons, I have had 2 training evenings

organised at the Club.   The first evening is for gateman, catering and

ground staff, and the second evening concentrates on training of

stewards.   On both evenings, there are demonstrations and instructions

given on first aid; there is a talk by Station Officer        of the

local Fire Brigade re fire precautions and fire duties; there is a
                                                                PAGE     9
                                                                S671A

talk by a Police Inspector (this year Inspector SEWELL) on emergency

procedures; and finally, I talk to them about Ground Regulations and

we finish off with a video of the Bradford and Heysel disasters in

the context of stewarding of soccer grounds, a video produced by the

Metropolitan Police.



In addition, the stewards are given written instructions as to their

duties on match days.   Initially, these were printed sheets given to

them at the beginning of each season, but of late I have altered the

system slightly so that each match-day employee is provided with a

booklet at the commencement of the season, which he has to sign for.

This booklet contains a separate sheet for each home match, which can

be used as a signed receipt for payment of wages for match day duties.

In the back of the booklet are printed the instructions for match day

staff.



I also caused to be produced a Management Information Sheet on 'Use

and Training of Stewards' which was given to all the administrative

staff at the Club, to ensure that there was Management awareness among

all of them of the functions and duties of stewards and part-time

staff.



Finally, on the match day itself, stewards are briefed by the Police,

visually in groups, for each of the 4 separate areas of the Ground -

North, South, East and West.



The officer in overall charge of policing Hillsborough for several

seasons, until earlier this year, was Chief Superintendent Brian M3LE.

Mr M3LE took over these duties very shortly after I retired, following

the death of Chief Superintendent Brian MOSELEY.   Mr MCSLE was one of
                                                                  PAGE 10
                                                                  S671A

those Chief Superintendents who took a very active or hands-on

approach to being in charge of policing Hillsborough, and I had worked

fairly closely with him in my position as Chief of Security of the

Ground, up to the point where he was transferred to another Division

in about March of this year (000389).    During his spell in F Division

he had been in charge of 2 FA Cup Semi-Finals at Hillsborough -

Coventry City v Leeds United and in 1987/88 (000087/000088) Season,

Liverpool v Notts Forest.   Inspector Clive CALVERT had worked as his

Liasion Officer up to and including the 1987/88 (000087/000088) FA

Cup Semi-Final, but he was then transfered and his replacement was

Inspector SEWELL.



When Brian MOLE was transferred from F Division he was replaced by

Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD, and Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD'S first match at Hillsborough was on Saturday, 1st April

1989 (0104898), when the visiting team were Millwall FC and the crowd

was relatively snail and well behaved.



The Club was involved in an evening match on Wednesday, 5th April

(150489) against Wimbledon FC, and again, on that occasion, I met

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and also Inspector SEWELL.      After

that match had started, at about 7.45pm (1945), we pulled in all the

Chief Stewards into a meeting to discuss with them the arrangements

for the forthcoming Semi-Fined between Liverpool and Notts Forest.

In addition to the 4 Chief Stewards, also present were

(who keeps a running check on turnstiles on match days and arranges

for change to be available etc.),                 (who is responsible

for payment of stewards),                                   We

discussed with them what extra stewards we would require for the Semi-

Final, for their differing sections of the ground, and we needed to
                                                                    PAGE 11
                                                                    S671A

have details of numbers etc., so that special passes could be

organised for those additional stewards.    Because each Chief Steward

knows his own area well, and we knew we would have a capacity crowd

for the Semi-Final, their views were very much listened to and heeded

in terms of what extra stewarding was required.



On the day of the Cup Semi-Final I arrived at the Ground at

approximately 9.45am (0945) and parked my car at the lappings Lane end

of Fielding Road.    I entered the Ground, and carried out a general

tour of inspection around the whole Ground in the period up to about

10.45am (1045).     I recall that Roger HOULDSWORTH was at the Ground,

and indeed, I assisted him by footing the ladder for him whilst he was

carrying out seme repairs to one of the Police cameras in the West

Stand area near the Police control box.     I also entered the control

box and spoke to PC Mick RYAN who is the regular Police Radio Operator

and I left with him one of the Sheffield Wednesday FC personal

radios.   These personal radios had all been serviced prior to the

match and I distributed additional radios to each of the 4 Head

Stewards, 1 to                 |l to Graham MACKRELL and another to

      his Admin Manager; 1 for the office staff generally; 1 to

          one of irty stewards who performs a flexible role at my

direction; 1 for the Turnstile Roam staff; and the 12th one I retained

myself.



I told the stewards that there would be a briefing by the Police

Inspectors at 11.15am (1115), having already been informed of that by

Inspector SEWELL.



I recall that about 11.30 am (1130), I went back to the Police control

box when there were a number of other officers present besides PC
                                                                  PAGE 12
                                                                  S671A

       One I recall was Sergeant GODDARD, but there were others whom I

cannot now recall.   I had a general chat with them.    They had no

special requests, and I walked back from there to the offices in the

South Stand.   I recall that when walking back briefings were then in

progress in each of the four areas of the Ground.      The turnstiles were

opened to admit ticket holders from about 11.30am (1130).      Each set of

turnstiles is covered by a CCTV camera and there is a facility for

recording the pictures taken by each of those cameras.      Each video

tape, however, lasts only 3 hours, and we discussed the position and

agreed that we would only switch on the cassettes from 12.30pm (1230).

I recall that at about 12 noon (1200) I checked on the computer print­

out and at that stage there were 600 ticket holders in the Ground.       I

walked around the outside of the stadium to check on the position, and

there were at that stage a number of fans in the area but many more

Nottingham Forest supporters than Liverpool supporters. In walking

around the Ground, I checked with all the Car-Park attendants and

reminded them of the arrangements for that day where there were 2

different types of car-park ticket - one for those who were entitled

to park and leave their cars, and cane a permit merely allowing people

to drop off passengers. I reminded them also that any vehicle not in

the car-park by 2.30pm (1430) should be excluded until 5 mintues after

kick-off - this is a standard procedure on busy match days, to avoid

any traffic hazard with the large number of fans who would be in the

vicinity.



I was back in the offices by about 12.30pm (1230) and having checked

with the office staff, I re-entered the control room where PC Harold

GUEST was present for the Police, together with Roger H0ULDSW0R3H

and a representative from the company who had installed the CCTV

system.
                                                                    PAGE 13
                                                                    S671A



At about 1.00pm (1300) I left the control room, which is immediately

adjacent to the players' entrance, and went out to that entrance where

I met with Superintendent Glynn MARSH and a Police Sergeant.



Superintendent MARSH explained that he had cone out to see the Police

operation generally, having recently taken over an operations' group

in the Force, and I gave him and the Sergeant a tour of the control

Room.    I recall that at about that time I also had a visit from

Inspector CALVERT who had been called in to assist at this special

match, and was in charge of the Kop area of the Ground.     I knew him

well, of course, Inspector CALVERT having been my Liaison Officer in

the days when I was involved in policing the Ground.



Seme time between 1.35 (1335) and 1.45pm (1345), the Liverpool team

coach arrived, followed shortly afterwards by the Notts Forest team

coach.    I recall that outside the players' entrance there were a

number of fans awaiting the arrival, again mainly Notts Forest fans

but seme Liverpool fans also.   A number of the fans were pressing

forward at the arrival of the players, and a mounted police officer

eased his horse through the crowd and pushed them back.     I clearly

recall that the mounted officer was wearing a white shirt which would

indicate to me that he was brought in to assist from an outside Police

Force - The South Yorks Police wear regulation blue shirts.     I

recall this instance particularly, for 2 reasons - in the course of

the maneouvre, the horse seemed to be a little excitable, and a middle-

aged man with a Liverpool accent complained that the horse had stepped

on his foot, and indeed, his footwear was visibly dented.     I recall

that Kenny DALGLIESH, the Liverpool Manager, went to speak to the fan,

and Superintendent Roger GREENWOOD was present and I suggested to him
                                                                PAGE 14
                                                                S671A

that the Police horse was unnecessary for the type of duty at the

players' entrance.   He agreed that South Yorks Police did not normally

use mounted officers in that situation, and said that he would deal

with the matter at the later de-briefing.   Superintendent GREENWOOD

was in charge of the Police contingent on duty on the pitch.    I walked

down from the players' entrance through the players' tunnel onto the

pitch with him and, after chatting for a little while, returned to the

control roam at about 1.55pm (1355).



At about 2.pm (1400) one of the employees from the turnstile roam

popped into the control room to see what the crowd already entering

the Ground was like.   My recollection is that the computer print-out

showed that seme 24,000 fans were in, mostly in the South Stand and

the Kop area (Notts Forest supporters) and a lesser number in the

West and North Stand area.   At regular intervals thereafter, the

Police control box staff would radio in (on one occasion they used

the internal land-line telephone), to check with us what the size of

the crowd was as demonstrated on the computer print-out, and

generally either PC GUEST or I would answer them and give them the

figure.   It was noticeable that the Notts Forest areas of the Ground

were filling up first.   This was demonstrated both on the TV

Monitors and also on the computer print-out. We have a separate

monitor within the control room for each of the CCTV cameras trained

on the various turnstiles and players' entrance.   In addition, there

is an extra monitor which is linked to the Police cameras and where we

do not have a recording facility but we can switch, at the press of a

button, from one Police TV camera to another, to see what pictures

they are displaying.



Between 2.30pm (1430) and 2.40pm (1440) it was noticeable that a
                                                                PAGE 15
                                                                S671A

significant number of fans were arriving at the Leppings Lane end of

the Ground.   This was noticeable in particular through the Police

monitor from the Police camera situated on top of the South West

comer of the West Stand.    I recall that at about 2.40 pm (1440) there

was an announcement over the Police Radio (PC GUEST had one in the

Control Room) that Leppings Lane was closed to traffic because of the

build-up in that area. I looked on the monitor at the Leppings Lane

picture and I recall the impression I had was that immediately outside

the turnstiles in the area of the metal gate there was a very tight

crush of people.   Just behind them was an area which did not seem so

densely packed, and then further behind again in Leppings Lane there

seemed to be a solid crush of people coming along.   I cannot say

however that I noticed any evidence of misbehaviour among the fans

near the turnstile area.   However there was a substantial number of

fans waiting to get into the ground with kick-off time approaching.

By 2.50pm (1450) the computer showed that there were about 45,000 fans

in the Ground. I cannot recall any report of problems, but on the

Police monitor it was noticeable that crowds outside the Leppings Lane

gates had increased, and they were pushing forward and there was quite

a crush.    The computer print-out indicated that there were about 2,000

spaces still to be filled in the North Stand area, and about 2,500 in

the West Stand area as I recall.   On the monitor I saw a mounted

police officer in the crowd at the Leppings Lane end and he seemed to

be the same officer as had earlier been involved at the player's

entrance.     Fran the TV picture his horse seemed to shy and slip

into something of a splayed-leg position, and then recovered and this

was an indication to me that the crush out there was increasing.     Then

suddenly Gate C opened and a crowd of spectators burst through and PC

Harold GUEST said something like, "The gate's gone."    I immediately

left the room in something of a hurry, as I was concerned that this
                                                                  PAGE 16
                                                                  S671A

could cause problems and that further help might be needed in manning

that gate or indeed other gates around the Ground, to which the

problem of fans trying to get in quickly could spread.     Because of

that, on my way out of the control room, I indicated to PC Janet

CRUTTENDEN, who was just outside the Directors' entrance, that she

should step inside the entrance if there were any trouble and to the 2

administrative staff who were at the players' entrance, I said that I

would arrange for extra stewards.    I called                the Senior

Steward in the South Stand area, to join me at the Directors' entrance

and I asked him to provide 2 burly stewards at the entrance to

reinforce the staff there, explaining what had happened at C Gate.



From then I wanted to make my way over the C Gate and went down the

players' tunnel on to the pitch.    As I waited along the side towards

the West Stand area, I met Graham MACKRELL about half-way between the

tunnel and the Police control box.    I told him my concern as to what

had happened at Gate C, and he said, "Leave it to me," and turned and

went back in that direction.   I recall looking and seeing that each of

the North and South 'wings' of the Leppings Lane terracing were not

overcrowded, but the centre pen seemed very full.



I started to return and at this stage the players from both teams were

on the pitch but the match had not started yet.     I had to wait,

because the gangway towards the players' tunnel was crowded with

members of the media waiting for Brian CLOUGH to arrive.     He came down

and sat in his seat, and then I was able to walk back through the

players' tunnel, speaking to the stewards as I did so.     I went back

into the control roan and Harold GUEST said to me, in a concerned

voice, "Doug, they have opened the gates."      Roger HOULDSWOKIH was not

there.   I ran back through the players' tunnel, shouting as I ran into
                                                                   PAGE 17
                                                                   S671A

my personal radio, calling up the Chief Steward at the West end,

Stuart THORPE, asking him what is happening.     I ran into Graham

MACKRELL and someone I now know as Glen KIRTON, an FA.official, and

told them that the Police had opened the gates at the leppings Lane

end of the Ground.   Graham responded to the effect, "Can we get them

in, are we up to capacity?" and I responded that we were not.      I made

my way down towards the West Stand and then saw people climbing over

the perimeter fences at that end of the pitch.    At that point a

police officer went onto the pitch and asked the referee to stop the

game.



There was a mass of people around the perimeter fence behind the goal

area and I am not able to say whether the gates in the perimeter fence

were opened to allow people out.     I could see that seme people were

being lifted over the top of the fence, people appeared to be lying on

the ground injured, and many were wandering around in a dazed

condition and in obvious distress.     I helped a number of people in

that state back towards the players' tunnel area and into the South

Stand so that they could be comforted and helped.     I recall that one

of the assistant caretakers, named           said we needed more

stretchers from the tea bar.   I went in and got the 2 stretchers which

were stored on top of the cupboard in that bar so that they could be

used.



At one point, I recall that Brian CLOUGH stopped me and said, "Sir, I

want you to find the Directors and the FA officials and tell them I

am putting my players in the bath and taking them home." Mr CUUUGH

knew that I worked with the Club, for I had been introduced to him

earlier that day.    I was aware of the fact that there was a meeting

going on in the Director's room to discuss the situation, which was
                                                                 PAGE 18
                                                                 S671A

still unclear, and I went into that room to tell the Directors what

Mr CLOUGH had said.   The message, in effect, was that there could be

no thought given to re-ccranencing the game when the problem had been

dealt with - of course, at that time, the full nature of the tragedy

was not known.



It was at about that point I realised that there had been no

announcement over the Public Address System, in accordance with the

emergency arrangements and procedures laid down.   The South Yorkshire

Police are in charge of the Public Address System, in the sense that

they have an override system and the emergency procedures stipulated

that the Police would make the necessary broadcast.   I, therefore,

used my personal radio and instructed all stewards to unlock the

gates around the Ground.   I got replies from seme of them only, and I

recall I spoke to              and asked him to get round and ensure

that the gates were opened all the way around.



I recollect that I was also approached by Superintendent Roger

GREENWOOD who said he wanted to take Kenny DALGLIESH and Brian CLOUGH

to the Police control box to broadcast to the crowd in the Ground and

explain the position, and I took them there by a relatively

unobstructed route.



I subsequently had a request over the radio frcm the Head Stewards, to

allow the men to stand down, pending the crowd eventually leaving the

Ground through the gates which had been opened, but I refused that

request on the basis that their attendance was still required whilst

the crowd remained.



Since the tragic events on 15th April (150489), I have been able to
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S671A

        watch the video recording of the position at the gates at Leppings

        Lane through the Club's own static camera trained on those gates.     I

        now realise that the initial event when a crowd of spectators burst

        into the Ground through Gate C, which caused me to first leave the

        control room was, in fact, subsequently controlled, after a number

        of fans had gone in.   They apparently got in when the Police were

        atttempting to eject some of the spectators inside, through Gate C.

        It was after that, it seems, that the order was given by the Police

        for Gate C to be opened, to allcw spectators in.



        I have read this Statement and it is true and correct to the best of

        ny knowledge and belief.




                                                              D J LOCK SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME             DATE:    230589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

END OF REPORT
                                                                            STATION

N^p:           ROGER
               HOULDSWDRTH

ADDRESS:
                             SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: ___________________


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                R HOULD5WORTH (SIGNED)



           I am engaged on a contract basis with Sheffield Wednesday Football

           Club, dealing principally with the installation and maintenance of the

           computer turnstile monitoring system.      111616 are 16 fixed camera

           points around the ground which focus on turnstile entrances to the

           ground.   Each camera is linked to a video recorder which is

           located in a ccmputer rocm off the players' entrance.



           When a football match takes place at Hillsborough, I am normally

           engaged in the conputer roan, monitoring the accumulating crowd figure

           on the visual display unit.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was at the ground for the Semi-

           Final.    Present in the ccmputer roan with me were PC GUEST, Mr

           LOCKE (Security) and



           PC GUEST switched the video recorders on.      There is a monitor in the

           computer roan so that we can see each turnstile entrance. Of the 16

           cameras only one was inoperative on the day.
HOULDSWORTH            ROGER                                                  2




Due to the tragedy at the ground, I left the computer roan to assist.

PC GUEST remained in the roan.



I returned to the computer roan some time later, I think about half

past four (1630).     I recall ejecting the tapes but leaving them in

the machines.



The ground in general during the afternoon was in a state of bedlam.

People, supporters, relatives were everywhere.



I locked the ccmputer room at about 6.30 pm (1830), but had to return

shortly after that as a Police Sergeant requested a ccmputer print­

out.    I supplied that to him.



I locked the room and set the alarm and left the ground.



I returned to the ground at about 9 am (0900) on Sunday 16th April

1989 (160489).    The alarm to the room was operative and the room was

locked.     I checked the video recorders, as I realised the tapes would

be required.     I discovered that (2) two tapes were missing.     I made a

thorough search of the room but could not find the tapes.        I put the

remaining (14) fourteen tapes in a bag.



On Monday 17th April 1989 (170489) I put the 14 tapes in the office

safe.



I informed Mr McGEE, Chairman, and Mr MACKRELL, Secretary, that the

tapes were missing.
        H0ULD5W3RTH            ROGER                                              3




        I checked with PC GUEST and Mr LOCKE, but they had not seen the

       missing tapes.      I am not aware that any person removed the tapes for

       any legitimate reason.



       The tapes concerned are:-

        1. A blank tape from the camera that was not operating

       2. The tape covering turnstiles 9-12, entrance for the West Stand

           (above Leppings Lane terraces).



       Keys to computer roan are held by myself, Mr LOCKE and Mr MACKRELL.



        I am not aware that any unauthorised persons entered the computer roan

       on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).     There was no evidence of any

        forced entry to the roan at any time.



       The video recorders are not numbered to show which turnstiles they

       cover.      It is strange that the two tapes missing are adjacent to the



•
       Leppings Lane turnstiles.




                                                          R HOULDSWORTH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     280489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                DCI

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL DC
Incident    102   050190 OP227         DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                          STATEMENT NUMBER S668A

                                                                          Station

Surname            HOULDSWDRTH

Forenames          ROGER

Age                                        Date of birth

Address
                                 SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

Occupation

Telephone

 IC                Height                  Build

Hair colour

 I^r
  dr    type

 Eyes                                       Complexion

 Facial hair

 Glasses          Use                       Accent

 Number of Pages 12

 Dated            270589                                       R HOULDSWORTO Signed


           i, ROGER H0ULDSW0RTH, of                                     Sheffield

           will states



           I am                    up to the week commencing 10th April (100489) I

           was employed as Technical Director by M W (Technology) Limited of

           Sheffield.    I had been employed in that capacity for some 2 years

           until I resigned my position.    I hold an HNC qualification as an

           Electronics Engineer.    Prior to working with M W (Technology) Limited,

           I had previously worked for more than 10 years abroad, in the

           electronics field.



           When I returned from working abroad, in 1986 (000086), I was

           approached by the then Company Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club, Dick CHESTER, who asked me to assist in relation to



                                                                                      620
                                                                PAGE      2
                                                                S668A

certain problems the Club were having with their closed-circuit

television systems (CCTV). I understand the CCTV system then

installed, had been put in place by Philips Alarms in about 1984

(000084), but that Ccnpany had subsequently gone out of business.



I did look at the system at Mr CHESTER'S request and as then designed

and installed it was not working properly.



Shortly afterwards, I joined M W (Technology) Limited, and whilst

their employee, I completed my examination of the existing system and

re-designed it to improve the system and also the computer system

related to it.    I also re-designed the CCTV system which had been

installed by the Club for police use - this being a separate system

from that operated by the Club for its own purposes.



THE CLUB SYSTEM

This consisted of a number of static TV cameras situated at

strategic points around the ground.   As a result of my examining the

system, I arranged for sane additional cameras to be installed to

enhance it, particularly when the Spion Kop part of the Ground was

re-opened in 1986 (000086).



Being a static system, the cameras are in a fixed position and focus

on a particular fixed area.    They were in fact positioned at strategic

points to view the turnstile entrances, and there was also a camera

covering the players' entrance. Within the CCTV room, situated in the

South Stand near the players' entrance, there is a bank of 20 monitors,

plus a monitor for the ccmputer system.    This ccmputer system records

the number of spectators who come through the turnstiles for each

separate area of the ground.    Of the 20 monitors within the control
                                                                PAGE     3
                                                                S668A

roan, 19 display the scene as depicted in the Club's static system.

The remaining monitor is connected to the Police CCTV system.



Each of the monitors connected to the Club system is in turn connected

to a VCR so that we have the facility to tape the film shown on those

monitors, on a video tape.   Of the 19 static cameras however, 1 was

not in commission at the time because a wall had been constructed

after the camera had been installed, which obstructed that camera's

view of the relevant turnstiles.   The turnstiles in question were

those numbered 9-16 which will be referred to later in this

statement.



THE POLICE SYSTEM

This consisted of 5 fully functional remote controlled cameras - ie.

those cameras could pan-tilt through 360 degrees, and zoom on a 16/160

lens.   They are controlled frcm a Police control box which is fixed in

position at the south west comer of the Ground, adjacent to the

western end of the South Stand.    The cameras for the Police system are

positioned as follows:-

1 on the upper south west corner of the West Stand;

2 are positioned on the top of the South Stand;

 1 at about its centre point and the other to the eastern end of the

  stand at the top;

 1 at the top (rear) of the roof of the Spion Kop;

 1 at the south west comer of the ground, mounted on high near the

   score-board and close to the Police control box.



Within the Police control box there are 7 TV monitors, 5 of them are

 dedicated, 1 to each of the CCTV cameras.   The other 2 are connected

 to special time lapse video recorders, and you can switch frcm camera
                                                                 PAGE  4
                                                                 S668A

to camera by means of a passive switch within the control rocm so that

the officer in charge can record the scene being displayed on any 1

of the 5 cameras.   The remaining 2 monitors are used so that the

officer can check which of the 5 cameras are being recorded at any

given time.   PC Trevor BISHOP was the Officer who worked the CCTV

system for the Police, but it was not usual for him to be alone in the

control rocm - there might perhaps be 3 or 4 other officers in there

with him at any given time, for their own reasons - eg. to watch a

section of the crowd frcm the elevated position.



Within the Police control box, there is also a telephone land line

which is part of Sheffield Wednesday PC's internal telephone system,

and the Police have their own separate telephone land lines installed

also.



THE EVENTS OF SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL 1989 (150489)

Although I had previously resigned my position as Technical Director

of M W (Technology) Limited, I was asked by Graham MACKRELL to attend

at the Ground on that day, in case my assistance was required.    We

knew that the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool PC and Nottingham

Forest PC was a sell out, all-ticket match and I arrived at the Ground

fairly early on the Saturday morning, to check that everything was in

order.   I was in fact asked to rectify a fault on 1 of the Police CCTV

cameras, the one at the south west comer near the score-board.       I

checked it, found it was not functioning properly, and I made the

necessary adjustments to the iris controls within the camera and

thereafter checked that it was working OK.   Late in the morning I then

went to the CCTV Control Rocm where PC Harold GUEST was also in

attendance, as usual.   In addition, there was present Doug LOCK, the

Security Officer for Sheffield Wednesday PC and              of M W
                                                                PAGE  5
                                                                S668A

(Technology). PC GUEST, as a matter of routine, would have ensured

early in the morning that cassette tapes were inserted in the 19 VCRs -

1 of course would not be recording a picture because the camera was

out of action, but PC GUEST would nevertheless routinely load all 19.

The authorised crowd capacity figures for each section of the ground

was part of the data stored in the computer, and the display monitor

for the computer would show how many spectators came through each of

the turnstiles in operation as the day went on.   The system was so

designed that when the turnstiles for a particular area had admitted

90   capacity to that area, the total for that section would flash on

the TV screen and if, for example, one part of the Ground was being

filled up quickly and there was capacity in another part (subject to

segregation of supporters), that would enable the Police to be aware

that they should direct remaining supporters to a different set of

turnstiles.   Each of the turnstiles was also fitted with an infra-red

ray sensor, so that if spectators tried to climb over the turnstiles

but within the turnstiles enclosure, that would also be recorded on

the screen, voider a separate heading.   I produce (Exhibit 1) a copy of

the print-out frcm the computer monitor for the game in question.

Numbers climbing over the turnstiles within the enclosure would be

shown on the column headed 'Check Total.'   The first heading 'Gate'

is the turnstile number through which the fans entered, the 'Gate

Total' shows the number who entered through each of those turnstiles

and there will be sub-totals for each section.



I was present in the CCTV Control Rocm frcm about 11.30 am (1130)

that morning, when the turnstiles were opened and spectators were

entering the ground.   The Spion Kop and the South Stand had been

designated for Nottingham Forest supporters, and the North Stand and

West Stand (including Leppings Lane), were reserved for Liverpool
                                                                   PAGE    6
                                                                   S668A

supporters.   The authorised capacity

ground was as followss-

Spion Kop                      21,000

South Stand covered             5,524

South Stand uncovered           3,310

West Stand                      4,465

Leppings Lane                  10,100

North Stand                     9,702



By about 2.45 pm (1445) the Kop and the South Stand areas were

full of Nottingham Forest supporters but the North Stand and the West

Stand areas were only about 2/3 (two thirds) full at that time and it

was noticeable frcm the static camera covering the Leppings Lane

turnstiles, that there was a build up of fans outside the turnstiles

in that area.     I produce (Exhibit 2) a plan of the Ground showing the

Leppings Lane entrance to the west and the turnstiles (7 in number)

which acinit spectators to the terraced area of the West Stand are

designated A/G.     It will be seen that to the south of those turnstiles

runs a concrete path which leads around eventually to the South Stand.

That path is bounded on the one side (the south) by the river Don and

on the north side by a high brick wall.      Situated in that wall just

immediately beyond the turnstiles - ie. to the east of than - was an

exit gate designated Gate C which is a double gate of the concertina

metal-type which was kept closed.       One of the static cameras of the

CCTV system was situated on a post just east of that gate, the camera

being positioned so as to show the area of the turnstiles A/G.



It was through the monitor showing the scene depicted by that camera

that it was possible to see the build up of supporters outside the

turnstiles.     The Police had erected seme barriers across the pathway a
                                                                 PAGE  7
                                                                 S668A

short distance east of Gate C, so that spectators could not walk

along the pathway to get access to the South Stand.   The build up of

Liverpool supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance, was such that

seme had been forced beyond the entrance to the turnstiles outside

Gate C, and seme of those supporters were visible within the field of

vision of the static camera.



The position was such that I recall commenting, at perhaps 2.50 pm

(1450), "For God's sake why don't they delay the kick-off?" and I

made that comment in the presence of Doug LOCK and PC GUEST.     We were

all, as I recall, in general agreement that it would be sensible to

postpone the kick-off to enable people to get into the ground,

although I do not recall that anyone in the CCTV Control Rocm

attempted to contact the Police by radio or telephone to suggest that.

The Police, of course, were monitoring the situation themselves frcm

their own CCTV system, and in particular using the camera on the south

west comer of the West Stand roof.   We could, of course, see that

that camera was trained on Leppings Lane turnstiles because we were

able to monitor the Police pictures on one of the monitors within our

control roam, although we did not have the facility to record that

picture.



There came a time when Gate C appeared to be opened, and a number of

spectators rushed through into the 'reservoir' area between the

turnstiles and the rear of the West Stand.   An examination of the

video recording appears to indicate that this occurred when the Police

opened the gate in an effort to eject one of the spectators that way,

and a number of the fans pressed through frcm the outside.     It would

appear that several hundred got through before the gates were again

closed.
                                                                 PAGE  8
                                                                 S668A



Subsequently, the static camera picked up the fact that a number of

fans climbed up over the structure housing the turnstiles, and

jumped down into the reservoir area inside.   That is, it seems,

further indication of the pressures building up outside the

turnstiles, although a steady flow of spectators was caning through

those turnstiles at all times, in the normal way.



I recall that after the first influx of several hundred spectators

through Gate C, Doug LOCK left the CCTV rocm to go outside, presumably

to report the matter to the Club Secretary, Graham MACKRELL, and/or to

check the position for himself on the ground.



Seme time later, I am unsure of the exact time, I heard over the

Police radio (we had one in the CCTV rocm), a senior police officer

make a request that a gate be opened at the leppings Lane entrance.

Police control asked which gate he wished opened and he repeated his

request 2 or 3 times.    On about the fourth occasion he said, "Someone

is going to die here, open the gate," and the Police control replied,

"If someone is going to die open the gate, open the gate."



As appears from the video tape, recording the scene, the gate was then

opened, apparently by a uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans

flooded into the area.



At that point in time, I realised from the number already displayed

on the monitor as having entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles,

that a dangerous situation was being created.    I left the rocm and

went cfciwn the players' tunnel to the pitch and, just as I did so, the

referee stopped the match as I recall.    I looked over to the West
                                                                PAGE  9
                                                                S668A

Stand area and I saw fans climbing over the fence and my first thought

at that time was that it was a pitch invasion, and the match had been

stopped for that reason.   The perimeter fencing at that point is high

and not easy to climb over.   I sat down in the stand area behind the

dug-out, and watched the situation for a little time - perhaps 2 or 3

minutes - before I realised what really was occurring.   One of the

Sheffield Wednesday ground staff carte down the tunnel holding 2

stretchers and I grabbed one from him and ran across with it to help

ferry the injured people to the gymnasium area where the first aid

room was situated.   It was in fact only after I had ferried 3 or 4

injured people in that way, that I then realised that there were many

people who had died as a result, and the gym was in fact designated as

a temporary mortuary.



After helping on the pitch as much as possible, at about 4.15 (1615)

/4.30 pm (1630), I went back to the CCTV rocm where                and

PC GUEST were present, and I had a cup of coffee and a cigarette.

Subsequently, I took print-outs of the attendance from the computer

monitor, and ejected the tapes from the VCR's, leaving them in the

machines in the ejected position, so that I could later know exactly

which tape related to which monitor/area.



I normally take 3 print-outs from the computer for the attendance

figures, 2 of which go to the Secretary, Graham MACKRELL, and the

third will normally go to the ticket office staff.    However, on this

occasion, since it was an FA Cup Semi-Final, all-ticket, I did at

 first give the third print-out to PC GUEST, at his request, since he

said his superior officers might want it.   Later, however, Graham

MACKRELL said that he wanted to keep all 3 in his secure possession

and I, therefore, retrieved it from PC GUEST.
                                                                          PAGE 10
                                                                          S668A



       At about 6.15 (1815)/6.30 pm (1830), Graham MACKRELL asked me to

       ensure the video rocm was properly secured.                 md PC GUEST

       had left the ground at that time.    I went to the CCTV roan, looted the

       cupboard doors where the VCR's were and then locked the roan and

       activated the alarm system for the roan.    I kept the key in my

       possession overnight. On locking the cupboard doors where the VCR's

       were, I do not recall specifically checking that all the tapes were

       still in the machine, but I do recall that as I finally left the

       ground at about 7.30 pm (1930) that night, with my fiancee who works

       as a receptionist at the Club, I asked the Security Guard at the

       players' entrance, to ensure that no one entered the CCTV roan

       overnight.   He promised to do so.



       1 returned to the ground at 9 am (0900), on the Sunday morning and

       checked the roan where it was still locked and the alarm operative.

       However, when I opened up the roan and checked the VCR's, I found that

       2 tapes were missing.   One of those was the tape relating to the

       camera which looks over Gates 9 - 1 6 , and the other was frcm the VCR

       which had not been activated at the time.     I have no idea who removed

       the tapes - I mentioned it to the Security Officer, Doug LOCK, and he

       was surprised and had no knowledge of it.



       I have read this statement and it is correct to the best of my

       knowledge and belief.




                                                         R HOULDSWDRTH SIGNED

^^TEMENT TAKEN
™        PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   160589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
                                                                                  STATION




ADDRESS:
                                       SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S6

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:                    (MXJNDSMAN


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                                     (SIGNED)



           I live                                       at the above address.   I am

           employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as                Groundsman, a

           position I have held for 10 years. For a year before that I was

                               Groundsman for the same club.



           My   <-hrt-i«=>c;   consist of total maintenance of the playing surface at the

           football club, plus the track area around the pitch.            This also

           includes any administration duties connected with this task, such as

           buying fertilizers and grass seed.



           During the season (football season), when there is a full heme team

           match on, I would normally be working at the ground every day of the

           week from about 7.30 am (0730) till 4.30 pm (1630).



           On the noming of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I arrived for work

           at 7 o'clock (1900), just in case there were any extra problems.



           Everything connected with the playing surface had been done - the




                                                                                             630
marking out of the white lines had been done on the Friday.    All I

needed to do with my staff was water the playing surface and put up

the goal nets.



I remained around the pitch all morning, to check how much water was

put on the grass.    Mid-morning the coach from Nottingham Forest who

were playing Liverpool that afternoon in the FA Cup Semi-Final, came

to me and asked how much water I had put on the pitch.



At about 1 pm (1300) I went with Graham MACKRELL, the Club Secretary,

to see the referee, two linesmen and reserve official in the changing

roan, to confirm everything connected with the pitch was in order.



This only took a few minutes and I came back down the players' tunnel

onto the track and I saw that there were spectators starting to

arrive at both ends.



For quite some time I remained around the bottom of the players'

tunnel.     I recall even then that it seemed to me that despite the

event being a big occasion, there didn't seem to be as much bustle of

people underneath the South Stand as there should have been.     I

stopped around this location for about half an hour, and I have

marked this location on a map of the ground I have been shewn as

point Bl.     I now produce this map as (Exhibit No     ) (Reference DWB

1).   Fran this point I was able to see the coming and going back

towards the office under the South Stand.



Since I have worked for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, I have

attended all the big matches, the semi-finals that have been played
here, including the equivalent game which involved the same two teams

in 1988 (000088).   Everything was the same, the dressing rooms, the

lot.



When I say that at or just after 1 pm (1300)it didn't seem as busy

under the South Stand, I mean in comparison to the game in 1988

(000088) when there was a lot more activity and a lot more people in

the ground early on, Police, television, people and the like.



At 1.35 pm (1335) Iwalked along the track in front    of the South Stand

towards the Leppings Lane end and checked that the advertising boards,

which had been moved forward for the day, were in their proper

position and not obstructing the sprinkler heads along the edge of the

pitch.   While I was   there, aLiverpool supporter in Pen 3, aged about

19 yrs, with ginger    hair anda spotty face, wearing a Liverpool top,

spoke to me through the fencing and said, "The ground's looking well."

He was stood just to the left of gate 3.



I then made my way back to the players' tunnel again.



At that time, about 1.40 pm (1340), the Liverpool supporters were very

thin in all the areas allocated to them, that is the West Stand and

the North stand.    This again, I compare to 1988 (000088).   Although

the Kop end is so much larger, there were a lot of Nottingham Forest

supporters in that end and they were a lot more vocal.



I then went up the tunnel, the players' tunnel for about half an hour.



Normally for league games, each respective manager and team captains
for both teams, should see the referee three quarters of an hour

before the kick-off and hand in to him the team sheet, plus a copy of

all the players and substitutes nominated to play that day.



I was aware that for FA Cup matches this is reduced to half an hour

before the kick-off.   Despite this, Mr Kenny DALGLISH did not appear

to know this fact and came to me and asked me where the referee was so

that he could hand in his team sheet.



I then went to look for the referee and found him outside the

directors' entrance with all his officials behind the South Stand.

The referee said 'If they want to get it all over and done with, all

well and good'. He then came back into the South Stand and saw Mr

DALGLISH for his team sheet.



A ginger haired fellow from Nottingham Forest also handed their team

sheet in.



I then stayed around the top of the players' tunnel frcm 2.20 pm

(1420) to about 2.45 pm (1445).   I then made my way to the bench

allocated to me with one other member of my staff,              and

two people, a man and a wcman from the advertising company, BIKMITS,

who look after the advertising hoardings around the ground for that

day.   I have also marked the locations of this bench on the map of

the ground, exhibit DWB 1, as point B2.



I sat down and by this time the players frcm both teams were out on

the pitch.
                                                                          5


I watched the warm ups of the teams to see if the ball bobbled about

or ran smoothly.     After a couple of minutes I was satisfied that the

pitch was alright.



I looked over to the Leppings Lane end at I would say about 2.55 pm

(1455). The West Stand seating area looked full, but I noticed that in

Pens 1, 2, 6 and 7 there was still quite a lot of room and I could

still see steps so there was nowhere near as many people on those

terraces as there should have been.



On previous years by about 2.30 pm (1430) all these terraces would

have been comfortably full.



I saw that Pens 3 and 4 were packed; they were full.



The match kicked off at 3 pm (1500) and even then I said to

        "There's something wrong in that centre area."



Straight off frcm the kick-off, Liverpool were attacking the Kop end

so the play was up near to where I was sitting.



It's just cone to me now, I recall, that at about 2.40 pm (1440) I

remember seeing the spectators in Pen 3 knocking what looked like a

multi-coloured beach ball about the Pen above their heads and also

young fans, 16 yr olds onwards were junping over the dividing fence

between Pen 2 and 3, frcm Pen 2 into Pen 3 using the crush barrier

that runs through the fencing to stand on.



Going back to just after the kick-off, I believe that Liverpool hit
the crossbar, but my attention was drawn to what was going on behind

the goal in the West Stand.



Normally at the back of Pens 3 and 4 you can see a line of policemen

and the flat concrete area leading back into the tunnel is clear of

spectators. But on this occasion this area was a sea of bodies and

it seemed to me more spectators were trying to get into Pen 3 than

Pen 4.



All these people were surging mainly into Pen 3.   This was within the

first five minutes of the game.   At this time there were people

junping over the fencing frcm Pen 4 onto the track.



Two of the adverts in front of this area had been disturbed, so the

two advertising people with me were walking round towards the West

Stand to rectify this.



These people at that time did not seem injured but were encroaching

onto the grass behind Bruce GROBBELAR's goal.



Then more people came over the top of the fencing frcm Pen 3 as well.

Seme extra Police started to walk towards this trouble frcm the

comer of the Kop and the North Stand.    There weren't many policemen

already at this trouble at that time, about 7, one for each gate.



These people then started to ccme onto the pitch, the playing area as

the play was over in front of the North Stand, and I saw a policeman

with a flat cap run over from somewhere in front of Pen 3 onto the

pitch to the referee.    The referee blew his whistle and play stopped.
                                                                              7


I thought it was a pitch invasion and I walked across the pitch to

the goal area near the West Stand because at that time I was

concerned that the goal nets might get ripped.       As I got up to the

goal line just to the left of      the goalfacing the terracing, Isaw

three people through the wider mesh fencing at that point.       Their

faces were bluey purple and squashed against the fencing.       They seemed

to be blown up and fat.     I've   not seenanybody dead before but       there

was no movement and I knew it      was serious.    These three people I saw

were somewhere between fourteen to seventeen year olds, but I couldn't

even tell whether they were boys or girls.



There was a lot of people walking about then, nobody was lying on the

pitch.     I went straight to the players' entrance to get help.     I sent

one of my staff,                   to that goal to look after the netting.

I spoke to a policeman at the players' tunnel and told him it was very

serious.     I don't know who the policeman was. I went up the tunnel

and it was obvious that people around me didn't know how serious it

was at that time.     The players had come off the pitch.     I went into

the heme teams shewer area and I was sick.        I don't drink but it was

what I had seen.     I then came back into the corridor under the South

Stand and I saw a policeman with a lad, aged about 10 years, in his

arms.    This lad was wearing a Liverpool shirt and he said he was

worried about his dad.     From the policeman it would seem that his

father was dead.     We took this lad into the physiotherapist's room

and I lay him down on the bed as he was complaining about pains in

his rib cage.     I went to the kitchen for seme ice and put seme in an

ice bucket and brought it back to the physiotherapist's room,
                                                                               8


             was by this time in his room, so I left the rocm and came

back down the players' tunnel where I saw Kenny DALGLISH.        I asked Mr

DALGLISH if he would see the young lad as he was very distressed.         Mr

DALGLISH said he had already been in to see him.



I then made my way back to behind the West Stand goal area.       By that

time there were lots of people on the pitch right up to the half-way

line.



Just to the left of the left-hand upright of the goal, again facing

the terracing, a man was lying on his side.        He was wearing a red top

and someone, I don't know who, said he was dead.       His arms were normal

colour so I couldn't believe it.       He didn't have a coat over his face

or anything.     It was pandemonium.    I saw a lad with a white sports

shirt staggering about, who had come over the top of the fencing.         He

had blood all down his front where he had caught himself on the

spikes on top of the fencing.     There were so many people lying on the

pitch.    An ambulance was behind the goal at this time.      I saw

         tending to a young lad behind the goal.     I don't know what he

was wearing.     People were breaking off the advertising boarding and

using them as stretchers to carry people off down towards the ramp in

the comer of the North Stand and the Kop.



I saw                and an ambulanceman pulling at the wider mesh

fencing to the terraces. They pulled it back and forward until it

gave way.



Within minutes, the pitch was filling up.       Two Liverpool lads aged

about 18 or 19, both wearing Liverpool tops were dragging a big young
                                                                         9


lad, at least 12 stone, aged mid-twenties frcm the Leppings Lane end

out across the pitch to about the six-yard line.    I helped them to

carry him a bit further and he had a big beer belly on him and smelt

really of strong ale; he smelt terrible.    This lad also had a red

Liverpool shirt on and a Liverpool scarf.   Also he had jeans on that

had been washed very light coloured.   He had dark, thick hair, not

well groomed.



When we lay him down on his left side facing the goal, the other two

supporters walked back for somebody else.



I felt his pulse in his neck but I couldn't find it at all, so I tried

his wrists but I still couldn't find it.    He felt cold to touch

although it was a warm day.   His face all the time was changing

colour, grey to dark purple within the space of a few minutes.



I knew he was dead so I turned his face to the ground and left him.

I have marked the place that I left him on the map of the ground as

point B3.



I then helped five people to carry a man aged perhaps mid-twenties

but I didn't see his face.    They were trying to carry him on a piece

of advertising boarding frcm about the 18-yard area towards the North

Stand and Kpp comer.     I have marked the position he was in when I

first saw him as point B4 on the map of the ground.   This man was

wearing a dark blue short Parka-type jacket without a hood which was

hanging off him and smart casual type trousers. I don't know what

colour they were.   I would guess he was about 11 stone and going

towards six foot tall.   His hair was well kept and dark.
We carried him with great difficulty, because the board was bending,

as far as we could to within 20 yards of the comer of the Kop

because it was very congested there.     Three of the lads with him then

took him off the board and I made my way back towards the Leppings

Lane end.   By that time there was a cordon of policemen right across

the half-way line.



I noticed then that the Nottingham Forest fans were behaving

themselves and were applauding the Liverpool fans who were carrying

people to the comer of the Kop.



I don't remember hearing the code words, "Will Mr MEADOWS go to the

secretary's office," coming over the Tannoy, but it was that noisy I

could easily have missed it.



I heard bits of messages come over the Tannoy but I couldn't make out

anything definite of what was said.    I heard someone say over the

Tannoy to get off the grass but this resulted in a lot of jeering and

swearing frcm the Liverpool end.



When I got to near the 18-yard area somebody stopped and and asked me

if I could get any water.   I haven't a clue what time it was then.     I

then went into the restaurant kitchen in the South Stand and got seme

water in a bucket and some paper napkins and back out on the pitch.

The bottom of the tunnel was packed with Liverpool people shouting

abuse, swearing nastily and blaming the Police. Seme of them had to

be restrained by the Police.   I could see that ninety per cent of

these were really the worse for drink.    One in particular, a stocky
                                                                            11


lad, was very drunk.     He had got as far as the enquiry hatch under the

South Stand and I had to fetch a Sergeant to get him out.      He was

wearing a red top, had fair hair and carrying a paper cup of something.

He was very upset and mouthy.     He was eventually ushered away by seme

stewards.    The crowd in front of the tunnel in front of the directors'

box area was getting bigger and bigger and getting more and more

aggressive towards the Police.     Seme of these supporters were holding

interviews with the television and radio crews on the pitch and around

that area.     I remember seeing to people who were distressed on the

pitch and giving them drinks of water but I'm told by a friend of

mine,                 a gateman for the Kop end, that I was walking

around with a glazed look on my face and he took the bucket off me but

I don't remember this at all.



I remember going back into the office area into a side rocm.      Somebody

took me, but I don't knew who.    When I got there,               was

there.    Someone tried to give me a drink of alcohol but I don't touch

it.     It was awful and I spit it out.   I broke down and cried then.

I was trembling, in a bit of a state.     I came out again onto the pitch

and by that time groups of bobbies were standing about and officials

were on the pitch frcm the Football League and firemen.     There were

very few supporters then, just a few wandering about Pens 3 and 4,

looking at the barrier that had collapsed and seemed to be looking for

lost items among the debris on the terraces.



With regard to actually when the barrier broke in Pen 3, I can't say

that I saw it break but I did see the big surge down the Pen 3

terracing which seemed to come frcm the back, radiating frcm the

tunnel, and that there weren't any barriers to stop them.      I thought,
                                                                           12


'Christ, where are they all caning frcm.' There were as many people

coming onto the terracing.   I saw where all the advertising boards had

been stashed behind the Leppings Lane goal.   It mast have been after

6 pn (1800) by then.



'Hie Chairman was in the centre circle with Graham MACKRELL

        another director and I broke down again in front of them.

We both had a good weep, the chairman as well.   Graham told

           to take me back to the office.



I just stayed there then till I went heme.



At no time at all did I go behind the West Stand.



At no time was I subjected to any violence by anyone.



I saw a lot of abuse directed mainly at the Police, but none was

directed at me.   The possible reasons for this terrible incident

happening, I would say, may be the late comings of Liverpool

supporters and the lack of Police manpower at the back of Pens 3 and 4

and at the end of the tunnel between the West Stand and 'C' gate.     I

can only comment really on these from what people have told me.     I do

feel that there would have been far more fatalities if the Police

hadn't acted so quickly and also the St John's Ambulance people as
                                         SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACES

          TIME:         DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           SGT

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 017 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                          (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address and I am employed at Sheffield Wednesday

        Football Club as



        I have been employed in this capacity for the past 5 years.     I was

        employed in this capacity at the equivalent semi-final in 1988

           (000088).   I was on duty as                     on the day of the

        disaster, Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489)



        My tours of work are normally 8 am (0800) to 6 pm (1800) on a match

        day, but on this particular date, I did not leave until about 8 pm

           ( 2000) .



        When I arrived at the ground at 8 am (0800) on 15th April 1989

        (150489), I entered the ground, had a cup of tea, and then with Dave

        BARBER                     I went to the Leppings Lane end to move and

        re-position sane Portacabins on that area.



        I think there were four Portacabins, three for programme sellers to
      use to sell their programmes from, and I think one to be used by the
      Police.



     The Portacabins had arrived sometime mid-week and ted been taken to

     the back of the West Stand and left there to be relocated.

     Portacabins like this I think were used on the area at last year's

     semi-final, but I think there were only two then.



     On the afternoon of Friday 14th April 1989 (140489), Mr             who
     is in charge of the programs sellers, had asked us to help position

     the Portacabins on the morning of the match and this is what me,

                were doing when Mr           and a police officer, who I think
     was a sergeant, cane to us.



       ------- and the police officer told us where to place the

    Portacabins.      We put one alongside the gate, which was open, in the

    gap in the brick wall dividing the rear of Leppings Lane, running fran

    the rear of the West Stand to the turnstiles A to G.     We put two near

    the metal fencing and metal gate which divide the West Stand area and

£   walkway leading to the rear of the North Stand.     One of these two was
    the Police Portacabin.



    We placed two other Portacabins on the other side of the metal fencing

    on the walkway side, leading to the rear of the North Stand.     These two

    were placed either side of a closed metal gate in the fencing.



    I have indicated the final positions of the Portacabins on a sketch

    plan of the ground area.     (I now produce the sketch plan (Exhibit Ref
       f 1) (Exh No           ) ).




                                                                                 644
                                                                        3




After positioning the Portacabins, me Dave

and the police officer, by the Portacabins, and the three of us began

our work on the pitch.



Hie Portacabin which we placed against the dividing wall at the back

of the West Stand, was near to the concertina gates and I did comment

to the others that I thought it was a bit close to these concertina

exit gates for when people would be leaving the ground.   I now know

these concertina gates to be gate B.



Ife, Dave_________ did our work mainly around the playing area until

about 11 am (1100) or 11.30 am (1130) when we went to the players'

lounge in the South Stand to P corridor.



Later               «ent to the gymnasium at the back of the North

Stand and had a shower.



We left the gymnasium at about 12 midday (1200) and walked down the

ramp between the North Stand and Spion Kop onto the perimeter track.



I did not notice at this time if the Penistone Road turnstiles were

open, but as I walked in front of the Spion Kop, I saw that there were

a few Nottingham Forest fans already in the Spion Kop stand.   There

was less than 50 fans there.



Me and                         who we had met up with in the gymnasium,

walked round the perimeter and up into the players' entrance on the

South Stand side.   As we walked towards the players' entrance, I
                                                                         4


glanced up to the Leppings Lane stand and terraces, and saw about ten

supporters, who I assumed to be Liverpool supporters, in the centre

terrace sections numbers 3 and 4.



I did not notice any supporters at this time in the West Stand or

North or South Stands.



We went up the players' entrance and met                        by the

dressing roans area and he asked me,                to take seme

chairs up to the BBC Television gantry above the South Stand by the

clock.   We went up into the gantry and I had a clear view of the whole

of the ground.



This would be about 12.15 pm (1215).   I don't think at this time there

were any more fans in the ground than there had been 15 minutes

earlier when I had walked round the track.   We stayed up the gantry

about ten minutes and then we went back down to the dressing rooms'

area.



I then stayed in the dressing roams' area for seme time and,

occasionally, I would walk down the players' tunnel to the pitch area.

Between 2.30 pm (1430) and 2.45 pm (1445), I went down to the pitch

area and right up to 2.45 pm (1445) I noticed that the Spion Kop area

had filled up with Nottingham Forest supporters, but I noticed that,

strangely, the part of the North Stand allocated to Liverpool

supporters, was emptyish and also the Leppings L a m terraces, 3 and 4

terraces, were full but the side sections were still relatively

empty.
I saw a few Liverpool supporters climbing over the dividing metal

fencing fran the side terracing section 2 on the Leppings Lane side,

into terracing section 3.



It seamed that the Liverpool supporters wanted to get into terraces

behind the goal where the most noisy supporters tend to get.



I noticed that the gates in the front fencing of the Leppings Lane

terraces were closed, which is normal practice.     I did not see if the

gates were locked with padlock and chains, but earlier in the morning

they had been unlocked because we went through them to get to the back

of the West Stand.



I do not know whose responsibility it is to unlock these fencing gates.

I did not notice any crushing, surging or any distress, in the

Leppings Lane terraces.     At this time the fans seemed quite happy.



I then walked back off the ground up the players' tunnel and at

2.55pm (1455), I went into the room at the rear of the South Stand by

the players' entrance. I cedi this the control room, it's where the

television screens are, which show pictures fran closed-circuit TV

cameras around the ground, mainly in the turnstile areas and outside

the ground.   I think they are Police cameras.



I went into this room on my own and in the room was Roger HOIDSWORTH

who ted installed the cameras and works in the room.     There was also

one uniformed police officer in there.     This officer is in this office

on a regular basis on match days.
When I went into the office, I asked Roger how many supporters were

in the ground up until then.   He said about 46,000.    Roger has a

screen linked to the turnstiles which updates the crowd attendance

every few seconds.



I was just glancing at the TV screens and noticed frcm one screen that

there were a lot of fans outside the Leppings Lane entrance. These

supporters were backing right back frcm the leppings Lane turnstiles,

right back through the entrance gates into the roadway.     They were so

densely packed and populated, I would think it was into the thousands.

It was too densely populated for me to see if anything was happening

in the crowd.



I could not see if any police officers were in the crowd or nearby.

At this time I heard a Police message caning through the hand-held

Police radio of the policeman who was with Roger.      I heard very

clearly on the Police radio a man's voice who I assumed was a police

officer.   The voice said something to the effect that there was a

terrible congestion and then the voice said, "There's going to be sane

serious trouble if nothing is done."   At one stage, the voice

mentioned the Lappings Lane area.   The voice came through four or five

times in about one and a half minutes, with more added on each time.



A different voice then came over the radio saying, "I've got 100 or so

men in the Sports Hall.   Do you want me to deploy them?"     A third

voice on the radio then said, "No.”



The voice frcm the sports tell had repeated his message twice before

he got the reply, "No."
                                                                          7




The first voice that I had heard on the radio during his first four

or five messages, I remember the voice asking permission for a gate to

be opened to ease the congestion.



I did not hear any reply to that request.



This request for permission to have a gate opened was made two or

three times within a minute and a half.     He was very distressed.



Shortly after the radio messages, I looked at the television screen at

the Leppings Lane entrance again.   This was through a different TV

screen.



The view from this camera was frcm a high position, looking over the

turnstiles A to G and into the main entrance section.



I noticed that a concertina gate, one of the lower ones by turnstiles

A to G, was half open, both sides open 50 per cent.     I saw that

supporters were pouring through the gate.     As they got through the

gate, they went out of view of the camera.



I could not see where the supporters went after going through the gate.

Seme of the supporters were running.



At this, I left this room as I had other jobs to do.     I did not know

at this time that a disaster was going to happen.



Just before I left the room, I heard a loud cheer frcm the supporters
in the ground.   I thought the cheer was for the teams going out onto

the pitch.



I went into the home team's dressing-room to wash the pots.



About five minutes after I had left Roger's room, I went down the

players' tunnel and into my seat behind the home teams' dug-out to the

left of the players' tunnel.   Also sitting there was

                      the Reserve official, an FA official, and two

duty electricians,                and a man called      they work for

                 Electricians, Sheffield.



By this time the match ted begun.    Liverpool were playing towards the

Spion Kop end.



My attention was immediately drawn to the Leppings Lane end terraces

because I saw quite a few people climbing over the front fencing of 3

and 4 sections of the terraces into the perimeter track.



I saw that in sections 1 and 2 of these terraces, there was quite a

lot of room at the front.



I didn't notice the situation in sections 5 and 6 of the terraces.

To me it looked as though they were absolutely packed solid in

sections 3 and 4 of the terraces.



By this time, there were quite a lot of people climbing over the

fencing fran sections 3 and 4 of the terraces onto the edge of the

pitch.
                                                                          9




There were a few Police standing on the track, facing the fencing,

trying to keep the fans, who were climbing over, fran going on the

pitch.   I saw one policeman stood on the low wall against the fencing

facing the fans.     I don't know if he was helping people over or

stopping them.     I couldn't see.



At this, I left my seat and went and stood at the bottcm of the

players' tunnel, in case I had to go and unlock the dressing-roans and

referee's room in case the game was stopped.



I stood watching the Leppings Lane end.    More and more supporters were

climbing over the fencing from the crowd and onto the track.    By this

time there were a lot of supporters milling around the edge of the

pitch, sane were collapsing to the floor or sitting down on the pitch.



I could not describe any of those who appeared injured because of the

number of people there and because I was too far away.



I could not see the Police at that end because of the number of people

in that area.



Because it was so crowded, I could not see if anyone was being treated,

and I didn't see any St John's or ambulancemen.



After a couple of minutes or so, I saw a policeman in a flat cap run

from the left-hand side of the Leppings Lane side goal, out of the

crowd, diagonally across the pitch towards the referee, waving his arm

as if to ask for the match to be stopped.
                                                                        10




Because I thought the match would be stopped, I went up the players'

tunnel and unlocked the dressing-rooms and referee's room.



I immediately went back down the players' tunnel towards the pitch and

stood at the bottcm, looking again at the Leppings Lane end.



The players and officials were now walking off the pitch towards the

players' tunnel and the players went up the tunnel but the referee and

linesmen stayed at the bottom of the tunnel.



The referee asked if I could get seme tracksuit tops for them to put

on and I went with            to his kit cupboard and got four

sweatshirts and took them back to the officials.



I was there another two or three minutes when Dave BARBER, H ead

Groundsman, came running across the pitch fran the Leppings Lane end

and he shouted to me and             to go to the Leppings L a m end to

look after the goal-posts and net.



Me and       went over to the Leppings Lane end and stood by the goal

netting.



By this time there were a lot of people, I can't say how many, lying

down or sitting down round the back of and either side of the goal

netting and around the goal-mouth.



The number of people in the area had now grown considerably.
                                                                       11


There was still people coming over the fencing and by now the gates in

the fencing were open and people seemed to be ccxning through those

gates.



There was quite a few police officers stood on the wall in front of

the fencing, helping people over.   Also people outside were pulling at

the fencing.



Because of the amount of people about, I couldn't see if any Police

were actually at the gates in the fencing.



There was a constant noise from the supporters but I couldn't tell

what they were saying, but I heard one person say, "There's people

dead in there, there's people dead in there."



I saw a young teenage boy, in his early teens, lying on the edging of

the grass to the left of the goal as you look firm the pitch, but to

the rear of the goal. He was having mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and

cardiac treatment, pressing on his chest, I believe by a St John's

ambulance person. There was a group of Liverpool supporters around him

saying, "Come on, you cow pull through, please, please pull through."



I can't remember anything about his description.   I think he was

wearing jeans. An ambulance then came across the pitch firm the ramp

entrance between the Rop and the North Stand.   It drove round the back

of the Leppings Lane ground.   He had his siren on to clear a passage.



I lost sight then of the boy who was being treated.
                                                                            12


I then moved across in front of the goal to the left-hand side of the

goal, looking fran the pitch, and I saw another, a young lad, lying on

the grass more or less on the line to the left side of the goad.       He

was younger than the first lad I described.    I would say he was about

10 or 11 years old.    He was lying on his back.   No one was treating

him.   I went and knelt at his side and said, "Are you alright?"     There

was no response. His eyes were closed.      I can't describe the boy

because by now I was in a state of shock.



As I was kneeling at the boy's side, I felt a tap on my shoulder.       I

glanced behind me and a man said to me, "Try and help somebody who's

got a chance." I can't describe the man who said this.



So I got up and walked into the penalty area where there were a lot of

people lying down but conscious, but very sweaty and exhausted.



I asked seme if they were alright and seme said they had injured legs

or injured arms.    They were all male persons, but again, I can't

remember any descriptions at all.



By this time, there were just so many people all over the pitch it was

absolute bedlam, and by now supporters were beginning to carry people

on advertising boards which had been broken down from behind the goal

towards the ramp area between the Kop and the North Stand.



Then I went back towards the players' tunnel and when I was on the

pitch just inside the Leppings Lane end of the pitch, I saw a

Liverpool fan standing there, shouting at people stood at the bottom

of the tunnel.     He was about 25 years old, about 5'8” tall, medium
                                                                           13


build, with dark blue denim jeans and lighter blue sweatshirt with a

couple of buttons at the neck.    It had long sleeves.    He had darkish

brown hair, short cut, going thin firm the front towards the back.

He may have had a bit of a moustache, I'm not sure.      He did not wear

spectacles.   He had a Liverpool accent and I would recognise him

again.



I went up to him and      asked him if he was alright.    He was facing         me and

he shouted, "It's them bastards, the FA.     We should have had the big

end." He called the       Liverpool chairman atight bastard.    I told          himto

calm down and go and      try to help somebodywho might be injured.



By this time,              had come up to us.     I said to the supporter,

"It's not our fault."    He said to me, "Just 'cause you've got a

fucking tracksuit on doesn't mean you can tell me what to do."       I told

him to go away and try and help somebody.       He then hit out at me with

the palm of his right hand, striking me on the forehead, just above

the bridge of my nose, and above my glasses. The blow knocked me

backwards slightly.     I wasn't injured.



I just walked away with         and stood at the bottom of the players'

tunnel.



The supporter still stood on the pitch just shouting.       When he was

talking to me, I could smell strongly, stale beer on his breath.

I don't think he was drunk as such but he had been drinking.



I then walked with         up the tunnel, intending to get some water to

take outside but half-way up the tunnel, I just cracked up and began
                                                                        14


crying because of what was happening and what I'd seen.



At the top of the tunnel Brian CLOUGH, Manager of Notts Forest, was

there and he put his arm round me and consoled me.



I went into one of the offices for a drink.   I stayed there about five

minutes and pulled myself together, then want out and saw

outside.   He had a big urn of water and I took it with him down the

players' tunnel.



I then saw the Police had formed a line of officers across the width

of the pitch facing Leppings Lane end and just in that half.



There was now thousands of supporters on the pitch on the Liverpool

end and people were taking water from us to drink or mop their brows.



We put the urn and plastic cups on the pitch and walked back up the

players' tunnel and went into our office.



On the way up to the office, I saw a kiddy, a teenager, being carried

up the tunnel on a stretcher I think, and he was taken into the

physiotherapist's office.   I cannot describe this person, or who was

carrying him.



I spent about ten minutes in the office before going back to the pitch.

I don't know what time it was, I just lost track of time.



I went through the Police cordon, and by now, most wooden adverts had

been ripped from round the ground and people were being carried away
                                                                            15


on the boards.



Roger HCHJDSWORIH, who works in the TV control room, came up with a

stretcher, and us two and about 3 Liverpool supporters, lifted an

injured man onto the stretcher.    He was lying on the pitch towards the

middle.   I can't ranariber if he was conscious.   He was in his late

20's that's all I can remember.    Roger and the 3 Livepool fans took the

man on the stretcher towards the gymnasium.



I helped lift another man onto an advertising board with seme more

supporters. This man had been lying near to the other man I mentioned

above; I can't describe him.    They took him towards the gymnasium.



I picked up some urns off the pitch and took them back to the offices.

In the main general office, I saw the youth who had hit me earlier

sobbing his heart out, being comforted by one of the office girls.



I went into the roan of this office and saw there                     who

was crying and                 one of the apprentices.     He was also

crying.   We had a chat about what had happened.



I had no more dealings with anybody outside on the pitch and had no

more dealings with any injured or dying people.



I finished at the ground at about 7.45 pm (1945).        tfy wife had to cone

and collect me.



I did not make any formal complaint to anyone about the Liverpool

supporter hitting me, and I do not wish to make any complaint against
                                                                                 16


       him.



       There's nothing else I can acid, except that it distressed me very much




       I can't say what really caused the disaster.     I don't think you can

       put it down to one thing.   I think it was a culmination of a number

       of things caning together on the day.



        I can't say if there was much difference in the handling of the match

       this year to the same match last year.   The only thing I can say is

       how quiet is was at the Leppings Lane end before kick-off.     It didn't

       seem to fill up at that aid as quickly as last year.

        (Signed)




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:    110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE!

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                    POL PC      H'
                                                                              STATION

N^:

ADDRESS:
                 SHEFFIELD

A ® / d a k :of b i r t h *

OCCUPATION:      I


Who states:- This statement consisting of 023 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                                 (SIGNED)



           I am a single man, living at the above address with ray parents.        I am

           employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on




           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I arrived at the football ground

           at about 7.45am (0745).         I went into the ground via the players' and

           officials' entrance. I then went to the caretaker's room and took off

           ray coat.    A short time later, I walked down the players' tunnel around

           the pitch to the groundsman's hut which is behind the North Stand.

                              , the groundsman,                                  were

           already in the hut.         I sat down for about five minutes and read the

           paper.      The three of us then decided to go and move the Portacabins

           which had been left behind the West Stand.



           On Friday 14th May 1989 (140589) I had seen a man I believe to be the

           head programme seller and he had told me that we had to put one of

           the three Portacabins which were behind the West Stand, under the

           stairway leading to the upper seating part of the West Stand opposite




                                                                                          659
turnstiles 1 to 16.    One of the other Portacabins he told us to put

next to the dividing wall behind the West Stand near to the roller-

shutter gate, also near to turnstiles 1 to 16.     The other Portacabin

he told us did not have to be moved as it was already in its correct

position.



Itself,                                   f*snt to the rear of the West

Stand to move the Portacabins at about 8.10am (0810) on Saturday 15th

April 1989 (150489).     In order to get to the rear of the West Stand,

we left the groundsman's hut and came down the gap between the North

Stand and the Kop aid and onto the track.    We then walked down the

track next to the North Stand to the gates at the front of the West

Stand behind the goal.    By gates, I mean the gates that are in the

perimeter fencing which prevents people getting onto the pitch.     We

got onto the West Stand terracing by going through gate number four

which was unlocked.    We walked up the terracing and then went down the

tunnel which leads to the area between the West Stand and the

turnstiles. All three of us then started to move one of the

Portacabins to the position we were told to put it, that is under the

stairway leading to the seating in the upper part of the West Stand.



As we finished putting it into the position we were told, the

                       came up with the chief programme seller I had

seen the day before and a policeman.    The policeman then informed us

that we would have to move the Portacabin frcm where we had just put

it as it could be a danger to the people working in it and it could

be broken into as supporters could get all around it.     He then told us

a number of places we could put it, and it was finally decided to put

it near to the entrance to the terracing with the back of the
Portacabin right up against the West Stand.    I have shown this

Portacabin on the map in blue highlighter.     I produce this map in

evidence (Ref No.       1)( Exhibit No.         ).



We had earlier moved the other Portacabin we were told to move into

its position, that was next to the dividing wall behind the West Stand

near to the roller-shutter door and gates 1 to 16.       I have shown this

Portacabin on the map in yellow highlighter.



After we had moved the second Portacabin to its correct position, next

to the West Stand, I asked the policeman if the other Portacabin,

which was next to the Police Portacabin, was alright.       He stated it

would be as it was next to the Police Portacabin, so we left it where

it was.



The police officer asked us if we had a table the Police could use in

their Portacabin, so myself and                went to the old bars

underneath the North Stand as we remembered there was a table in one

of them.   We eventually found an old glass-topped table in one of the

bars.   We took the table back with us and on the way back we saw a

police officer.         asked him if it would be alright to put the

table into the Police Portacabin and he said yes.            and me then

took the table to the Police Portacabin and as it was unlocked, we

went inside and left it in there,                     had gone to do

another job at this stage so with                    I went through the

tunnel under the West Stand leading to the centre section of the

terracing, down the terracing through gate three which was open and

onto the track next to the pitch.   We then walked along the track next

to the South Stand and went up the players' tunnel into the main
building.                  and myself then got a drink from the drinks

machine and went into the caretaker's room and sat down with our

drinks.



After about five minutes                 and myself left the caretaker's

office, went back down the players' tunnel around the pitch back to

the groundsman's hut and collected the goal nets.    We then went and

put the goal nets up on the pitch, doing the Spion Kop end first, then

the Leppings Lane end second.    When we finished putting up the nets,

me and                went onto the pitch and got the sprinkler system

set up to water the pitch.     This took about fifteen minutes to do.

While we were setting the sprinkler system up,                  joined us

and helped us.    After the sprinkler system was set up,

went and set the computer which controls the sprinkler system.



                               ind me then went back to the caretaker's

office in the main building.    We were in there for about twenty

minutes, talking amongst ourselves.    We then went back out onto the

pitch as the sprinklers had finished watering the pitch.    We checked

the pitch to see what markings had been washed away by the water.

After checking we got a bucket of whitening and a brush and went over

the patches which had been washed away.    We then dismantled the

sprinklers at the Spion Kop end and the Leppings Lane end, but left

the one in the centre of the pitch as we had to water some of the

pitch later on.



We left the pitch for about half an hour, during which time we just

wasted time by reading the paper and talking as there was nothing we

could do.
At about 10.45am (1045) we checked the pitch again, but, as there was

still seme water still on the pitch, we decided to leave it until

after we had had something to eat.



At 11am (1100) we met up with other ground staff and went to the

players' lounge in the main building and had a cooked breakfast.



At about midday (1200), with                                    I went

back to the groundsman's hut and collected a hose-pipe. We then

watered the parts of the pitch that needed to be done and after this

had been done, we dismantled the sprinkler system in the centre of the

pitch.   The dismantled spinkler systems were at the side of the track.

We normally put these behind the advertising boards next to the North

Stand, but because Liverpool supporters got over the wall of the North

Stand and onto the pitch at the 1988 (000088) Semi-Final at the

ground, for safety reasons we decided to put them where they could not

do any harm.   After we cleaned up around the pitch,                 and

me went to the main building.    We then started doing jobs that had to

be done before the kick-off.    We filled up buckets with water and put

them in the teams' dug-outs next to the pitch, put the substitution

numbers in the dug-outs and I put a stretcher in the players' tunnel

with some blankets.   Apart from this stretcher, there is only one

other one at the Club and this is kept on top of the kitman's cupboard

which is at the end of the main building.



               and myself then had a cup of coffee and a sit down for a

short while.   Then            asked us to move some chairs fran the cafe

at the end of the ground floor building and take them up to the
television gantry where they were needed for the match.



By the time we had finished it was about one-twenty (1320).    When we

were in the television gantry, I looked around the ground and I

noticed that there appeared to be a lot more Nottingham Forest

supporters inside the Ground than Liverpool fans.    Having been at the

ground for 1988 (000088) Semi-Final game between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest, I would say that at the same time last year there

were more Liverpool supporters inside the ground.    In fact, the West

Stand terracing looted quite empty at this stage, which I thought

quite strange.    I even commented to               that I had not seen

so few supporters for a match like this in the Ground at this time.



After leaving the gantry,                 and me collected a change of

clothes fran the caretaker's office.    The clothing we had to change

into was a green and blue Umbro tracksuit.    On this day there were

five of us with these tracksuits to wear.    After collecting the

tracksuit,                  and myself went over to see                in

the groundsman's hut.   We gave         a towel and all three of us then

went to the sports hall which is situated at the rear of the North

Stand.    There were a number of police officers in and around the

sports hall as they had obviously just had their briefing.    All three

of us went to the ladies' showers and had a shower and got changed.

We put our bags in the groundsman's hut and waited around the pitch

to the players' tunnel.     We then went up the players' tunnel and into

the main building.   We then dropped off our dirty towels to be

washed.



A short time later, I picked up a match-day programme and went back
down the players' tunnel to the track next to the pitch.        I stood at

the end of the players' tunnel and had a look around.        It was about

1.45pm (1345) at this stage.        I looted for my sister in the Spion Kop,

end as she was in there with her friend.        I saw her and waved to her.

I noticed that the Spion Kop which contained Nottingham Forest

supporters was filling up at a normal rate for a game like this.           I

then looked down towards the West Stand or, as it is known, the

Leppings Lane end and I could see that the centre section of the

terracing was starting to fill up but was not anywhere near full.          The

two outer sections of the terracing either side of the centre section

were in fact quite empty, with no more than a couple of hundred people

in each.     I was then joined by

                                                            I said to them

that there weren't many people knocking about.       He then told me that

there were a lot of people outside the ground and that there were

loads queuing to buy beer at the           shop outside the ground.   He

also said there were lots of people sitting around in nearby roads

drinking beer.



I then went back up the tunnel because               wanted me to do a job

for the referee.    I did this job, then went back out onto the track

via the players' tunnel.    It was about two o'clock (1400) at this

stage.     I looked up to see if my sister had a good viewing point which

she appeared to have.     I then looted at the North Stand which was

starting to fill up in a normal way for this type of game.



I then looted at the West Stand.       The seated area seemed to be quite

empty and most of the people in there appeared to be in little family

group®.    The terracing below the seating was starting to fill up, with
                                                                            8
 the centre section of the terracing filling up slightly quicker than

 the outer sections either side, but there still appeared to be quite a

 lot of room in the centre section.



 I then went back up the players' tunnel and started talking to

      near to the players' changing roans.     At this stage both the

Liverpool and the Nottingham Forest teams had arrived.     A short time

later, the Liverpool players made their way down the tunnel onto the

pitch.     The players were still in their suits at this stage.   I

followed the Liverpool players down the tunnel.      I could see that the

Liverpool supporters who were sitting down on the West Stand terracing

stood up and started applauding the Liverpool players.     The Nottingham

Forest supporters in the Spion Kop then started singing and you could

feel the atmosphere in the ground starting to build up.     The

Liverpool players went off the field after a few minutes and then the

Nottingham Forest players came down the tunnel onto the pitch, wearing

their tracksuits.    At this stage, I was talking to the apprentices of

Sheffield Wednesday.     The apprentices were wearing blue tracksuits and

they were to act as ball boys during the game.



A few minutes later, the Nottingham Forest players left the field and

went back up the players' tunnel to the changing roans.     I then went

up the players' tunnel and stood inside the main building at the top

of the tunnel, reading my programme.



At about 2.20pm (1420)             the caretaker went down the tunnel

and sat in the South Stand on the seating behind the Liverpool teams'

dug-out.    I joined him shortly afterwards.   I started talking to him

and I said that everything was running smoothly.     He told me not to
say things like that too soon as it was the quietest semi-final he

had been involved in for forty years.     I looked around the Ground.    I

noticed that the North Stand was starting to fill up normally and the

seating in the West Stand was also starting to fill up, but not as

quickly as the North Stand.   At this stage, I did not take any notice

of the terracing on the West Stand so I couldn't say how full it was.

I then went and talked to the apprentices by the players' tunnel for a

short while and then went up the players' tunnel to wait for the teams

to come out prior to the kick-off.



At about 2.30pm (1430) three or four Liverpool players went out onto

the pitch with their football strip® on.    They took a ball with than

so they could warm up prior to the game.    I followed them down the

tunnel and I stood on the track.     I looked over to the West Stand and

looked at the terracing.   I noticed that the centre sections of the

terracing were now quite full but the tvro outer sections either side

of the centre section were still quite empty.



A few more Liverpool players then came out onto the pitch, followed by

sane Nottingham Forest players. The noise fran the supporters

increased as both sets of supporters started singing.    The players

then stayed out for a few minutes. I looked over again to the West

Stand and I noticed that Liverpool supporters were climbing over the

fences on the terracing of the West Stand fran the two outer sections

to the centre section. I have marked the fences they were climbing

over in pink highlighter on the map of the ground.     I saw between ten

and twenty climb over each side into the centre section which at this

stage was looking quite full.   I also saw Liverpool supporters being

helped up fran the terracing in the West Stand to the seating area
                                                                          10


 above them by other Liverpool supporters.



The announcer then announced the teams out over the public address

 system.   When Alan HANSEN's name was read out, the Liverpool

supporters on the terracing of the West Stand started jurrping up and

down and cheering.    It was then that I realised that the centre

section of the terracing of the West Stand was full.   The tine at this

stage was about 2.45pm (1445).   Both sets of players then left the

pitch and went up the tunnel.



I again looked over at the West Stand and I noticed that there were

still people climbing over the partition fencing on the West Stand

terracing fran the outer sections into the fuller centre section.     I

saw between twenty to thirty supporters getting over the fences each

side.   I also saw more supporters being pulled up fran the terracing

into the seating section of the West Stand.   There did not appear to

be any police officers near to the Liverpool supporters and no one was

trying to step supporters climbing over the fencing or being pulled up

into the seating area fran the terracing.



I watched the West Stand for a couple of minutes, then went back up

the players' tunnel to wait for the teams to go out onto the pitch so

I could collect up the used cups in the away teams' changing room

which was being used by the Nottingham Forest team.



Between ten to and five to three (1450)/(1455) both teams went out

onto the pitch.   I went to the Nottingham Forest changing rocm and

asked if it was possible for me to tidy up the cups in the changing

room.   They said it was, so I collected the cups and took than to the
 shower block and washed them up.   After this I put than back in the

changing room on a tray.     As I came out of the changing room I saw

                 He told me that the Liverpool supporters had kicked

the gates in and were just walking in.    I told him I didn't believe

him and he told me to go and look for myself in the video rocm and I

could see for myself.



I waited to the video roan which is situated off the corridor of the

players' and officials' entrance.    When I got to the video roan, the

door was slightly open and I could see people walking straight through

the big roller shutter gates.    I could not tell which gate was open,

but the television which showed the picture was either the second or

the third fran the top right-hand comer.     What surprised me was that

the people coming in were walking, not running.    They were caning

through in a constant flow of big numbers.    There did not appear to be

anyone trying to step them or check their tickets. I turned around

and vent back to the players' tunnel.    I went down the players' tunnel

and went to my seat which was behind the Liverpool dug-out which is

near to the half-way line.



When I sat down the match had already started.    I looked over at the

West Stand and I noticed that there was still room in the two outer

wings of the terracing, but in the centre section behind the goal

which is served fran the tunnel, it was full to overflowing.   When I

hoi cone away fran the video roan, I had been quite shocked and I felt

that something would go wrong.



I could see that as more people were caning down the tunnel, which

services the centre section of the West Stand terracing, the result
                                                                           12


of all the people caning out of the tunnel to the top of the terracing

was that everyone on the terracing was being forced down the terracing

towards the fencing and wall at the front.   The tragic thing is that

women and children who had come early and stood at the front of the

terrace were forced down right to the front and were being crushed

against the wall and the fencing.



I could see people surging forward in wave after wave and I could see

people falling forward.   Scrae of the people who were at the top of the

terracing realising they couldn't go forward any further, were putting

their arms up and people were pulling them into the seating area above

them.



I then watched the game for a short time and as I was watching, I saw

one of the Liverpool players, Peter BEARDSLEY, hit the crossbar with a

shot.   As a result of this, there was a loud cheer.   It was then there

appeared to be another surge fran the tunnel servicing the centre

section of the West Stand terracing.   This seemed to be a slow surge

forward and only appeared to take place at the rear of the terracing.

As they were so packed at the front, they could not move forward

anymore.



The Nottingham Forest full back took the ball up the field towards the

West Stand.   The ball went out for a throw in and the next thing I saw

was a policeman come onto the pitch and speak to the referee.    At this

stage, sane Liverpool fans had spilled onto the pitch and sane

Liverpool players were telling them to get off the pitch.



I looked at the West Stand end and saw that gate 3 on the map was open
   With a policeman standing at it, bat he did not appear to be letting
   people coroe off the terracing onto the pitch.



   I got out of my seat at this stage as I realised that scmething

  drastic was happening.           I stood next to the dug-out on the track,         i
  waited for a couple of minutes to see what was going to happen.              I

  could see people getting over the fencing at the west Stand end and

  they were droning off the top of the fencing and collapsing onto the

  track next to the pitch.          I also saw people ccming through gate 3 onto
  the track.



    saw a white youth about nineteen years of age, who had long hair,

    was vearing a black T shirt, jeans and white training shoes, run

 onto the pitch frcm the West Stand terracing.            He then ran the full

 length of the pitch to the Kop end which contained the Nottingham

 Forest supporters.        He started giving the 'V' sign to the fbrest

 supporters with both hands and taunting         than   to fight.    A [~l

 went towards hi™ frcm behi«i the Kop goal and the youth ran back onto
 the pitch towards the ^ s t stand,         ftx.ther policeman who was already

 on the pitch, chased him and rugby-tackled him.           He then hrought the

youth to the players' tunnel and they walked past me.               I noticed that
the youth smelt strongly of drink.



I looked back towards the West Stand and David BARBER came over to me

and told me to go to the west Stand end of the pitch a rd look after
the goal net.



  ran to the ffest Stand end and as I reached the «fest Stand end near

to gate   2   on the map   I   saw a little boy on the floor, half of his    body
                                                                           14


on the grass and half on the track.     I can't remember what he was

wearing, I noticed that he appeared to be dead.    He was about ten

years of age.     A policeman had been with him but moved away.



I then went to the goal-mouth and stood in the goal holding onto the

net.     I was badly shaken by what I ted seen and was crying at this

stage.     I told myself to get myself together and help anyone else I

could.



I went to the right of gate number 4 on the map and I could see at

least twsnty people dead pressed up against the fence and others

behind them who were obviously dying.    Most of these were about

sixteen years of age.     I went up to gate 4 where there was a policeman

standing.    He was just standing there and appeared to be in a state of

shock.     I told the policeman he had to pull himself together and help

get people out of the terracing onto the pitch.     I went to the open

gate and I pulled one youth out who appeared about fifteen years of

age.     He had light coloured hair and was wearing a short sleeve, red

Liverpool football shirt and bit© denim jeans.     I sat him next to the

gate on the track.     I then pulled out another youth who was also

about fifteen years of age out.    He also had light hair, but all I can

remember was he was wearing denim jeans.     I kept told of him with my

a m and picked up the other youth I had sat down on the track.      I

placed them on the grass next to the side of the net.    I then called

to a St. John's Ambulanceman who was standing behind the goal.      He

obviously didn't hear me so I went over to him and asked him to have a

look at the two youths I had fetched out of the terracing.    He then

went over to them but, in my opinion, they were both already dead.

I then went back to gate 4 and I noticed that the policeman was no
longer there, in fact there was no one at the gate.



I then pulled out a white man in his early twenties. I cannot

remember anything else about him.     I carried him over my shoulder to

the grass area and placed him on his back.    At this stage, he was

unconscious so remembered what first aid I had been taught when I was

at college and gave him heart massage.     I then started giving him

mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.     While I was doing this, he vonited

into my mouth.    I realised then that he was breathing again so I put

him into the recovery position.     All the time I was helping him I was

crying.   I left him as his eyes were starting to open and got another

St John's Ambulanceman to ccme over to him and look at him.    The St

John's Ambulanceman looked at him.     I asked him if he was going to be

alright and he told me the man was still breathing.     Then the St

John's Ambulanceman called over some Liverpool supporters who had

broken off sane advertising boarding to use as a stretcher.    They

came over and took the man away over towards the passageway between

the North Stand and the Spion Kop.     That was the last I saw of this

man until I saw his picture in the Daily Mirror newspaper some days

later, so I know he did not die.



After this man was taken away by the supporters, I went to gate 3 as

there it looked like it was more serious.     There were a number of

police officers already at this gate pulling people out of the gate

and onto the pitch.    I joined them and it was like a circle, someone

would get a person out, place them on the pitch then join the circle

again.    I took out a white woman who was in her early twenties.     She

had blonde curly shoulder length hair and she was wearing a black T

shirt and blue denim jeans. She appeared to be unconscious when I
                                                                            16


pulled her out.    An ambulanceman helped me carry her over and place

her on the grass.     I then left her with him.



I then went to the goal-irouth again and just looked at the terracing

as I just could not believe what I was seeing.        I saw peqple

crouching over other people lying on the floor, who looked like

relatives or friends.    They were all crying.



I looked around and saw an ambulanceman pulling at the fencing next to

gate 4.    He was not having any success so I decided to go and help

him.     I ran over to him, got next to him and started pulling at the

fence with him.     Unfortunately, we could not budge the fence at all,

one of the reasons being because of the number of persons being

crushed up against the fence.     You could not get your fingers through

the fence to get a good hold.     I decided because of this to go back to

gate 4 and try to get people out as before, but as I went to gate 4, I

noticed that young boys were trapped        up against the fencebetween gate

4 and the centre dividing fence between Pens 3 and 4.        I have shown

this fence in green on the map.



I went to the pen by going through gate 4.        I was only able to get

onto the terracing because a lot of people had fallen flat onto the

floor.    When I got into the terracing I put my back to the fence and

then braced myself off the ground, by putting my right foot on

someone's chest as they were pushing forwards, then raising my left

foot off the ground and putting that on another person's chest so I

was wedged at the front with both my        feet off the ground.I then

managed to get hold of about six or seven teenagers, one after the

other and pass them to the gate by lifting them over the top of my
                                                                             17


legs.     At the gate they were taken off roe and I don't know where they

went after that.     I think a couple of them had Liverpool shirts on but

I could not give a better description than that.       I can remember,

however, one of those I assisted to the gate was a white woman in her

late thirties or early forties, wearing a light coloured           ?

possibly beige in colour.     She appeared to be of large build.    Of the

youths that I passed over to gate 4, I think only two of than were

still alive and the woman was definitely alive.



I then decided to get out ofthe terracing because I could      see more

people being lifted into theupper seating area.I could also hear

people shouting and crying.     As I had got the youths I was concerned

about out of the crush, I decided that for my own safety I would have

to get off the terracing andback onto the track.        So with my back

still to the fence I shuffled across to the gate.      I managed to get

half of my back over the gap of the open gate, then a surge of people

came from the back of the terracing right the way down to the front.

My knees were pushed against my chest as I still had both feet off the

ground.     The next thing I knew I was catapulted out of the gate about

six feet.     I landed with half my body on the pitch and half on the

track.    As a result of this I was dazed and the next thing I knew I

was being brought around by an ambulanceman.      I can remember he was

not a St John's Ambulanceman, he was a regular ambulanceman.



I got onto my feet and steadied myself and I started to walk towards

gate 3.     I then heard   people shouting from the       directionof gate 4, so

I turned around and Inoticed that the fencing just past gate 4 which

was towards the North      Stand was bowing.   I ran      over to the fencing and

as I got closer I could see that part of the fencing had come away
                                                                              18


from its supporting structure on the bottom right-hand corner.       I

could see that four arms had been pushed through the small gap by

people on the terracing crushed against the fence, so I ran up and saw

the ambulanceman who I had tried to help pull open the fencing earlier.

I told him to help me pull the fence open as we had more of a chance

with this section, as it had started to ccme away from its frame.        So

the St John's Ambulanceman then went over to the fence with me and we

both started pulling at the fencing.    At first we managed to get the

one comer free, then we managed bit by bit to get the whole bottom

section of the fencing away from the frame it was welded to.      Then by

forcing the fencing upwards, we were able to make a gap of about two

to three feet for the whole length of that section.



The ambulanceman and myself then started pulling people out.      We were

joined shortly afterwards by a police officer who helped pull people

out.   In all, in the matter of one minute, we were able to pull out

between ten to twenty people.    Same of these people were males between

the age of eighteen to thirty, and as I was pulling them out, I

noticed they smelt strongly of drink.   About three quarters of the

ones I pulled out, appeared to be dazed and unaware of what was going

on due to drink.    Seme of these were fighting to get out.     They were

not waiting for us to pull them out.    When these got onto the track,

they were crawling on the floor, then they went over and leaned

against the net.    I don't think all this was due to injury.     I believe

a lot of their inability to walk and look after themselves, was

because of drink.   They were also vomiting onto the pitch when they

got out.   I don't know if this was due to the crushing or the amount

they had had to drink, or possibly, both.
Because people appeared to be getting themselves out of the gap made

in the fence, I decided to leave it and go and see if I could help

anywhere else.    I noticed that the Nottingham Forest supporters in the

Spion Kop had started to sing and chant, mainly because I think they

were unaware of what was happening.     But as they were singing and

chanting, sane of the Liverpool supporters at the Leppings Lane end of

the pitch, were getting visibly upset.    On the pitch at this stage,

were about five hundred people.    About one hundred of the supporters

started to run towards the Spion Kop, but about thirty or forty other

supporters tried to stop them, telling the Liverpool supporters that

the Nottingham Forest supporters in the Spion Kop didn't know what was

going on.   They started going down towards the Spion Kop but at this

stage the Police had formed a human barrier across the half-way line

and the Liverpool supporters gave up and turned around and walked back.



I walked too towards gate three and as I was passing the goal-post, a

young lad about ten to twelve years came up to me and asked me if I

could help find his friend.     I asked him which area he had last seen

his friend in and he told me it was the terracing behind gate three.

The young lad was visibly upset.     We went over to the front of gate

three and I picked him up and put him in my arms and the boy looked

around the terracing for a couple of minutes.     I asked if he could

see him and he replied he could not.     I told him we would have a look

around for him, so we had a walk past gate four and towards the North

Stand, looking onto the terracing.    As we didn't see him, we turned

around and started walking back along the track.     On the track between

gates two and three the boy saw his friend.     We both ran over to the

boy who was on the floor.     This youth was about sixteen or seventeen

years of age.    He was wearing a grey Liverpool football shirt, which I
                                                                          20


think is Liverpool's away strip.   There was a policeman with the youth.

I asked the policeman if the youth was alright but he said the youth

was dead.    The young boy at this stage gave out a loud cry and I put

my arms around him and I started to cry.    I told the boy everything

would be OK.    I took him onto the pitch and to the goal-mouth.    He

then gave me his Liverpool scarf and said he would like me to have it

for helping him finding his friend.    I took the scarf frcm the boy.

I took the boy then to a policeman as I was totally exhausted and

upset and I realised that there was nothing else I could do.       I found

a policeman near to gate three and handed the young boy over to him.



I heard the Nottingham Forest fans start to sing again and more

Liverpool supporters this time started to run down the pitch towards

the Spion Kop which contained the Nottingham Forest supporters.

However, they were unable to get pest the half-way line because of the

Police forming a human barrier across the pitch.



I started to run towards the players' tunnel with my hands up to my

face because I was so upset.   Then a policeman grabbed me by the

scruff of my neck, grabbing hold of my tracksuit collar and the back

of my hair. He asked me where did I think I was going and I told him

I worked for the Club.    He said he was sorry and let me go.   I don't

think there was any need for what he did as he could see how upset I

was and because of the fact he had come frcm the area where the

policemen were helping injured supporters frcm the Leppings Lane

terracing.



I went to the players' tunnel where I saw                the head

groundsman.    He could see how upset I was so he took me up the
                                                                            21


players' tunnel and sat me in an office.    One of the girls in the

office,         jjave me a drink to calm me down. I noticed there were

seme Liverpool supporters in the office making phone calls.      I sat in

the office for about half an hour and had a couple of drinks.      I then

went to the toilet and then got a cup of coffee fran the drinks

machine.   I then went down the players' tunnel and I noticed that the

ground was clear of supporters. The only people still in the ground I

could see were on the pitch.



I then went and sat on the wall near to gate four of the West Stand.

When I was sitting there I started to cry again.      At this time sane

photographers and television cameramen must have taken photos and film

of me, because I have since seen the pictures of me in the national

and local newspapers and seen myself on the television.      I sat there

for about ten minutes and then I noticed that about three men were on

the terracing of the West Stand taking photographs.      I asked them fran

the track if they thought it was clever and right for them to take

photographs of where people had lost their lives, as I thought they

were fran the newspapers.    They told me to shut up, that they were

police officers and that they didn't like what they were doing but

they had to do it.



I then walked onto the pitch and started talking to three of the

Nottingham Forest players.                 was also there at this stage.

The players I talked to were Des WALKER, one whose surname is STARBUCK

and third was Brian LAWS.    They asked me what I had done.    I told them

and they told me that I had done the best that I could and I would

 just have to try and forget it.                   then told me to go and

 s          e           e           t          o            get a lift
                                                                         22


hone, as since the match had ended and I had been in the office having

a drink, I had had too much to drink to drive home.



I then went to            the caretaker's office, and found

and he stated he would give me a lift home.   We both then went down

the players' tunnel and onto the pitch and saw

       could see the state I was in and told me to have a couple of

days off.   I then went to the car-park at the back of the sports hall

with             and he drove me home.




In retrospect, I can say from being there that whilst the whole

incident was going on there were too few police officers helping get

the injured and dying people out of the West Stand terracing and too

many forming a human barrier across the pitch.   I believe that if the

police officers who were lined across the pitch had been used to help

get people off the terracing of the West Stand, that many more

supporters who died could have possibly been saved.   In my opinion,

there were sufficient Police inside the ground to deal with the

situation but they were wrongly used.    They seemed more concerned

about preventing trouble between fans than helping the injured.



At the time of the incident I also wondered why more ambulances didn't

come onto the pitch to collect the injured supporters.    In fact, I

only saw one ambulance come onto the pitch.    This meant that injured
                                                                               23


        fans had to be carried to the other end of the ground by other fans,

       to get to an ambulance and medical treatment.



        Earlier in my statement I stated that              told me about the

        supporters buying drinks at the            To give you seme ideas of

       the numbers queuing up at the shop,        stated they were queuing

        half-way up




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:        110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:              PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      POL PC




                                                                                    681
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
               SHEFFIELD, S YORKS

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a married roan and I reside at the above address with my wife and

           family.



           I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as a lottery

           Ticket Seller at the Hillsborough Ground.     I have been employed in

           this capacity for the past two seasons.     My normal position on

           football league days is in the uncovered terrace in the South Stand

           near to the Spion Kop end of the ground, but on Saturday 15th April

           1989 (150489) I asked to be posted to the uncovered area between the

           turnstiles in Leppings Lane and the rear of the West Stand.     I had

           that particular position at the equivalent game last year and I sold

           a large amount of tickets.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I arrived at the Hillsborough

           ground at about 12.15pm (1215) and I entered through the main entrance

           in Penistone Road.   I went to the pools office which is at the rear of

           the Spion Kop and there saw                                         After

           supplying us with tickets,            took all the Ticket Sellers, as




                                                                                       682
a group, to our various positions.     I arrived at my position at about

12.30pm (1230) . I was the only Ticket Seller in this section.



On my arrival I could see that persons were entering the ground via

the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.     The large gate marked gate 'C' on

the plan (Exhibit No       ) (Reference No.    fl) was closed.



At this time I saw that the Liverpool supporters were entering the

ground at a steady flow.    There were about six Police Officers

standing near to the turnstiles marked A-G on the map, which are next

to Gate C.    They were making selective searches of fans as they

entered the ground.    I also saw that there was a Football Club

Steward standing at Gate C.



At about 1.30pm (1330) I had sold the hundred lottery tickets I had

been given so I returned to the pool's office in order to collect seme

tickets.     I can say that between 12.30pm (1230) and 1.30pm (1330)

that gate 'C' was not opened and none of the fans had gained

unauthorised entry.     I collected my tickets and I returned to my

position, after walking around the edge of the football pitch passing

the Spion Kop and the North Stand.     I think it was about 1.40pm

(1340) when I passed the North Stand.     I looked at the West Stand and

I noticed that the terrace section on the West Stand serviced by the

tunnel fran Leppings Lane, which I have highlighted on the map of the

ground (Exhibit No          ) (Reference No.    f1) was fairly full.      I

arrived back to my position at about 1.45pm (1345) after going

through a gate in the fencing on the perimeter of the pitch.       This

gate led onto the West Stand terracing and was manned by a Police

Officer.     He opened the gate for me very quickly and I walked up the
terracing.   The gate I used was near to the North Stand.



When I did return to my original position, I noticed that a lot irore

people were entering the ground, but as before, this was being done in

an orderly fashion and as far as I could see no unauthorised entries

were being made.     I carried on selling tickets and spoke to a number

of Liverpool supporters. Sane of these smelt of drink but none

appeared to be drunk.     I did not have any trouble fran airy Liverpool

supporters all the time I was there.     Between 2.15pm (1415) and

2.30pm (1430).     I can't remember the exact time I realised I had run

out of cigarettes.     I decided to go to the sweet shop in Leppings Lane

to get some more.     I went up to the Steward who was standing near to

gate C.   I asked him if I could    be let out of the gate so I could go

and get somecigarettes fran the sweet      shop which is only about

thirty yards     frcm the gate.   He told me I must bejoking as there

were so many     people outside and it had just taken another man thirty

minutes for a man to get to the shop and back.



At this stage I remember a Policeman having the gates slightly open

and shouting at the supporters outside.     I had previously looked

through a small glass panel in the gate and saw a mass of people the

other side of the gate.     I have never seen so many people trying to

get into a football ground in my life.     I decided to carry on selling

the lottery tickets for a while, but at 2.40pm (1440) I decided to

stop as people did not appear interested in buying lottery tickets

and it was getting quite congested where I was standing.



I spoke to a Steward who advised me on a way to get to the other end of

the ground, so I went to the edge of the South Stand and a Steward let
                                                                          4


me through a gate which led me into a passage between the South Stand

and the uncovered seating.    I then walked along in front of the Spion

Kop, then down the alleyway which leads towards the sports hall.



I spoke to a Steward on a gate which takes you onto Penistone Road and

he let me out.   I then went out and bought seme cigarettes.



I returned to the ground a few minutes later and got back into the

ground via the same gate I had gone out of.    I then went to in

front of the North Stand with the St John's Ambulance staff near to

the Spion Kop.   I noticed two people operating a video camera on the

track next to the pitch.     I started talking to than, as I thought they

were television cameramen and started hinting that I would like to be

on the film, but they said they didn't think I would like to be on it

as they were recording, as they said 'naughty boys'. It was then I

realised they were plain clothes Police Officers.



I started talking to another youth a short time later, who was

standing with the St John's Ambulance personnel. He was white in his

mid twenties. As I talked to him he informed me he was a Liverpool

supporter who had cone up from Norfolk to see the game.    He had cane

without a ticket so he had bought one outside the ground for thirty

two pound fran a tout.     When he had gone to the turnstiles with the

ticket, the turnstile operator had told him it was a forgery and they

had had words, but then a Police Officer had told the Turnstile

Operator to let him in.



After talking to the youth, I started watching the game.    The next

thing I knew was, a Police Officer go up to the referee and the game
was stopped.   I then looked at the West Stand and saw people trying to

get over the fencing.    My initial thought was that it was a crowd

invasion of the pitch.



I realised after a time that the Police were not trying to keep the

supporters in, but trying to get them out.    I walked down towards the

West Stand and saw about thirty people on the pitch, some lying down,

some standing and some kneeling.



I then walked back to where I was originally standing.



The advertising boarding was then moved away from the North Stand

wall and an ambulance came down the side of the pitch.   Then a large

number of Police started arriving and made their way towards the West

Stand.   I stayed where I was until about three forty-five (1545), but

I was so shocked and frightened that I decided to go heme, which I did.



As I have said before I was on duty at the same game lest year and I

can say that there appeared to be more Liverpool supporters at the

game this year than lest.



Things I have noticed that were wrong at the ground were, that as far

es I could see there were no Police Officers or Stewards at the

entrance to the tunnel, stopping people going through the tunnel when

it was full, and no one directing fans to other entrances onto the

terracing.
                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL PC




                                                       687
                                                                           STATION




ADDRESS:
                              SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIKffl:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is txue to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as a Car-Park

           Attendent.   This is my first season with the Club.    I started working

           at Hillsborough Stadium in August 1988 (000888).      I am required to

           work every first team heme game.



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was required to work the FA

           Cup Semi-Final tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.      I

           commenced work at eleven o' clock (1100), and my duties usually finish

           at kick-off time, three o'clock (1500)



           At eleven o' clock (1100) I took up my position at the entrance to the




           Visiting supporters enclosure.     I was aware that this end of the

           ground had been allocated to Liverpool supporters.



           During the morning and early afternoon, I noticed nothing untowards.

           There was a gradual build up of supporters entering the ground without




                                                                                      688
                                                                           2


any problem.



At about half past (1430) two queues were devolping which grew larger

and larger, until no queues could be distinguished in the crowd.       More

people were joining the crowd all the time.



About fifteen minutes later the area in front of the turnstiles was

packed with people.    Tte crowd stretched back through the gates I was

standing next to and onto the road.



There was a small group of mounted Police Officers, about four or

five, on the edge of the crowd and I think about three in the crowd

itself.   One of the officers sticks in my mind because he had a

moustache.     In my opinion he was a doing an excellent job in trying to

prevent the crowd fran pushing forward.    He rode over to the gates

where I was standing and closed them, but the sheer weight of the

crowd pushed them open again.



The crowd was so tightly packed, it prevented freedon of movement by

the horses.     Sane supporters were even going underneath the horses in

order to get through.



There is a dividing wall between terrace turnstiles and the seating

turnstiles.     People were climbing over this wall and entering the

ground.   There was a constant flow of people entering the ground by

climbing over the wall.



It was a very dangerous situation outside because of the crowd

pressure and the possibility of people being injured.     As more people
f
            joined the crowd it steadily grew worse.



           At about three o'clock (1500), I saw the exit gates to the standing

            area open.     I did not see who opened the gates.   The crowd then

            started running through the gates, and within a few minutes, the area

           was clear.



            I was relieved when the gates were open because the situation outside

            had become desperate.



            I did not go into the ground or witness any incidents inside it.      I

            remained on the gates, allowing access for ambulances and fire

            engines.     I have indicated on a ground plan my position outside the

            ground marked        (Exhibit No            ).




                                                                             SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

              TIME:              DATE:    300489

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                      PC

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                        POL PC




                                                                                      690
                                                                        STATION




ADDRESS:
                         CHESTERFIELD, DERBYSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 230589                                                           (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address.   I have been

           employed by



           On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) I was on duty at Hillsborough

           Football Ground for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final of Liverpool v Nottingham

           Forest.   I came on duty at 8.30am (0830), at the football ground. I

           was posted to the main gate into the football ground in Fenistone

           Road North.   My duty was to check everyone who came into the ground

           by vehicle, as everyone who was allowed to park in the Club car-park

           had been issued with a pass.   I remained at this point Which I have

           indicated on the attached map, all morning.



           At about 11 am (1100), a taxi containing five men, came to enter the

           Club car-park. I stopped the taxi and one of the men inside asked me

           if there were any tickets on sale.   I said that so far as I knew there

           were not any on sale, but I advised them to go to the general office.

           At this point, a man in a green shirt who had been standing on

           the other side of the gate near to the turnstile, came across to the
                                                                            2


taxi and said to the nan inside,       "Do you want tickets?"   The men

inside replied,    "Yes".    The nan in the green shirt then said to the

driver,   "Let me get in, and if you drive up the road I will sell than

some tickets."



He then got into the taxi which then turned right off Penistone Road

in Herries Road.   I would describe the nan as follows:- White male,

late 30's, 5' 10" tall, with black hair which was untidy. He had a

beer belly and he was wearing a green shirt, light coloured

trousers and black training shoes.



About an hour after this nan had left in the taxi, he returned to the

same place as before.       A short while later, there was a scuffle on the

bridge near to where I was stood.       The Police attended this incident

and moved the people concerned on.



After this incident, there was a white male stood on his own.       A

Police Inspector went to him and searched him.      As the Inspector did

this, the nan in the green shirt moved off up the road.



I then remained at this gate until 2.30pm (1430) I then closed the

gate and remained there with the Police Officers, and stopped anyone

without tickets from going into the car-park area of the ground.



Shortly after 3.15pm (1515), I was made aware that there was a serious

incident taking place inside the ground.       I was informed that a number

of emergency vehicles would be attending in the ground.



I was then engaged in directing fire engines and ambulances to various
       parts of the ground, from ray point in Penistone Road.   Afterwards, I

       went to see                                                           told

       me to continue directing the emergency vehicles.    I remained here

       until the fans began to leave the ground.   I then assisted in

       directing vehicles and fans away from the ground.



       At 6.00pn (1800) I went inside the ground to see if I could be of any

        further help.   I was informed that I could not assist anymore, and

       that if I was required, I would be called back to the ground.     I

        finished my tour of duty just after 6 pm (1800).




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:   230589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                DS'H'

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  POL DS




                                                                                    693
                                                                       STATION

              COLIN LESLIE
              GILLAM

ADDRESS
                           SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRffl:

OCCUPATION:   SECURITY GUARD


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160589                                             C L GTT.TAM (SIGNED)



          I am employed as a Security Officer by Guarda Security who are based

          at Hillsborough Barracks, Penistone Road, Hillsborough, Sheffield.     I

          have held this position with the company for approximately 3 and a

          half years.



          Guarda Security are employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, to

          assist with the ground security at Hillsborough on match days.



          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was detailed to work at

          Hillsborough Football Ground on gate security for the Liverpool v

          Nottingham Forest Semi-Final match.



          My hours of work for that day were to be 0800am (0800) until 5pm

          (1700), and I was to be positioned on the perimeter iron gates at the

          entrance at Leppings Lane end of the ground, shown as gates Al, B1 and

          Cl as indicated on the sketch plan of the football ground   Exhibit No

                        Identifying reference CLG/1




                                                                                     694
GILLAM                COLIN LESLIE                                      2


My job entailed me restricting unauthorised vehicles frcm entering the

football ground (the only vehicles that have authorised access through

these gates are club officials, emergency vehicles and the Police on

duty for the game).



I have previously worked on these particular gates at the Hillsborough

Ground on two other occasions prior to this match.



In order to explain the position of gates Al, B1 and Cl in more

detail, if you were to stand on Leppings Lane itself, looking towards

the ground entrance, these three gates are situated on the far right-

hand side nearest to the River Don, and serves access to turnstiles A-

G as shown on the diagram.



These gates also allow access to the rear of the South Stand via a

pathway which runs to the right of the turnstiles A-G, thus passing

gate C, a folding concertina door.



Looking towards the entrance again but along the left-hand side of

gates Al, B1 and Cl, there is a metal partitioning door, which when

secure separates turnstiles A-G frcm the others, thus allowing the

fans for the North Stand and the standing pens and West Stand to be

segregated.



Gate Al as shown on the diagram is a wrought iron gate.   It is a

double gate that opens inward towards the ground.



Both of the gates have securing bolts which fit into holes in the

concrete floor, enabling either one or both of them to be opened at
GILLAM                 COLIN LESLIE                                       3


one time.     These gates, when opened to their limit, would be wide

enough for a motor vehicle to pass through with ease.



Gate B1 is again wrought iron, but considerably wider than the

previously mentioned Gate Al.    This gate works on the same opening

principle, but when opened to its limits would accommodate the width

of a coach.



Gate Cl is a pedestrian gate.    This is a double wrought iron gate,

allowing pedestrian access but would be wide enough for a small motor

vehicle to pass through if necessary.



All of the perimeter gates When not in use are secured by the use of

individual padlocks and on match days it is the responsibility of the

club steward to open and close them.     No keys are held by any Guarda

staff for these gates.



It is normal practice for gate B1 as shown on the diagram, to be

opened by the club steward prior to my arrival at the ground at

0800am (0800).     Gates Al and Cl remain secure until later in the

morning and did so on this day of the Semi-Final match.     I believe

it's around 10.30am (1030) When the steward canes and opens these

other two gates.



I arrived for my duty at the ground on Saturday 15th April 1989

(150489) at approximately 8.00am (0800) and entered through gate Bl.

I remained on these gates, alone, until around 10.30am (1030) when the

steward came and opened gates Al and Cl.     Within minutes, I was joined

by another club steward who was to help me work the gates restricting
mr.T AM              COLIN LESLIE                                          4


vehicle access.   I do not know this steward's name, bat I do believe

he is normally posted on match days to assist with this job.



tfore or less at the same time, I was aware that the Police presence

was greater in the area.     I saw at least three police officers on

horseback and they seemed to patrol the turnstile area and the

entrance to Leppings Lane.



On a number of occasions, I saw group® of youths congregate inside

the gates Al, B1 and Cl between there and the turnstiles A-G.     The

mounted police officers periodically came back to the area and moved

the youths on, asking if they had tickets or not.    The majority of

these youths, when challenged as to if they were in possession of

tickets, made their way back out of the ground onto Leppings Lane.

I saw the same youths congregate in the area on a couple of occasions

before being moved on.



Around about 12 o'clock (1200) more police officers came.     I would say

that there were about eight constables carried wooden barriers and

placed them across the pathway near to gate C.     I have indicated the

position the barriers were placed on the sketch plan of the football

ground Exhibit No          Identifying Reference CLG/1.   The police

officers appeared to be posted to this area for the match and remained

behind the barrier they had made.



 In the entrance to the football ground on Leppings Lane at the same

 time, the police officers formed a human barrier which spread across

 the whole width of the entrance.    I cannot estimate how many officers

were involved in this.
GILLftM               COLIN LESLIE                                       5




I was very surprised as the morning went on as to how quiet the area

around Leppings Lane was. There seemed very few supporters ccming into

the ground, considering how important the match being played was.

The weather I remember was very good, it was dry and in fact quite

warm that day and seemed a beautiful day for the event.



I would say that it was around 1.45pm (1345) when the fans began to

come in any numbers, but even then there weren't that many. The

turnstiles appeared to be coping with the numbers going through with

ease and there was no large build up of fans waiting to get through

into the ground.    The fans appeared in good spirits and were orderly

and well behaved.



I was surprised after this how quickly the turnstile area seemed to

fill up.   Within minutes there appeared to be crowds of youths waiting

in the anpa in front of the turnstiles A-G.    I had not seen frcm where

I was stood which way they had cane down leppings Lane, but the

numbers seemed to be swelling quickly and, in fact, by 2.15pm (1415),

it was impossible to see gate A1 frcm where I stood due to the pure

volume of people inside that area between there and the turnstiles.



As I stood watching the turnstile area, thinking the crowd didn't seem

to be moving very fast, I saw probably 2 or 3 youngsters actually

climb up the wall at the side of the turnstile area nearest to

Turnstile A.   One of the lads was being cheered on by the crowd

beneath him, but as he got to the top he saw a steward and climbed

back down into the crowd.
GILLAM                  COLIN LESLIE                                         6


At approximately 2.30pm (1430), as close as I can recall, two

uniformed police officers appeared on the inside of gate Bl.     They

proceeded to close the double gates to stop fans getting through.       The

number of fans actually waiting to get through the turnstiles at this

time were tremendous.     It was like a sea of heads and I could see that

there were many more on the other side of the perimeter gates waiting.

The fans still were able to gain access through gates A1 and Cl, but

the crowd already through and near to the turnstiles didn't seem to be

moving at all.



Most of the people entering through gate Cl, I noticed, seemed to make

their way down towards the footpath that runs to the South Stand but,

of course, they were sent back by the police officers on the barrier.

These fans then tried to get back through the gate and into the main

crowd, to gain access with the main stream through gate A1 to the

turnstiles.   This, of course, caused havoc as fans tried to get both

ways through the gate.



Soon afterwards, a young police officer in uniform came towards the

steward and myself. I was, of course, in itty blue Guarda Security

uniform and the steward was wearing a bright yellow sleeveless jacket,

so we were both easily identifiable to the crowd.     The policeman, I

would say, was only around 21 years old and was only slightly built.

As he got to the gate I was amazed as I watched him walk through the

double gate and secured one of the two gates with the floor bolt.       He

then pulled the other gate closed behind him and held it closed with

his hand behind his back.     He then stood facing the crowd.   I realised

that with the volume of the crowd in front of this policeman, that he

would need help holding the gate, so I and the Steward went over to
GILLftM                 COLIN LESLIE                                         7


him and held the gate closed by pushing it with our bodily weight.       I

could feel the pressure of the crowd against the gates and it was

difficult to keep closed.



The pressure at this time on gate Cl, and also on gate Bl, was great

and one of the policsnen on gate Bl shouted and asked me if I had a

key to the gate to lock it.    I told him that I hadn't, but I thought

the caretaker might,.



At this time I did consider, myself, that it may have been a good idea

to secure the gates as I realised it was a matter of time if we didn't

get additional help off other officers, that the crowd would be able

to push their way through.



I could not see any other police officers, apart frcm the ones I

mentioned on gate Bl.     I didn't even know if there were still the line

of constables making the chain on Leppings Lane, as I couldn't see

them.     I was surprised that there were no senior police officers or

additional officers close by as the crowd was so large and becoming

agitated and hard to handle, and it was obvious decisions needed to be

made as to how to handle them.



I noticed that where I stood there were Liverpool fans side-stepping

their way along the railings on the river bank, trying to make their

way past the crowd so they could climb over the fence further dcwn to

get inside the ground.     I was surprised to see this as I know how

steep the drop is on the other side into the river.



As one youth edged his way along, he begged me not to open the gates
GILLAM                 COLIN LESLIE                                           8


and let the crowd through as he realised he would lose his footing

and fall backwards.    I had no intention of loosing the gate, but the

force of the crowd was causing than to bow inwards.     I could see the

people at the front of the gates were getting crushed against them

and everyone was screaming and shouting for them to open the gates.

I considered that very soon people, if it carried on as it was, were

going to be injured.



We managed to hold the gates for quite a while and I vrould consider

that it was around 3pm (1500) when finally a surge of the crowd

managed to force the gates open, both ours at Cl and Bl.



We managed at first to hold the gate against the crowd, enabling small

numbers to get through at a time.     I noticed a few people seemed to

lose odd shoes as they came through in the rush.     As the crowd

gathered speed as they came through the gates, both the steward and I

were pinned against the railings.     I never took ity eyes off the

oncaning crowd as I was in fear of losing concentration and been

pushed down.



When I finally did manage to look back towards the ground, which must

have been at least 10 minutes later (and all of that time the crowd

were coming through the gate), there were no people in sight.         I was

shocked.   I couldn't understand where the number that had passed me

had suddenly gone.     It was very eerie, it was suddenly so quiet.



About 15 minutes later, fans started caning out of the ground.         I

didn't know what had happened, but the fans seemed very distressed and

were verbally abusing the police officers they passed; they appeared
        GILLAM                  COLIN LESLIE                                      9


        angry.     Ambulances then began to arrive at the ground and I realised

        something serious had occurred.



        I saw injured people carried to ambulances and bodies being brought

        out, but all this was frcm a distance.



        At no time did I see any fans who appeared to be under the influence

        of drink or any that were carrying cans.



        I do consider the actions of the young policeman who stood in front of

        gate Cl should not go without notice.      In my opinion, he acted

        courageously to put himself in that position, obviously knowing the

        volume of the crowd.



                                                              C L GILLAM SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:        160589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

  flCERS SIGNATURE:                  PC
                                                                            STATION
NAME:            ANDREW KENNETH
A               LAWSON

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     AMBULANCEMAN


Who states:— H u s statement consisting of 022 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it a n y t h in g which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                   a   LAWSON (SIGNED)



        I am a married man living at the above address with my wife and

        family.    I have been an ambulanceman for two years.       I am enployed

        by South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I am based at

        Middlewood Station.



        As part of my training I initially attended a three week intensive

        study course where I was instructed in the various treatments of

        injuries in order to carry out my duties.     Treatments such as

        artificial resuscitation, fractures, wounds and burn treatments.

        The course was very detailed.



        In my spare time I also work at the 'Steps Restaurant' which is in the

        South Stand at Hillsborough Football Ground.     I have been working here

        for approximately two years, one of my first major games being last

        years Semi-Final FA Cup game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



        I work on average three times a week in the restaurant, depending on

        my shift at work.
 LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH                                    2




 At about 9am (0900) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I went to

 the Hillsborough Ground to start my tour of duty in the restaurant.

 I approached the ground frcm Leppings Lane.   I noticed as I entered

 that on the garage forecourt, just down frcm the entrance to the

 ground, there was a large dark green or blue box van which appeared to

 contain a lot of Liverpool supporters.   There were two policemen

 talking to the supporters with the roller shutter door at the back up.

 It appeared as if the van had spent the night on the forecourt ofthe

garage and the policemen had just woken them up.



Apart frcm this van there was only about a handful of other supporters

who were hanging around Leppings Lane.    I was not approached by any

regarding tickets for the game.   I didn't see any touts at all as I

went into the ground.    I parked my car in Vere Road without problems.



There was a security man on the Leppings Lane gate as I went in.     I

showed him my identity card with my photograph on and he let me into
the ground.



I walked around the edge of the ground along the wall towards the

South Stand and went into the restaurant, arriving at 9.05 am (0905).



The restaurant is used on this day by the Nottingham Forest executives

who are given a meal, and entertainment is laid on for them prior to

watching the game.



Vihere I am working in the restaurant there is no view of the pitch or

stands.   However, frcm one part of the restaurant you can see the
 LAWSON               ANDREW KENNETH


 players' entrance and the car park next to the entrance.



 Prior to 2pm (1400) I did not have cause to leave the restaurant, so I

did not go out into the stands or the ground at all.



At 2 pm (1400) the meal had been served and the entertainment had

 just begun, so I and sane of my work mates went out into the South

Stand through the entrance which is situated behind the press box.



I have marked the point where I stood as 'Bl' on the map of the ground

shown to me.   I now produce this map as exhibit reference Number AKL1.



Whilst I and my work colleagues were at this point, I spoke to quite a

few celebrity people, including Emlyn HUGHES,




At this time the Spion Kop stand was pretty much full of people. The

North Stand was only about one quarter full.    I found this very

surprising compared to previous years when usually by that i-.iny* most

people have found their place.



The South Stand was about half full.   The West Stand seated        was

at the most one quarter full.    In the terracing areas in front of the

West Stand, two pais behind the goal, which I now know as 3 and 4,

were packed full of people.   The other pens either side of than and

the wing pens were very empty.



I cannot recall whether there were any police officers in the ground

or on the pitch at all.
LAWSON                  ANDREW KENNETH




 In Pens 3 and 4 there was general swaying of the people which made me

notice that it was so full.    They appeared to be enjoying themselves,

although they weren't singing at all.      At that stage I did not notice

any of the fans in the Pens 3 and 4 trying to get into the seated

stand above, or into the a joining pens.



I stayed in this position for about 30 minutes, just talking to

people, along with my




At about 2.30pm (1430) the North Stand was starting to fill up.     The

South Stand was about three quarters full and the seated area in the

West Stand was filling up.



It's difficult to say whether I could see any more people going into

Pens 3 and 4, because I would have found it hard to believe if any

did. The wing pens were still very sparsley filled given the time.       I

refer to these areas marked as 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7 Pens.



Whilst we were talking, the main conversation point was the fact that

so few Liverpool supporters had got into the ground.     A lot of them

had left it late.   Another thing we mentioned was the fact that most

of the people would miss the start of the game because there are so

few turnstiles for the amount of people needing to enter the ground at

the Leppings Lane end.



At 2.20pm (1420) I had noticed the train arriving, whose line passes

at the rear of the North Stand.   Even the people coming to the ground
 LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH


 on the train would have been hard pushed to get to their spot for the

 start of the game.    I knew this was the football train because the

 line is only used for large games at Hillsborough.    Frcm my experience

 it takes about 15 minutes to walk frcm the railway station to Tappings

Lane, but this is on a normal weekday.     But on this big match day such

as this, with a lot of people being walked dcwn to the ground by the

Police, it would take at least 30 minutes just to get to the ground

and then you would have to queue at the turnstiles to get in.



At about 2.30pm (1430) I went back into the restaurant.     The

executives had moved into the bar area and we set about clearing up.



Between 2.45pm (1445) and 2.50pm (1450), I heard a loud cheer frcm the

ground.     As I follow football as much as possible, that was my cue to

get out into the stand to watch the game.     I went back into the South

Stand and stood where I was before at point Bl.    When I got out I saw

that both teams were out on the pitch, so the cheer had obviously been

for them ccming out.



I saw that the Spion Kop and South Stand was full of spectators.     The

North Stand was fairly full by now.    The West Stand seating area was

full.     The two pens behind the goal, 3 and 4, were even more packed

with people than there was before.    I couldn't believe the amount of

people in the two pens.    It was obvious that the people in there

couldn't move.    There was still space in Pens 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, which I

would say, with the amount of people expected, has never happened

before.



At about 2.55pm (1455), I know it was just a few minutes before kick-
LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH                                      6


off, I noticed that people were climbing over the fence at the front

of the Pens 3 and 4.   The people were getting out and sitting down

behind the goal.    I noticed thatone or two were holding their arms or

legs as if they had sustained aninjury.     Sane fans were being hauled

up into the seated stand fron Pens 3 and 4.    There were between 50

and 100 people who were behind the goal at the Leppings Lane end by

this time. A mixture of fans, Police and pressmen.    I couldn't say

specifically how many fans there were.     I formed the opinion that the

game would not be starting on time, given the amount of people already

behind the goal, and they were still getting out of the Pens 3 and

4.   Even if they did start, I thought it would be stopped; there was

no way it could carry on.    I got the impression, initially, that it

was a pitch invasion, so I went back into the restaurant to tell my

work colleagues they needn't rush their dinner because the game would

be stopped.   When I went back in     they hadn't kickedoff. This would

be 2 or 3 minutes before 3pm (1458) (1457).



At about 3pm (1500) I went back outside into the South Stand and stood

at position 'B' on the map as I had before the game had started.    I

stood with              and looked towards the West Stand.



I saw that the amount of people behind the goal on the pitch had

increased.    There was between half as much and the same amount again

extra; because of the numbers they were beginning to encroach on the

pitch.   Frcm my position, it appeared that the problem was still one

of a pitch invasion and it appeared people had been injured just

getting over the fencing.   All of them appeared to be carrying one

form of lint) injury or another.    Being an ambulanceman I thought I

could help because the people just appeared to be carrying lint)
 LAWSON                ANDREW KENNETH                                       7


 injuries.



 I decided to go and see if I could help, so I walked (town underneath

the South stand, through the club reception and players' areas.      As I

walked through the areas there did not appear to be any panic at all.

Everything was normal.    I walked through the players' tunnel to the

pitch.    At the end of the tunnel there was a Chief Steward standing at

the end of the tunnel next to the pitch. I told him that I was an

ambulanceman and I thought I could help. He told me to go (town and see

what I could do.



At this stage the game had been stopped because the players came off

the pitch and passed down the tunnel towards the changing rooms as I

walked out.



I've received several briefings on emergency situations.    In cases of

emergency the sentence, 'Could Mr MEDDQWS please go to the Police box

at the back of the North Stand,' is used, and all the staff move into

position to await further instructions.    The message is passed via the

Tannoy system.   Even though I was in a postion to hear the Tannoy I

heard no such message up until that point.



I walked along the gravel path running along the front of the South

Stand towards the lappings Lane end.    About three quarters of the way

along the track, I cut onto the pitch. It was then I realised the full

extent of what had happened.   There were bodies laid out all over

the pitch around that goal area.   I could see that seme of them were
LAWSON                ANDREW KENNETH                                       8


I walked towards a young St John's Ambulance girl who was about 25-26

years of age.   She was working with an elderly St John's Ambulanceman.

They were rendering artificial respiration to a young lad who

was about thirteen years of age.   He was lying on the pitch at the

point I have marked as 'Cl' on the plan.     The girl was carrying out

mouth-to-mouth and the elderly man was carrying out the heart massage.

The method the man was adopting was different to the one I have been

taught.   I thought at the time it was the wrong method, but it may not

have been.



I went to them and I told him who I was. He moved over without

question and allowed me to continue the heart massage.     I continued

using the method I had been taught which is five massages to one

breath.   The girl continued carrying out the breaths.    We had been

working on him for about 20 seconds when a policeman came to us.      He

was between 23 and 28 years, medium build.     That's all I know.    He

held the boy's wrist, checking his pulse.     After about a minute, the

policeman shouted, "He's got a pulse."   I honestly believe that the

lad was dead before we got him breathing again.     We were all so

relieved it's hard to describe how we felt.     We turned him over and

put him into the recovery position, once we had ensured that the

breathing was sustained.



By this time it was apparent that more and more people needed help, so

I left the boy with a young St John's Ambulance lad and instructed him

on what to do if the lad stopped breathing.



The scene by now was one of total chaos. Able people were just going

to injured people as and when they could.     You could not walk three
LAWSON                  ANDREW KENNETH                                      9


yards before you came to the next person who needed help.      The

thirteen year old lad I treated was dressed in a red Liverpool

football shirt and dark trousers.     He had dark hair and was very thin.



From this lad I walked a few yards to the position I have marked as

 'Dl' on the plan.    It was only a matter of yards.   He was the next

body we came to. The ambulance girl was with me. The man was about

30-35 years, very overweight.     He was clean shaven. He was wearing a

shirt with buttons all up the front which had been opened from the

waist to the neck.     The man was lying on his back with his arms

outstretched and his legs outstretched.     We started working on him

straight away.     I did the heart massage and the girl did the

breathing. We worked on him for perhaps 3 or 4 minutes, its difficult

to say.   I had no idea whether somebody had tried beforehand.

Thinking about it, perhaps somebody had, because his shirt was open.

I'd always been taught before that day to never give up on anybody and

always work on them for as long as you could, but you had to make a

decision how long to keep trying before the next one needed help - you

might have been able to save that one.



Whilst we working on the man a couple of yards away, there was another

man who appeared also dead.     He was about 25-30 years of age, and was

of medium build.     There were three male Liverpool supporters working

on him.   They were about 23, 24, 25 years of age.     Whilst I was

working on my man I watched them and I indicated to them to tilt the

man's head back when they were blowing, because it would have helped.

I know they had been working on him for longer than we had been

working on the big man, so when we stopped, they asked us if we could

do anything else for him.     I knew we couldn't because they had been
 LAWSON                  ANDREW KENNETH


 trying for ages anyway.    We had to leave both of these men where they
 were.



 In respect of the three casualties I have mentioned, none had any

visible injuries, other than seme



Myself and the St John's Ambulance girl moved about four or five yards

and came to another body of a man who was about 22 years of age. He

was lying on his back at the position marked El on the plan.      He was

apparently dead.   We started giving him heart massage and artificial

respiration straight away.     When I had done it for a few times, a man

came over to us who said he was a doctor.     He asked if there was

anything he could do.     I had remembered that we had always been taught

to inform our control at the earliest opportunity, of any situation.

I decided I would have to telephone them to let them know, because up

until that time I had only seen one Red Cross ambulance there.



I asked the doctor to carry on the heart massage, assisted by the

girl, and I would go and telephone the Control Room at the Ambulance

Service to let them know.



I ran back to the players' tunnel and ran down the tunnel.     At the
end,         the groundsman, was there and I asked him where the

nearest telephone was.     He took me to a room.   I think it was the

coach's room, but I'm not sure.



I telephoned the Ambulance Service Control at Fairfield, Margate,

Rotherham.   When I got through I told them that there was a major

incident at Hillsborough.    I told them who I was.   They told me they
LAWSON                ANDREW KENNETH                                       11


were already aware that it was a major incident and to carry on what I

was doing.    I also told them that there was about forty people dead at

that stage.



I went back out to the pitch via the players' tunnel, the same way I

had gone into the stand.



When I got out onto the pitch, I saw bodies being carried across the

pitch towards the Spion Kop end of the ground, in between the Kop and

the North Stand.    They were being carried, mainly by supporters any

way they could, on stretchers, boards, anything at all.



I noticed that there seemed to be more people walking about, either

injured, tending to people on the ground and such.    People were still

being pulled fran behind the fencing over the top by Police Officers

and other people.



The people who were walking about with injuries I left, because they

were obviously not in serious need of help.



As I walked towards the goal-posts, near the the goal-post nearest

the South Stand, I saw the bodies of two young girls aged about

sixteen years of age.     There were both lying at the side of the goal­

posts at the point I have indicated on the plan as point FI.       A man

was standing over them.     I soon realised he was their father.    He was

shouting and screaming, "Help me, they've all I've got help them."



I started to give heart massage and artificial respiration to the

lighter coloured haired girl of the two.    The other girl had dark
LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH                                        12


hair.    There was a girl close by who was St John's Ambulance I think,

but I'm not sure.     She started to help me revive the blonde haired

girl.    I think somebody had been trying to revive her before, because

the jumper she was wearing had been rolled up and tucked underneath

her chin so as to aid the heart massage.        I continued trying to revive

her for about 8 minutes, without success.        I think there may have been

sorebody trying to revive the dark haired girl, but I'm not store.       I

wouldn't know who they were.     I found out that the two girls were

sisters and their father knelt by me the whole time. Fran television

reports I saw later, I recognised them as the HICKS' sisters.



After I had been working on the girl for about 8 minutes, a man of

about seventeen years of age staggered to the side of me and collapsed

on the floor next to me.     He seemed in a pretty bad way.    It was then

I made the decision to step working on the girl and see what I could

do for the lad.     I moved towards him.    He was clutching his chest and

appeared to be gasping for breath.    Where he had fallen was right next

to the point marked FI on the plan.        He was breathing, so I put him

into the recovery position, along with the girl who had helped me try

and revive the girl.



I looked to try and find the stretcher to get him moved because he

needed hospital treatment.     I looked around and saw a Chief Fire

Officer who appeared to be taking some sort of control in the chaos

that was happening.     He was indicating to some other fireman that he

wanted some rows of seats in the stand clearing of people, in order

that we could carry the stretchers towards the back of the Police

Control Box, just below it.
LAWSON               ANDREW KENNETH                                    13


Sane supporters were just putting what appeared to be a dead body

onto a stretcher, so I asked to have this, in order that we could

move the injured man.   We placed him on the stretcher and two

Liverpool supporters and a policeman helped me carry the man across

the pitch, up the seats which had been cleared and along the gangway

in the South Stand to the area at the back of the Police ControlBox.

Hie route we took is marked G1 on the plan.



The lad on the stretcher, we carried, I would say was about

seventeen years of age. He was a thin lad and had black hair, but I

can't remember what it was like.   He was wearing a red Liverpool shirt.

I don't know what sort of trousers he had on.



When we got to the area at the back of the Police Box, I saw that

there were about three or four other casualties who needed hospital

treatment.   They were all young lads under twenty years of age, the

youngest being about twelve I would say.   Further than that, I cannot

describe them.



There were also fire engines in this area - I don't know how many.



An ambulance came from the direction of the Leppings Lane entrance

and drove past me towards the rear of the South Stand.   The ambulance

was full and had no room for any more casualties. It carried on

towards the main entrance in Penistone Road.



I went towards the Leppings Lane entrance to see if there were any

more ambulances.   As I walked down the walkway which joins Leppings

Lane to Penistone Road and travels at the back of the South Stand, I
LAWSON                ANDREW KENNETH                                    14


saw that there were three or four ambulances in the centre of the

walkway.   Alongside the high wall at the back of the West Stand, I saw

a lot of injured people sitting on the floor at the foot of the wall

slumped against it.   Although these people were injured, they did not

appear to be in immediate need of resuscitation; they appeared to have

one form of limb injury.



The other side of the ambulances to the left as I looked, there were

other fans who were laid out on the floor next to the the wooden fence.

These people were being given heart message and artificial respiration

by ambulancemen, St John's and policemen.    It became obvious that the

ambulances could not be brought down to the casualties, because the

officers ware just as busy as I had been, trying to resuscitate

people.    I have marked this point HI.   I decided that I had to get the

casualties down to the ambulances. I ran back to where I had left

them and saw that another two casualties had joined than.    They were a

few people hanging about, tending to the casualties as best they

could, so collectively, we carried all of the six casualties down on

the stretchers back to the point Hi on the plan.



We put all the casualties down in the walkway at the point marked J1

on the plan.    As soon as we put than down there, doctors and nurses

were treating than straight away.



I formed the opinion that everybody was working as a team at this

stage; everything was more organised.



I walked back along the wall where people ware sitting to check that

they were all comfortable as far as possible and that none were in
LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH                                    15


need of any immediate attention.    I got to the end of the row more or

less and I then noticed that another ambulance was pulling in behind

the others.   I walked down to it and saw that the driver was one of

xny collegues,                 He was on his own, and he said we would

crew up together and get the walking wounded into the ambulance.



Wte set about getting the wounded together who could walk unaided to

the ambulance.   All during this time, doctors and nurses were

carrying out heart message and artificial respiration on other

casualties.



Wte put about thirteen patients into the ambulance, four nurses

and the two of us altogether got in the vehicle.    I cannot put a

time on this at all.    After I had left my position in the South

Stand, when the game was stopped, I cannot attach a time to anything

I did until my part in the disaster was over.



Once the ambulance was filled, we drove to the Royal Hallamshire

Hospital, the Minor Casualty Department.    On arrival the hospital was

working flat out to accept casualties and were fully organised.      They

 accepted patients frcm us immediately and assessed each person's

 injuries at an early stage.



 Once the casualties were being dealt with, we got in touch with our

 Ambulance Control to request further instructions.   They told us

 to go back to the ground.



 We drove back and approached the ground via lappings Lane.    As we

 approached the entrance it was apparent that the crowd was ccming
LAWSON               ANDREW KENNETH


out of the ground, and because of the number of fans in the road, it

took about 5-10 minutes to get inside the ground.



When we got just inside the gates I saw that there were a number

of dead bodies, about 10 or 11 laid out with green tarpaulines

covering them.   The bodies were laid out at postion marked K1 on the

plan.



We were told that we were no longer needed at that end of the ground,

so we drove along the pathway, around the back of the South Stand,

around the back of the Spion Kop, to the gymnasium where most of the

bodies had been laid out.



We parked the ambulance in Penistone Road, outside the ground,

around the back of the Spion Kop.   There were other ambulances

standing ty so it became apparent I wasn't needed anymore.



I wanted to get back into the ground to make sure

         were alright.   I was let back in and I went straight to the

'Steps Restaurant' in the South Stand where I found

was later told, but I wasn't aware of it myself, that I arrived back

at the restaurant between 5.30 pm (1730) and 6 pm (1800).



In respect of the gates situated at the Leppings Lane end of the

ground, indicated as A, B, C on the plan, when the emergency

direction is given over the Tannoy, 'Mr Meddows,' the stewards who

are responsible for the gates, are instructed to open the gates and

leave them open until they are instructed further.    This is the

procedure for every gate in the ground.
LAWSON                 ANDREW KENNETH                                      17




On the 15th April (150489) when I had cause to go to the Leppings Lane

turnstiles to take casualties to the ambulances, I saw that gates A,

B & C were open.   I did not pay any attention to what was happening

inside the gates behind the West Stand.



As I was not there, I cannot say who opened the gates, nor do I know

of any stewards who were near the gates when I was by them.     I am not

aware of any difficulty in opening and closing the gates.



Whilst I was on the pitch, treating the injured, I was not aware of

the fencing being ripped away.   I was aware at seme stage that the

gate in the fence next to the pitch to Pen 3 was open, however, I

cannot put an exact time on this.



Whilst I was in the South Stand before I went onto the pitch, I was

not aware of any alcohol being consumed or anybody drunk.     However,

when I got down to the pitch there were seme people who were drunk,

walking around where I was treating people.



I did not see anybody being obstructive towards the people helping and

treating the injured.    In fact, I would say everybody was being as

helpful as possible.



As previously stated my first big game was last year's FA Cup Semi-

Final between the same teams.    Last year when I entered the ground in

Leppings Lane, to start work at around the same time, I entered the

ground the same as this year, by showing my badge.
LAWSON               ANDREW KENNETH                                     18


Last year at about 1.30 pm (1330) - 2 pm (1400), I had cause to go

down to the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      I saw

that there was a cordon of policemen in Leppings Lane prior to the

gate to enter the turnstile area.   This point I have marked LI, Ml and

Nl.   From whichever direction you approached the ground, your ticket

was checked twice.   Once at the first checkpoint and then the second

point before the front gate.   At that time last year I was not aware

of any crowd problems either outside the ground or behind the West

Stand.



Fran the experience of being at last year's game, most people were in

position prior to the start of the game, certainly no later than

2.55pm (1455).   This included all the standing standing pens in the

West Stand.   This year it was not the case as previously stated.



Personally, I think the Tannoy system could have been used a lot

earlier, to prevent people milling around and trying to leave the

ground, adding to the chaos.



I have signed an exhibit label referring to the plan.   I now produce

exhibit reference No AKL 1.
        LAWSON           ANDREW KENNETH                     19


                                          A LAWSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           WPC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         r POL PC




                                                                 721
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                         SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010689                                                             (SIGNED)



                                 I reside with my parents at

                    Sheffield.



           I am a regular visitor to Hillsborough Football Ground, due to the

           fact I am the holder of a season ticket to watch Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Club and have been for the past four or five years.



           I would say that I know the layout of the ground quite well.



           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) Hillsborough was host to the F A

           Cup Semi-Final game between Liverpool and Notts Forest Football

           Clubs.



           A schoolfriend, I know to be                   is a regular member of

           the catering staff for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.      It was by

           speaking to him that I knew extra catering staff were required for the

           Semi-Final fixture.
At approximately 11.15am (1115) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I

met up with                outside the catering area, behind the

South Stand.



From the South Stand, I then went to the North Stand with

        where I recorded my personal details in a time book of seme

description.   I met a Senior Catering man and he instructed me to

work with other part-time staff, which included four other school

friends.



They were




At approximately 12 midday (1200), we all arrived at the refreshment

bar, frcm where we were to sell refreshments, which inducted hot pies,

tea, coffee etc.   We also sold Mars, Kit-Kat and Twix chocolate

bars.



This particular refreshment bar is situated, actually to the seated

area of the West Stand (Leppings Lane Stand).



The bar is positioned in such a way that when you are inside you

cannot watch the game, but you can, by looking through a window, see

directly over the turnstile area of the Leppings Lane entrance.



The view to the outside of the turnstiles is totally free of any

obstruction.
On arrival at the bar, as a group, we were instructed what to do by

four regular workers, who were all adults.     In addition to than,

there was another man who was in possession of a personal radio and

I would describe him as the most senior member of staff in our bar.



We started to sell refreshments almost immediately on our arrival

although it was not very busy.



As time went on the number of spectators increased and therefore we

sold more refreshments.



At approximately 2.45pn (1445) the volume of people requiring

refreshments increased to such a degree that we were rushed off our

feet with business, although up to this point the spectators had

behaved quite well.



At this time, one of the full-time staff stated that a lot more

supporters were still outside the Leppings Lane entrance.



At this point I looked through the window which overlooked the rear of

the West Stand and the turnstile area.   To my disbelief, still

outside the ground in Leppings Lane area, approximately 30 yards

either side of main entrance, the entire area was completely full of

people up to its junction with Catchbar Lane



At the same time I saw that a large gate in the immediate vicinity of

turnstiles A-G (as per map) open and an amount of supporters began to

ccne in.   I cannot say who opened the gate, although I did see both
Police and stewards in the area inside the gate.



It was also evident that it was crowded because I saw a number of

spectators climb over the turnstiles.



I cannot give any other details, due to the fact I then continued to

serve refreshments.



At a point, just after this, I had occasion to re-stock the drink

stand, whilst my friend             started to serve a supporter.

This supporter was a white male, aged approx 25 years old, approx

5'9" tall, slim build, brown short hair and he had a moustache.

He was wearing jeans and a tan coloured sweatshirt.



This man demanded t o     that he be given sane pies.   His actual

words were, "Give me sane pies or I'll kill you."



At this same time, he was holding a hot drink in his hand and

indicated he would throw it over us unless he was given sane pies.



I was personally frightened by his actions and I only felt better

    when actually gave him two pies and this man went away from

the kiosk.



Frcm this time until we finished serving, at approximately 3.20pm

(1520), the demand for refreshments was continuous.



During this time, numerous people came to the refreshment kiosk,

stating the stand was full and that their particular seat had already
been taken.



At approximately 3.10pm (1510), it was only at this time, that we in

the kiosk realised that something of a tragic nature had happened.

This was when people were seen to be crying.and one man was abusive

towards us, saying, "How can you still be serving when people are

dying out there."



A short time after this one of the senior staff decided to close the

kiosk and we collected sane stock and the cash and went to the kiosk

in the lower part of the West Stand where we left it in possession of

the senior staff.



I assisted in filling containers with water and took them to the rear

of the tunnel, which runs under the West Stand.   On the instructions

of Police Officers we left the containers at this location.



I could see that injured people were in the area between the rear of

this stand and the turnstiles.



I also saw what appeared to be a deceased person, covered by a blanket

and two people were next to the body crying.   I cannot give any other

details in relation to this.



I returned to the kiosk and continued to fill containers with water.



At approx 4.20pm (1620), we, as a group, were instructed to go to the

North Stand to be stood down.
       I got to the North Stand by walking to the rear of the West Stand,

       walked through the tunnel and onto the terracing on Pens 3 or 4.

       Fran there I entered a gate which gave us access to the pitch.     Fran

       there I then gained access to the North Stand, where I waited until

       4.45pm (1645) and left the ground.



       Although I saw people on the terracing and on the pitch I did not pay

       particular attention to them and carried on to the North Stand.



       Whilst in the North Stand, I heard someone say that the kiosk I was

       working in had been broken into and property stolen although I cannot

       confirm this.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

         TIME:            DATE:   010689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

O ^X
OBEICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                            STATION

N^p:
ADDRESS:
                               SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address and my full time job




           A friend of mine,                who works on the catering side at all

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club matches, asked me about four weeks

           before the Semi-Final match between Liverpool and Notts Forest at

           Hillsborough, if I would help out in a catering kiosk at that match on

           15 April 1989 (150489).     I said I would and he put ny name forward.



           A few days before the match,                  said I was needed and I would

           have to see him at the comer of Middlewood Road and Holme Lane by the

           ground.   I met him there at 11 am (1100) Saturday 15 April 1989

           (150489), and we walked to the ground down Leppings Lane through the

           main gates and down the walkway at the side and down to the back of

           the South Stand and in a back entrance there into the kitchen where I

           was given a pass, indicating I was allowed in the ground as part of

           the catering staff.    There was a man there who gave me my pass.     His

           name I think was          but I'm not really sure.    He told me I was to
                                                                           2


serve pies and things in one of the kiosks. He then took me to what I

think is kiosk

Leppings Lane terraces.



I have seen a sketch plan of the ground and indicated this kiosk on

the plan with an X.      In the kiosk he told me what I had to do.

This was about 11.30 am (1130).



When I first of all walked down Leppings Lane to the main entrance at

11am (1100), I only saw 10 to 20 Liverpool supporters just hanging

about in Leppings Lane.



I was approached by two different people in Leppings Lane about 30

yards from the main entrance. They both had a number of match tickets

in an envelope, and both wads of tickets were about 3 inches thick.

They both asked me if I wanted to buy a ticket.    We said no and they

did not ask a price for the ticket.     I saw one of the tickets.    It

just seemed like an ordinary ticket.     I did not see which end it was

for.   Both ticket touts were white males, one was in his late 20s.        I

can't remember any more about him.



The other one was in his early 20s about 5'10 tall, medium build with

fair hair, short cut, not close cropped, and parted to one side.      He

was clean shaven and wearing a dark blue, long-sleeved denim shirt and

blue denim jeans, and he had trainers on.     He had no tie on and had no

jacket.   They were stood about 10 yards apart.    I don't know if they

were working together.



After the man, who I believe is named           had stowed me my kiosk, I
went with two other lads, who were also employed for the day in the

kiosk, for a walk around the pitch and ground for about half an hour.

We started to walk around about 11.45 am (1145).     I don't know the

names of the two lads who were with me.    We walked round the track in

front of the West Stand and terraces and up the South Stand to see

     in his kiosk in the South Stand.     At this time 11.45 am (1145) I

saw just a few Notts Forest supporters sitting on the terraces on the

Spion Rep.



There were no supporters in any of the other stands or terraces at

this time.



I saw a lot of Police Officers, policemen and women, sane sitting in

the North Stand, seme standing in the Spion Kop and sane sat in the

West Stand.



I stopped and talked to       at his kiosk for about 15 minutes and me

and the other two lads walked back to our kiosk.     We went back the

same way we had cone.



At this time a few more Notts Forest fans were in the Kop terraces and

all the other stands and terraces were empty.



 I went into my allotted kiosk and served there until about 2.55 pn

 (1455).



 From 2 pn (1400) until 2.55 pn (1455) I was serving continually, but

 up until 2 pn (1400), because it wasn't too busy, I left the kiosk 4

 or five times.   I went to the standing area in the comer between the
                                                                          4


West Stand and North Stand to see how the ground was filling up.     I

noticed that the Kop and South Stand were filling up nicely with Notts

Forest supporters, but by 2 pn (1400) the North Stand and West Stand

were less than half full.



The terraces below the West Stand were about half empty all along,

including the middle terraces there.



Up until 2 pn (1400) I did not see any trouble in the ground.



As I said, between 2 pn (1400) and 2.55 pn (1455) I was continually in

the kiosk serving.   It was not really busy at my kiosk and in this area

it was relatively quiet for what I thought it vrould be.   It certainly

was not hectic.



About 2.20 pn (1420) I saw two policemen, both wearing helmets, with a

lad in his early 20s.   They each had one of his arms and walked him

past our kiosk.   This lad was struggling violently as if trying to get

away and shouting to Liverpool supporters nearby,"'Help me lads, get

'em off me." No one helped him and he was taken by the Officers down

the walkway towards the back of the North Stand, and as they did so, I

saw about 10 supporters dive at them trying to pull the lad away from

the Police, but suddenly other officers came and moved everybody away.

The Police managed to take the lad off towards the back of the North

Stand.



I didn't see any other trouble.



In my kiosk I was out of the way and so could not see what was
happening at the main gates and Leppings Lane turnstiles.



Three or four minutes before 3 pn (1456)-(1457) I left the kiosk to

go to the South Stand to see part of the match.    I left the other two

lads in the kiosk.



I walked round the back of the West Stand through the gap in the

dividing wall, then down to the back of the Police Control Box and

through a gate into the South Stand, and I stood in about the second

gangway in and on a gangway dividing the front rows of seating from

the second tier of seating.   I stood with the Steward there.



As I walked round the back of the West Stand there were quite a few

Liverpool supporters about, trying to find where to go.



There certainly was not thousands of supporters here at this time.     I

did not have to fight my way through them.



There were Police Officers at the turnstiles searching supporters as

they came through and a lot of other Officers stood around watching

and directing supporters.



There was no trouble here that I saw.



I did not notice if any gates were open at this time.



There was not a rush of supporters at this time.



As I got into the South Stand gangway, I noticed that everywhere was
full - the Kop, North Stand, South Stand and West Stand.      The terraces

below the West Stand were completely full as well.



I did not notice any distress in the crowds in the West Stand terraces

at this time.   The end terraces here were as full as the centre ones.

There was singing caning fran these terraces as from the rest of the

ground.



Both teams' players were on the pitch.    They had ccme out before I got

to the South Stand.    They had just kicked off.



I just watched the game for about five minutes, then suddenly I saw

supporters in the middle terraces below the West Stand and behind the

goal climbing up the front fencing and over onto the track.      I just

thought it was a pitch invasion.    I never heard any shouts for help

fran that area.    There was about 20 supporters at first climbing the

fence.



There was 10 to 15 Police behind this goal, stood facing the fencing,

and as the fans began climbing over, the Police were at first trying

to stop them.     I hadn't noticed any push forward in these terraces

before this, but I had not really been looking.      Then suddenly it

seemed like everyone in the centre terraces behind the goal was trying

to get out and I saw supporters in the West Stand pulling up

supporters fran the terraces below.    More and more were trying to

climb over the front fencing.     It was chaos.    Then the Police who were

in that area, and other Police who joined than, were stood at the

fencing helping people to get over the fencing onto the track.
This was going on for seme time and hundreds of fans were getting over

the fencing onto the track and pitch.     Some who had got over were lying

down.   Most were just wandering about.    I saw a young lad about 14

years old lying on the pitch in front of the South Stand mid-way

between the half-way line and the West side track.     I'd seen two

Police Officers physically carry him fran behind the goal area to the

area I've described above.   He was unconscious and they laid him down.

I saw the Officers giving him the kiss of life and heart massage.



They were doing this for about five minutes.     One of the Officers was

crying as he tried to revive him.   I believe the Officers revived him

because they put their thumbs up and a crowd nearby all cheered.      Then

an ambulanceman ran over with a stretcher and the lad was put on the

stretcher and taken over to the corner of the North Stand and Kop. I

can't remember anything about the lad other than he was about 14 yrs

old.



By this time an ambulance had arrived behind the leppings Lane end

goal.   There were a lot of people laid down now and many were being

given the kiss of life by Police and St John's Ambulance people.        I

can't describe any of these people who were being treated.



By this time I was totally numb with shock.



It was totally chaotic.   There were so many people rushing around you

could not really see what was happening.     I saw supporters and Police

pulling wooden advertising boards fran round the pitch to use as

stretchers.
About ten minutes after people first started climbing out over the

fencing, I noticed the two centre gates in the front fencing were

open.     I don't know who opened than or when.   Police Officers were at

these gates helping people out of the terraces.



When I realised how serious the matter was, I went on the pitch to

help.     This was about 15 minutes after it had all started.



Ms and another led who had been standing behind me, I don't know who

he is, ran across to the Kop end and pulled seine of the advertising

boarding off, just the one piece.     We ran with it to the front of the

Leppings Lane goal area.



I saw a young girl about 16 years lying on the pitch round about the

        of the right side comer of the penalty area as you look at the

goal.     She was lying on her back with her eyes shut and all her face

was blue.     She did not move.   I believe she was dead.   I describe her

as having black or dark hair, collar length to the top of her

shoulders.     I think it was like soft penned.   She was slim built.        I

think she had a light coloured T-shirt, round-necked, on and blue

 jeans.    She was white.



There was a man kneeling at her side.      He was in his early 20s.     He

had a Liverpool shirt on.     He was just looking at her.    He was upset

but not crying.     No one was treating her.   A St John's Ambulance-

wonan came and told us to take the girl to the top end.         We put her

 onto the board and about 4 supporters joined us and we took her to the

 walkway between the Kop and North Stand and seme St John's Ambulance

 people carried her off fran us.     They took her off the board we were
                                                                         9


carrying.



I ran back by myself towards the Leppings Lane end.   I did not carry

anyone else away from the area.



I did not personally see any more that I think were dead.



I went up and asked people if they were alright and about 3.30 pm

(1530), I went back onto the South Stand and back along the rear of

the West Stand towards my kiosk.



I have indicated on the sketch plan of the ground with symbol 'O'

roughly where the girl, who I believe had died, was lying.



As I walked to the rear of the West Stand, I saw about 60 supporters

lying around on the concrete with Police and other supporters treating

them.   As this was happening I saw glass come showering down on the

people lying about.   I looked up and saw a big hole in the glass of a

window in the comer of the West Stand.    I did not see how this window

was broken. I don't think anybody was injured by the falling glass.



I walked on and went to my kiosk.   When I got there the other two lads

were still in the kiosk and we gave drinks away to people in the area

who ware obviously distressed.



We stayed at the kiosk until most people had gone and at about 4.20 pm

(1620), I locked the kiosk door with a key and the three of us took

all the money from the kiosk to a room in the North Stand.   We just

stayed there for about 15 minutes and then walked out across the pitch
                                                                          10


to the South Stand to find



The ground by now was quite empty.   There were only ground staff and

Police on the pitch by now.



I forgot to say that about 10 minutes after the incident had begun, I

saw a supporter run across the pitch to the front of Notts Forest fans

in the Rep and stand in front of them, acting the fool, waving his

hands about as if calling the supporters on.     Then he ran back and a

Police Officer rugby-tackled him and he was taken away.    That's when a

line of Police formed across the width of the pitch facing the West

Stand area and they were on the half-way line.     The supporters had run

over to the Rep end while people were climbing out of the leppings

Lane terrace.



I would also like to say that at about 2 pn (1400), when I was in the

kiosk, I saw 10 to 15 Liverpool supporters urinating against a brick

wall in front of our kiosk.   Police came and moved them on, and as the

Police were doing this, I saw Liverpool supporters urinating on these

Officers from a concrete stairway above them.



As I got back to the South Stand looking for          I could not find

him so I stopped and talked to a man and woman, Notts Forest

supporters, in the Stand.



About 5.30 pn (1730) I couldn't do any more and I left and walked

home.



There's nothing else I can add other than the Police did a very good
                                                                                  11


       job and I wish it had never happened.




        I now produce the sketch plan mentioned previously (Exhibit No             )

       Exhibit Reference Nc




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                  POL PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION




ADDRESS:
                        SHEFFIELD,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

                     at the Riverside Suite Which is situated in the South Stand

           at Hillsborough Football Ground.



           On Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) ray hours of duties were 10am

           (1000) to 7pm (1900).     At 10am (1000) on the day, I arrived there and

           corrmeneed my normal duties.    Up until 3pm (1500) I carried out these

           duties,                                                   By 3pm (1500)

           the executives and their guests had taken their seats, so instead of

           remaining in the suite to take my refreshments, I decided to watch the

           match with ray friend                                                     We

           took up position in the seating area of the lower tier of the South

           Stand as indicated on the map (Exhibit Ref           (Exh No           ).



           Frcm this position I had a good unobstructed view of Pens 2-7 of the

           West Stand terrace with the match in progress.



           My attention was then drawn to the West Stand terrace and I saw one or
two persons being bodily lifted frcm the terrace into the seated area

above, to begin with frcm Pen 3.     This had repercussion effect along

the back of pens 3-4, either side of the main entrance tunnel.    Whilst

I was watching this, I saw a sudden surge in the crowd Which emanated

from the tunnel area.    This had a kind of donino effect upon the crowd

and I saw them being pushed forward into the perimeter fencing.    The

people seemed unable to right themselves.



I then saw Police Officers, Stewards and Apprentices making towards

the front of the West Stand.    There seemed to be a lot of officials

congregating at the perimeter fence behind the goal.    I saw a number

of supporters attempting to climb the inside of the perimeter fence,

to get onto the pitch.    As they reached the top they were assisted by

Police Officers and Ground staff alike, I could not see if any

perimeter fence gates were opened due to my view being obstructed by

the officials helping supporters



As more and more people came onto the pitch I left my position and

went down to the track to help them,    ffy attention was drawn to a

supporter running across the pitch from the North Stand who was

eventually detained by Police Officers.     When I looked round to face

the West Stand, I saw a considerable number of spectators on the

playing area, seme of whom were in various states of shock, and others

who were being resuscitated.    I then noticed the body of a boy lying

face down on the pitch in the position I have indicated on the map

 (X3). The boy was wearing a red top and trousers.     He had mousey

brown hair.   There didn't seem to be anyone with him, so I went over

to him to see if he was alright.
       I put ray Arm on his left shoulder to try and stir him.     There was no

       response, so I put ray hand to his mouth to see if there was any signs

       of breath.     I also checked for a pulse in his neck.   There seated to

       be a faint trace of heart beat so I turned him over, checked his

       airway and began to resusciate him mouth-to-mouth.       I did this for 4

       cycles and again felt for a pulse.       Within a few seconds, a First Aid

       man relieved me and carried on the resusciation procedure.       I watched

       for a few mcments, but I was so overcome by the incident, that I

       walked back towards the South Stand.       As I climbed back into the

       Stand, I glanced back and saw that two persons were resuscitating the

       boy.   I went back inside to the Riverside Suite Where I remained until

       I left the ground at 4pm (1600).



       My friend               eft the Stand at an early stage and did not go

       onto the pitch.



                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

^         TIME:              DATE:   010589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   POL PCI
                                                                         STATION




ADDRESS:
                               SHEFFIELD,

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 230589                                                            SIGNED)



           I live at the above address




           My wife works                                           at Sheffield

           Wednesday Football Club.



                                                           for the F A Cup Semi-

           Final match between Liverpool and Notts Forest at Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Ground on 15 April 1989 (150489), Compass required extra

           temporary catering staff and                          agreed to help out

           on that day.    She asked me and I also agreed to help out on that date.



                                                 Compass at Sheffield Wednesday,

           asked               I to be at the ground for 11.30am (1130) on the day

           of the match.




                                                                                      742
We both went together and arrived at the ground at 11.25am (1125) that

day.



We both walked into Lappings Lane and in through the main gates there.

At this time there were just a few hundred supporters, I believe both

Liverpool and Notts Forest, just wandering about the area.   Thinking

about it there may have been about 50.



There was no trouble with the supporters and I did not see anyone

drinking alcohol.



There was about three uniformed Police Officers on the gate.      One of

the Officers asked to see a pass card which was pinned to my

sweatshirt and which said we were catering staff.



We were allowed in the main gates and we walked down the walkway to

the rear of the South Stand to a store rocm with freezers and fridges

inside and that's where                was standing with other catering

staff.   We went up for a cup of tea, I just took my coat off and a

couple of minutes later I returned to         in the same area.



         lad previously told me that my job for the day would be

assisting a man named          to keep the kiosks on the South Stand

supplied with goods to sell.



         had been allocated a kiosk in the South Stand and I waited at

her kiosk and           joined me after about ten minutes.



I was not wearing a watch on that day, so was not really aware of
actual correct times.



       showed me around the South Stand's kiosks and we took certain

orders for the goods required by the kiosks.



We then walked via the front of the West Stand through a gate which

leads to the rear of the West Stand where the store-rocm for the kiosk

goods is and we collected serviettes and stirrers from there.   This

was about between 12 midday (1200) and 12.15pm (1215).



Then we returned to the South Stand kiosk via the same route.   At

this time the whole of the terracing in front of the West Stand was

relatively empty, there were only a spattering of fans there.   A lot

were lying down in the sun, just taking in the sun, reading their

programmes.



The South Stand was practically empty as was the North Stand.



The Kop end had a lot more supporters in than the West terrace area.

Then with        I spent the next 30 to 45 minutes checking the South

Stand kiosks.



During this time I did not go into the ground area so I cannot say

what the situation was in the stands or terraces.



At this time              approached us and asked us to go to the

North Stand kiosk and store-rocm to collect trays of pies for the

South Stand kiosks, and so        md I got down onto the track over

the small wall in front of the South Stand seating area, seme distance
to the left of the tunnel area and walked around the track in front

of the Leppings Lane end terraces and into the North Stand over the

small wall in front of that stand seating area.



At this time which I actually believe could have been about 2pm (1400),

the Kop end was relatively full.



I didn't really notice the South Stand area.



There were quite a few supporters in the North Stand, it was by no

means full. It could have been about half full.



I did not notice the seating area of the West Stand.



I noticed that the terraced area to the left and right of the lappings

Lane terraces was quite empty, but the middle sections were full at

the front, but I could not see to the back of the centre sections, so

I don't know how full that was.



There was no crushing at this time and no one appeared in distress.



We collected the pies and had to walk back to the South Stand via the

rear of the West Stand on the instructions of a Police Officer who was

on the track by the North Stand.



 I can't recall any Police being in front of the leppings Lane end, but

 I wasn't really looking for Police.



Me and         then carried on supplying the South Stand kiosks.
                                                                        5




There is nothing else I can say about the crowd situations in the

ground, until about quarter to or ten to three (1445-1450), when_____

       again approached us and asked us to go with a girl from one of

the South Stand kiosks (I do not know her name) to the West Stand, to

collect seme chocolate bars fran that store-roan. I went with

      and the girl again, through the gate at the side of the South

Stand and to the store at the rear of the West Stand and collected the

chocolates and returned the same way.



All the South Stand was now full, the North Stand seemed fairly full

but I didn't take much notice.



I don't know about the Kop.



It seemed there was a lot of people at the front of the leppings Lane

terraces along the whole length.



I didn't notice any crushing or any distress in this crowd.



I can't recall what the crowd in the Leppings Lane terraces were doing

specifically, it just seemed normal behaviour for a match day.



As we went to the West Stand terraces I saw supporters just milling

about in the area on the ground side of the turnstiles and a lot were

urinating against the boundary wall.    Some were leaning against the

wall as if they were drunk.



There was not a vast crowd of people in this area at this time.
As we left the girl at the South Stand,         and I and       had to

return to the North Stand to fetch more pies.



We again got onto the track in front of the South Stand over the small

wall and walked along the track in front of the Leppings Lane terraces

towards the North Stand.



The match had begun at this time and play was in progress. It must

have been just two or three minutes after kick-off.



I did not notice the crowd situation in the Kop end, South Stand or

North Stand, because I just was not looking there.



There were a number of Police Officers on the track in front of the

Leppings Lane and just watching the supporters. There was also a St

John's Ambulance person, who was a youth aged about 18 yrs, also on

the track, just on the grass, also looking at the supporters.



I noticed that both left and right sections of the Leppings Lane

terraces were full, but there was still room for further supporters.



In the centre sections at this end, behind the Liverpool goal, I saw

a lot of people, male and fsnale crushed tightly against the front

metal fencing from maybe the lower chest upwards. Their bodies were

distorted against the fencing. There was a lot of screaming from these

people and others behind.



Behind these for about five or six, maybe more rows back in this area,
                                                                         7


everybody was crushed tightly together and there was a lot of shouting

and screaming from them.



A lot of the people being crushed against the front of the terrace

area were pale and my immediate impression was that quite soon someone

was going to die.



I can't actually say that sane of the people I saw were actually dead

at this time, although they looked in a very bad condition.



I believe that at his time the Police in front of the Leppings Lane

terrace area should have been aware that something was terribly wrong

in the crowd, then suddenly I was aware of a man, maybe 20-21 years of

age, wearing a blue shirt on the grass just behind the goal. He was

holding his right shoulder, bending forward.   He looked as if he was

in pain.   I did not see him collapse. I did not see where he came

from.



I just kept walking towards the North Stand, looking into the Leppings

Lane terraces.



I did not make any comment to the Police, but I don't think that the

Police on the track could have done anything at this time.



Frcm then on a number of supporters appeared on the track area in

front of the terraces. I vrould think they came over the fencing from

the terraces.



I can't describe any of the people I had seen crushed against the
                                                                         8


fencing in this terraced area.



Me and          walked off and got into the North Stand over the small

wall and we went to a walkway at the back of the stand.    I was now out

of sight of the ground and pitch area.



             then joined us after a few minutes. I had said to

as we walked in front of the terraces, "Someone's going to die in

there."



We got the pies from the North Stand and walked back via the rear

of the West Stand.



At the back of the West Stand at this time, there was a lot of people

in the area on the ground side of the turnstiles, running about.      They

seemed unaware of what was happening inside the ground.    They just

wanted to get into the ground.    I was asked directions to various

parts of the ground.



I did not see the tunnel area leading down to the Leppings Lane

terraces.   This was about five or ten minutes after I first walked

onto the track just after the game had kicked off.



I can't remember if any Police were in the area behind the West Stand

at this time.



I walked quickly through the crowd towards the gateway at the side of

the South Stand.
I saw a number of people, including a St John's Ambulance person

around someone lying on the floor just at the top of the terracing, at

the right side end of the West Stand.     I can't say if it was a male or

a female Who was on the floor.     I can't describe what the person was

wearing.



I didn't see anything else happening in the ground at this time.



Myself,                     dropped the pies off in the South Stand and I

went into the South Stand area to see what was happening in the ground.



I spent only about 30 seconds looking and all I saw was a lot of

people on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end.     The match had been

stopped by now.



I did not look any more and went back to the kitchens and continued

doing my job. I went up again two or three times to look.



It was still the same, lots of people on the pitch.



I couldn't see exactly what was happening.



I stayed supplying the kiosks until about 4.15pn (1615) when

           closed the kiosks and at about 4.45pm (1645) I left the

grounds with            and went into Penistone Road.



There was no activity in Penistone Road at this time other than fans

going home.
                                                          10



<1                   I then made our way home.



       That's all I have to say.




                                                 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    230589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

JUICERS SIGNATURE:                      POL PC




*




£
                                                               751
