     ANTONY CREIGHTON BOVILL.          Pc 10^f Rotherham C1

At 8.30am on Saturday 15th April 1989 I came on duty at Main Street Police Station,
Rotherham where I joined my serial, number ^2, the supervisory officer being Sergeant
2171 Keenan.
At 9»00am that date with my serial, I attended Sheffield Wednesday football stadium,
Hillsborough, Sheffield where the briefing took place. At 10.30am, tjie briefing completed
we left the football groundand went to our point of duty on Halifax Road, the duty
relating to the supervisionof the Liverpool fans as they made their x-ray to the ground.
With Pc 1925 Suter, I took up a position approximately half a mile from Hillsborough.
From the time that we arrived at that place, the volume of fans slowly increased as the
coaches arrived, and grew to a large and constant stream as time went on.
I saw huge numbers drinking alcoholic beverages such as canned beer and lager, bottles
of wine and martini, and we had to advise several youths who were running around the
rear of the nearby shops tourinate. We were"-also persistently asked for directions to
public houses.
As the time approached 2.30pm that date, the volume of fens increased furtherto a huge
level, and these numbers continued to pass us up to 2,^5p®.
It was apparent that a large number of these fans were drunk.
At 2.A-5pm we     joined, the rest of our serial outside a nearby public house, then aftera
short time we all made our way down Halifax Road towards the football ground.
The footpath and ajoining grounds were littered with cans and bottles of various,
alcoholic drinks.
At 3.00pm as      we approached the traffic island close tothe ground, we were calledvia
the radio to      attend at the Leppings Lane end regardinglarge crowd disturbance.
   climbsd into a passing police transit and attended immediately at that location,
un our arrival I saw a massive crowd pushing and shoving outside the gates, several other
officers were already in attendance.
Continuing crowd control duties, we were persistently approached by youths, demanding to
be let into the ground and showing their tickets. Thess youths were in a very aggressive
and abusive mood and despite, after a short time when other youths started to stream from
the ground, and it was apparent that a large disturbance had taken place inside, they
were still demanding to be lat in, and refusing to mave away from the gates.
These gates were subsequently opened for emergency services   to enter, still thecrowd
refused to be dispersed.
As people came from the ground, recriminations were screamed at all of the officers,
including myself. I remained in that location, outside the Leppings Lane gates until it
was apparent that theground had been emptied, and was then directed to do traffic duty
on the traffic island, Penistone Road.
After a short time we were directed to Claywheels Lane and were there stood down from
duty.
At 7.30pm that date we returned to Main Street Police Sation, Rotherham, where after
being debriefed, I went off duty.




Police Constable 10^f
