DAVID ALFRED LAWRENCE, POLICE CONSTABLE 389 - 'C' DIVISION H/Q
DIVISIONAL FIREARMS OFFICER


REPORT RE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



At 8.30 am, on Saturday, 15th April 1989, I commenced duty at

Main Street Police Station, Rotherham, in connection with the

F.A. Cup Semi-Final between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool to

be played at Hillsborough, Sheffield, kick off at 3.00 pm,

together with other officers, I was conveyed to Hillsborough

Football Ground arriving there at approximately 9.20 am.



At that time we were seated in the North Stand of the ground

where about 10.00 am, we were briefed, by various senior

officers, on different aspects of the days programme.    I was

in Serial 53, the officer in charge being Detective Inspector

Charles.



At 11.15 am, that day, together with other officers in my

Serial, I took up duties at Herries Road Bus Station,

basically ensuring that the incoming Nottingham Forest

supporters were policed and that their buses were parked up

safely and correctly.   I remained at this post and on this

duty until 3.00 pm, when we were instructed by Detective

Inspector Charles to make our way to Claywheels Lane for a

meal.



I was in possession of my own Police personal radio, tuned

into ground control and as I was walking, with other officers,

towards Claywheels Lane, it became obviously apparent, due to
wireless traffic that there was a crowd control situation in

Leppings Lane outside the stand.     I heard some officer, whom I

assumed was outside the ground, I don't know who, ask for

permission to open a gate.     I did not hear the reply but after

a few more minutes I again heard the officer ask for the gate

to be opened as in this words,    "There was a danger of some

persons being seriously injured or killed at the gates."

Whoever was in control then came back over the air and said,

"If there is any fear of people being injured or killed then

open the gate."



By this time, our Serial had joined up with other Serials on

Claywheels Lane and due to traffic coming over the air,

Detective Inspector   Charles contacted control via radio,

informed them that he had a number of Serials with him and

asked if we could be of any assistance.     As a result of this,

we were instructed to make our way to the Leppings Lane end of

the ground and await further instructions.



We made our way qiiickly to Leppings Lane, where we lined up in

Serials, some 50 yards from the ground forecourt.     We had only

been there a few minutes when Detective Inspector Charles again

informed control that we were available and asked for further

instructions.     A message came back that we were to go

immediately inside the ground and assist other officers.

Together with other officers in the Serial we ran the short

distance to the ground and on the forecourt we were confronted

with Liverpool supporters who were carrying other injured

supporters out of the ground.
I saw bodies, either injured or dead on the forecourt.       I then

went through the tunnel which leads directly onto the terraces

and this smelled vilely of urine and alcohol.     As I was going

through this tunnel, Liverpool supporters who were coming out

were in an aggressive mood towards myself and other officers

calling us, among other things,    "Murdering bastards."



Once through the tunnel, and onto the terraces, I saw

Detective Constable Hubbard (in uniform) on top of the

perimeter fence which leads onto the pitch shouting at the

crowd to back off from the fence.    He then shouted at myself

and other officers to try and push the crowd away from the

perimeter wall.   I managed to get to the front of the crowd

near to the wall but it soon became apparent that I had no

chance of moving the crowd back.    I was then jostled     and

pushed by the crowd and found myself trapped amongst it near

to a gate which leads directly onto the pitch.     At this gate,

was a supporter, who had one arm on either side of the gate,

with his back to the crowd, preventing anyone from getting

onto the pitch.   I' realised that he was trying to protect

another supporter who was lying on the ground inside the

gateway from being trampled on but in doing so, he was infact

causing a build up of supporters behind him.     I could feel

myself being trapped and squashed by the crowd and finding

difficulty breathing.   Somehow, I managed to move the

supporter from the gate and I , together with other fans were

able to get onto the pitch.
                                4



Once on the pitch, it took me a few minutes to regain my

breath and I then looked for other members of my Serial but

could not find anyone.   I took up a position on the pitch,

along with other officers to prevent what I thought would be a

pitch invasion.   This did not materialise and I then noticed a

build up of supporters congregating at the players entrance.

I went to that entrance stopped some four or five supporters

from going up towards the players dressing rooms only to be

informed by them that they had been informed by a steward that

there was a phone in the old gymnasium that they could use to

phone ho m e .



I then saw Inspector Newey (C 2) at the top of the entrance and

he instructed me to remain in the dressing room area to police

fans already congregated in and around the phone area.     At any

one time, for the following two hours, there must have been

between fifty and sixty fans waiting to use the one phone.

Some of the fans were obvviously distressed but there were

also a number who had been drinking and were using the phone

as an excuse to talk to the players.



I reamined in the players tunnel until all had quitened down

and almost all of the fans, both Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest had left the ground.



I later went into the North Stand where we were debriefed and

I went off duty at Rotherham at 7.00 pm.
