                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15.4.90            P.C. 2002 Simon SLACK

                                                                           ''D* Division Plain Clothes
                                                                               Dept., rfest Bar P.Stn.

     At the time of the disaster I was a member of the 'D' Division Crime & Vandal Squad,
     which was allocated duties at the Sheffield Midland Station, supervising the arrival
     of Notts. Forest fans and loading them onto buses to transport them to the ground.


     At 1.45pm the Squad resumed patrol around the city - paying attention to pubs and known
     trouble spots.
     At 2.30pm I attended at the Wellington Public House on Infirmary Road, Sheffield, to
     eject about 40 Notts fans all of whom were the worse for drink. These fans were loaded on
     to buses and taken to the ground and were supervised by officers from the squad who travelled
     on the buses.


    At 3»05pm the C&V attended outside the Hillsborough ground to pick up the officers from
^he      unit who had been escorting fans. I parked the units crew bus on Penistone Road,
    outside the entrance to the gymnasium whilst waiting for these officers.
     It was at this time I saw a great many officers running into the ground and my first
    assumption was that there was fighting in the ground.
    On the instructions of the unit's Inspector we left the vehicle and went into the ground
    where we were told to wait near to the Gym. At this time rumours were passing around that
    several fans had been injured and perhaps one had died. These figures incresed to 13 dead
    before the unit was ordered onto the pitch to form a cordon in front of the North Stand,
    supposedly to prevent more fans invading the pitch.
    It was whilst standing at this point I saw the commotion at the front of the Leppings Lane
    stand. Fans were carrying the bodies of obviously dead peaple from the pitch to the Gym.
| I was dismayed that we should be standing doing nothing whilst members of the public
v   tended to the dead and injured.
^ f t e r a short time the unit was returned to the gym. to 'stand-by'. It was at this point I
    joined in and assisted the fans to carry the dead into the gym. where they were laid out.
    There seemed to be a srever ending flow of bodies coming from the pitch. I helped others to
    carry about 4 or 5 bodies into the gym until I saw several fans struggling to carry the body
    of a large man.


    I first saw this man being carried in the area out side the gym and went to      their aid. I
    could find no pulse on the man and judged from his colouring    that        he was       already dea
    I accompanied the body into the gym and there stayed with it. The body was assigned number
    49. He was identified to me by a Mr. Joseph Thompson - brother of the deceased - as
    Mr. Patrick John Thompson 35^rs (4.9.53) a Railway Guard of                      I Liverpool 25.
    The body was certified as dead by Dr. Bull at 4.00pm.


    I stayed with the body of Hr. Thompson in the gymnasium until 4.30am the following day, when

    he was taken to the Medico Legal Centre and handed over to C.I.D. staff. I then went off
    duty at 6.00am.
                                                                   '.C. 2002
