                                                                                                M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised   (2 -0 I     IQ       \ ° 1 0 _______   Number



T itle   L F -r n a ^     0oiA      t-C             7S >     CC    h t/r& n e ^ o        I   IjfjgT
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/No
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                    4$ I)
Examined       further action to be taken                                                                                         SIO




                                                                                                                        l53\
Further action No(s)                                                                                                        Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
    C C/ BM T


                           PERSONAL


R Hadfield Esq QPM
Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
P 0 Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
BIRMINGHAM
B4 6NQ

                                                                30 August 1990




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I have now completed my investigation into the criminal and disciplinary
matters which arise out of the Hillsborough disaster which occurred on 15
April 1989.   My investigation was supervised by Captain Noel Taylor of the
Police Complaints Authority and he has issued a statement on behalf of the
Authority that the investigation has been carried out thoroughly and
satisfactorily.

The Director of Public Prosecutions has considered my report and has
decided that there are no grounds for any criminal prosecutions. My report
is now with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police and his Police
Authority for consideration as to whether any police officers should face
disciplinary charges.

There are still numerous civil actions to be pursued but they are matters
to be dealt with by the South Yorkshire Police Authority and its Chief
C on stable.

The inquests into the 95 deaths which occurred at Hillsborough have still
to be concluded.    The inquests so far have established the date, time,
place and medical cause of death but not how they were caused.        The South
Yorkshire Coroner, Dr. Stefan Popper, is now making plans to reopen the
inquests and he has appointed Mr Mervyn Jones, Deputy Chief Constable of
the Cheshire Constabulary, as his C or o ne r ’s Officer. Mr Jones will require
a support team for the inquests and it makes sense for him to use the West
Midlands Police team for that purpose.     I understand that the Coroner is in
touch with you about that matter.
                                          2



I have now returned to my own force but I would like you to know how much I
have appreciated and relied upon your officers and civilian support staff.
It was not until 2 April 1990 that I was appointed Investigating Officer
but by then the efficiency, effectiveness, thoroughness and sensitivity of
all of the team, was very apparent.       I know you will understand the
complexity and difficulty of such an investigation, particularly for those
who came into contact with the bereaved.   The professionalism of them all,
police and civilian staff, is a credit to the West Midlands Police.      It
would be impossible for me to mention everyone by name but there are a few
that I would like to bring to notice because of my personal involvement
with them.

Detective Chief Superintendent Mike FOSTER,      for             his clear     head,  his
tremendous  memory,     his clear  analytical mind,               and his      ever-ready
willingness to listen to my ideas and suggestions.

Superintendent Roy TAYLOR who "copped" most of the difficult jobs, many of
them seemingly impossible, and yet made so much sense out of so much chaos.

Superintendent Stanley BEECHEY whose common sense and pragmatic approach,
backed by an exemplary ethic, consistently   brought me back to reality and
kept my eye on the light at the end of the tunnel.

Superintendent Bill    COBB   for   the       way   he brought    technology    into    the
inquiry so effectively.

Inspector Caroline PERKINS for the calm,   sophisticated and effective
efficiency which    she brought to the administrative  side and office
m a n a ge m en t .

Mrs Sue HARPER     for her administrative expertise which kept                  the    team
provided for, and saw us through the difficult budgetary process.

There are so many more inspectors, sergeants, constables, typists who
deserve a mention.     They were a superb team and I must say, led admirably
by Mervyn Jones whilst he was in "the chair". My thanks to them and to you
for making my burden so much lighter than it could have been.

If there is anything more you require of me, please do not hesitate to
contact me but for now I send best wishes to you all from the lakes and
fells of Cumbria.




Chief Constable
Investigating Officer
