   HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                  51
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                     On

              15th February, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                 **




                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                              Pa&e
STEVEN ROBERT CURRY

     By THE CORONER                             1.
     Cross-Examined    by   MR.   ISAACS        9.
     Cros s-Examined   by   MR.   MANNING      10.
     Cro ss-Examined   by   MR.   KING         11.
     Cross-Examined    by   MR.   CATCHPOLE    12.

TREVOR HIGGINS

     By THE CORONER                           16.
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE              22 .
     Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS             23.
     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING            29.
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING               31.
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN           35.
     Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMAN          41.
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE              41.
     Further by THE CORONER                   41.
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN   42.

PAUL ANTHONY JAMES EASON

     By THE CORONER                           43.
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE              48.
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING               49.

PETER WELLS

     By THE CORONER                           51.
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE              58.
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING               61.
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN           68.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE      68.
     Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS             68.
            FIFTY FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             FRIDAY, 15th FEBRUARY, 1991

     THE CORONER:    Good morning.     Steven Robert Curry.

              STEVEN ROBERT CURRY Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

It is Steven Robert Curry? - A. Yes.

I think you are a journalist with the Daily Express? - A.
Yes.

Is their address still Ludgate House, Blackfriars,
London? - A. Yes.

I notice you are the chief football writer for that
paper? - A. That's correct.

So you attend major matches whenever you are able to, I
take it? - A. Yes.

This is a job you have held for ten years?     Twelve now,
I suppose? - A. That's right.

I am interested in the match on the 15th of April, 1989
at Hillsborough. - A. Yes.

I think you flew up and then you came by car from
Bradford? - A. Yes, I flew to Leeds.

You arrived at the ground and being a press man were you
allowed to park in a special car park? - A. Yes, we were.

You then made your   way towards the South Stand? - A. That
is correct.

In doing so I think you passed the Penis tone Road
turnstiles, which of course was the Nottingham end? - A.
That's right.

You didn't go past the Leppings Lane turnstiles as such?
- A. Not as such.   I went towards that end to collect my
ticket, but that was as far as I went.

In any case you entered the ground at ten past two? - A.
Yes.

1 don't think we need take you through what was going on
outside, but in a nutshell as far as you were concerned
nothing untoward? - A. No.
                                              S.    R? fcURRY


That's correct? - A. Yes.

In every sense of the word, both with regard to... - A.
The normal scene outside a football ground on a normal
big match occasion.

At about that time? - A. Yes.

We are going to get you to show us on a plan in a moment
where you took your seat, but there is a special area in
the South Stand for the press? - A. There is, yes.

Is that near the players entrance? - A. Yes, above and
slightly to the left.

So it is more or less central in that South Stand? - A.
Yes.

I think by the time you had meandered your way through
the buildings you got to your box at about 2.25? - A.
That is correct.

Let's see if we can fix the time accurately.   You say
about 2.25, is that a correct time or an estimated time?
- A. That would be the correct time. That is about the
normal time, thirty-five minutes before kick-off -
certainly at big matches.   One usually goes to check
that everything is in order there, that the seat exists
and not somebody else's bottom is on it!

You mean that happens in a press box as well? - A. I'm
afraid so, yes!

On this occasion that was all OK and you were able to sit
down? - A. Yes.

I take it you had a quick look round? - A. I did.

Just give me a brief description of what you saw at that
time, your first impressions. - A. At that particular
time the ground was filling.   The end the Nottingham
Forest fans were occupying, which was to my right, was
fairly full.   That stands were filling slowly, but that
is fairly normal for seated accommodation and the central
section on the left hand side was beginning to fill up
fairly briskly, but the two side sections were fairly
sparse in fact at that particular time.

Perhaps I could ask you this:  from your observations of
football matches, not necessarily at Hillsborough, is it
in fact the case that the centre sections tend to be more
popular than the sides? - A. Yes, without exception.
                                              S . R.* fcURRY


That is because people like to stand there because they
are right behind the goal, they are very close? - A. Yes.

Now you continued to sit and probably wait for things to
develop? - A. Yes.

I want to ask you about one or two field events to try
and see if you can recollect it.   Do you recollect first
of all the players coming out for the kick around, as
opposed to their entry on to the field, pre-match? - A. I
don't have any recollection of that.

Do you remember the teams being announced? - A. Not
specifically, but then it is not something I normally
have to notice because we get given team sheets anyway.

None of this is criticism of you, it is just a
convenience for us because these are features which we
have been noting.   Do you recollect the teams coming out
on to the pitch? - A. For the beginning of the game?

Yes. - A. Well, I was conscious of it because of the
noise, but by that time I was actually focusing on
something else.

Do you recollect the kick-off, or do you recollect any
play? - A. None at all.

I don't mean detail of play, but do you recollect that
play was going on? - A. I was conscious of play going on
but I certainly wasn't watching it.

You were looking around and at some point your attention
was drawn towards Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Tell me first of all what drew your attention and then we
will try and fix the timing of that. - A. It is a habit
of mine, as normal on most football matches, big or
small, that I always take a pair of binoculars to
football and I used them to look at the...   I think
crowd behaviour has become a pattern of our job,
especially on big occasions, and you do tend to have a
look around through them.   I was very conscious from
quarter to three onwards that there was a situation
developing at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and I
think from that period onwards my entire attention was
directed towards that particular area of the ground.

Tell me then what you saw from quarter to three onwards
at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I sensed that that
particular central section of the ground was getting
pretty full and there were a lot of young people in it -
which is quite normal because it is the young people who
tend to congregate directly behind the goal.   Some of
                                              S. Re<fcURRY


them were in clear discomfort ten or fifteen minutes
before the kick-off, to the extent that I was sitting
alongside a radio commentator from Liverpool whom I know
through the job, and I remarked to him that I was a bit
concerned about that situation.   As I say, I felt
compelled to actually keep my attention on it because it
was getting progressively worse.




     Q. I want you to tell me about
                                              S. R. CURRY


I want you to just tell me about the progression that
you could see. Can you just tell us a little bit
more about that? - A. I had seen and what I noticed
through my glasses was the number of youngsters who
were trying to turn away from facing the pitch
because of the crush becoming greater.  I could not
be entirely precise in terms of having looked at my
watch but at one stage it seemed to get suddenly
worse.

Did you at that stage observe any surging? Do you
know what I mean by surging? - A. I do know what you
mean by surging. Not as much.   I do not think there
was room to surge.

In your observation of those terraces did you, in
fact, see any surging at all? - A. No, I do not
recall seeing surging.

You do not? - A. No, not surging that I know in terms
of a wave of people.  I saw a crush of people but not
so much that. More a crush than a surge.

What do you mean by that so that we know we are
talking about the same thing? - A. When you say a
surge in terms of a football crowd, that indicates to
me like dominoes going down and a wave of people and
room to move, in fact, but I was seeing people, I
mean, squashed.

What you are saying is that you noticed that things
were getting worse. You felt at some point whatever
point that might have been that there was a sudden
deterioration I think you said? - A. Yes.

Would I be right in saying from what you say that you
could not actually see what had caused that sudden
deterioration? - A. No, I could not.

I have already tried once but I will just try again.
That deterioration which you have mentioned, I want
to pick that up? - A. Yes.

Are you able to relate it in any way to events on the
field? - A. No.

So you cannot say whether that was associated either
with team announcement, players coming on to the
pitch, kick-off or anything like that? - A. No.

You cannot? - A. No.

I want to go back to the initial time that you
mentioned when you said from which time you began to
                                                S. R. CURRY


notice that things were not quite right in that area
and I think you said 2.45? - A. Yes.

On what basis is that 2.45 based? How strong are you
that that is in fact the correct time? - A. I mean
within two or three minutes.  I could not be specific
to say it was 2.45 precisely as such but I know that
it was about 15 minutes because I looked at my watch
to wonder how many people were going to get in before
the game started.

You are pretty confident that give or take two or
three minutes that that is an accurate time? - A.
Yes.

Did you in your observation of the Leppings Lane end
notice a beach ball being knocked about? - A.
Actually among the crowd?

Among the crowd in those central terraces? - A. Only
now you have mentioned it.

You mean I have reminded you of it? - A. Yes.

Tell me a little bit about that then.  It has brought
it back to you? - A. It has actually.  I mean I have
never given it a thought and nobody has mentioned it
to me since but I think there was a ball going up and
down actually.

Does that help you in any way with fixing the time
you started observing? - A. No, I cannot say it does,
sir, no.

All this is designed to try and find out, as near as
we can, the gradation if you like? - A. Yes, I
appreciate that.

I think from what you have said you could see and, by
the way, what strength are your binoculars, do you
remember? - A. I am not sure.  They are pretty good
ones.  They are small but quite powerful ones.

Quite powerful ones then? - A. Yes.

Am I right in saying your observation of what was
going on in the pen and the detail which you could
see was when you were looking through the binoculars
as opposed to using your unaided vision? - A. I mean
initially, yes.  Eventually one did not need a pair
of binoculars.

I am talking about what I call the early period? - A.
Yes.
                                                S. R. CURRY



Did you observe any gates on the perimeter fence? -
A. Yes.

Tell me a little bit about those and tell me what you
noticed with regard to them? - A. I noticed them
because I was looking to see if there were any and to
see if the people could be relieved because it was
obvious to me that people needed to come out of
there.  I think, are there three? There are
certainly two I noticed because one in particular
where there seemed to be a particular volume of
people which in my recollection was opened and closed
at one stage.

I take it you cannot say in relation to anything that
happened on the pitch as to when that was? - A. No.

Are you able to say when it was in relation to your
watch in any way? - A. Not to be specific, sir, no.

Perhaps the best thing to do is to get you to show us
on the plan (a) where you were — we will get you to
put a little cross on because it is helpful to me —
and then perhaps you might be able to orientate
yourself and locate the gate which you observed? - A.
Sure.  The press box as I recall is in this area here
(indicating on p l a n ).

If you walk round and put a cross on it? - A. That
might not be strictly accurate.  These are the gates
here.

Which one did you think you saw opened and closed? -
A. This one (indicating on p l a n ).

  MR. BEECHEY:   The C number, sir, is C.476.

     THE CORONER:   Having seen the gate open and
closed, did you see it opened at any point? - A. Yes.

Can you say at what point it was or are you not able
to say that either? - A. I think, I would not be
certain, but the game was in progress.   As I say, I
was not really watching the game at all.

I am interested in what you saw. We have got plenty
of other people who have also seen things and
pictures and all kinds of stuff.  What I am
interested in is what you recollect and what you saw
at the time? - A. Of course.

Do you remember the game ending? - A. Yes.
                                              S. R. CURRY


Did you see somebody running on to the pitch or did
you just notice that it had stopped? - A. I recall a
Policeman running on to the pitch.

You do recollect that? - A. Yes.

Would I be right in saying that by then there was
quite a bit of activity around that end of the
ground? - A. A lot of activity.

That is in your recollection? - A. Yes.

Did you see people go up into the stands, being
pulled up? - A. Yes, I did.

Are you able to say when that was in relation to your
observation at all? - A. I would think it was around
the time of the kick-off.




                            /Q. What about people.
                                                         9


                                          S.R. CURRY
                                                        *$

Q. What about people coming over the top of the fence, forward
   I mean? - A. There were  people trying to come    overthe top
   of the fence before the game started.

Q.   Tell me a little bit about what you saw with regard to
     that? - A. It was quite clear there was a crush at the
     front and people were endeavouring to get away from it.
     The Police on the perimeter of the pitch were trying by
     motion to get people backwards and in fact I have to say
     were trying to prevent people coming out of the crowd,
     but as I say by then my   feeling was that there was dis­
     organisation and a panic.   I mean people were     panicking
     by then already, including me I might say.

Q.   So what you are really saying is although you could see
     the Officers signalling to people to go back, you thought
     it was a futile gesture because of (a) the situation in
     the terrace and (b) the appearances of the people that
     you could observe? - A. That I could observe.   I could not
     understand why they had not opened the gates.

Q. But what you are saying is at that point you did not see
   the gates open? - A. No.

Q. Now I know that you were there for quite a long time later
   and you watched and observed as one would expect events
   afterwards, but on the whole what I am interested in is
   your observation up to about end of match so to speak and
   we have got that. - A. Yes.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Curry, just one or two questions, if I may. So far
   as the time when you became very conscious as you told us
   that a situation was developing at the Leppings Lane end,
   from what you say that could be two minutes before, two
   minutes afterwards, three minutes afterwards? - A. I think
   I could say a situation was developing from the moment I
   had my attention drawn to it, but it deteriorated badly
   in the period I would say immediately before the kick-off
   and certainly whilst the game was in progress.

Q. I am more concerned though with the timing of it because
   you have told us 2.45, but what I am putting to you on
   your reckoning that could just as well be for example as
   late as 2.50 when you first had your attention directed
   to it? - A. Within that three or four minutes I would say.

Q. Very well, and your attention was directed to it because
   you were using these binoculars? - A. Yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say, we have had other people come
   from similar positions as you were, albeit higher up, that
   looking from where you were without binoculars you would
   merely be seeing a sea of bodies? - A. Yes, that is fair
   to say.
                                                          10


                                       S.R. CURRY
                                                      *$


Q. I know you tell us that there came a time when you did not
   need binoculars to see what was going on, but as I under­
   stand your evidence that was when people started coming
   over the fence; you could see gestures of Police Officers;
   when you could see people on the perimeter track, but in
   terms of individual distress you would not be able to see
   that without binoculars from where you were? “ A. No.
   I mean one can see a crush but most of that period I had
   my binoculars in use anyway.

         MR. ISAACS:   Yes, thank you very much indeed.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. I am going to try, if I can, and jog another bit of your
   memory that may not have been in action, with respect,
   and that was similar to the beach ball which you had not
   thought of from that time until now. Do you remember
   seeing a big inflatable around that sort of time held up
   in the crowd as well? - A. I don't think so sir, no.

Q. Can you help me by seeing whether you can remember either
   people standing on other people's shoulders in the crowd
   or else standing on the crash barrier and waving? - A.
   People were standing on other's shoulders, yes.

Q. Can you remember at all any reaction from the crowd, and
   I appreciate this may be very similar to the sort of
   crowd reaction that one gets ordinarily when a team is
   announced, in other words the sort of cheering and the
   punching of the air with one's hand? — A. I don't recall
   that. The only swell of noise I recall was when the
   teams were coming out but I am not sure by then it was
   coming from the Leppings Lane end.

Q. You don't remember any particular, or for example when it
   was announced to the crowd that Alan Hanson was playing
   and his name was called? - A. Not specifically, no.

Q. Had you been at the match the year before? - A. No, I
   was at the other semi-final the year before.

Q. And you said very early on in your evidence to the Coroner
   that the central sections tend to be more popular than
   the sides? - A. Yes.

Q. It tends to be an area where young people go? - A. Yes.

Q. It tends to be an area where they feel that the excitement
   of the match can best be taken up in all of its forms?
   - A. From my recollections of a boy that is certainly so
   sir.
                                      S.R. CURRY
                                                     * t


Would it surprise you from that standpoint to have heard
that as close as a few moments before kick-off some people
standing in that central section were perfectly happy
and would have been perfectly happy to have continued to
stand there? - A. I would have been very surprised sir.

So the perception of someone in your situation looking
through your binoculars is different to a perception of
somebody who was actually standing there? - A. I would be
very surprised if anyone standing in that particular
section of that ground from 2.45 onwards or certainly from
5-to-3 onwards felt comfortable.

From 5-to-3 onwards,   yes.  I think you very fairly said
to my learned friend   Mr. Isaacs that the deterioration
in the situation was   immediately prior to kick-off and
then of course after   it? - A. The deterioration was
certainly around the   kick-off time.

You had not seen the surges, the tumbling or domino effect?
- A. I was not conscious of a domino effect sir, no.

I appreciate you can't watch every single thing but you
did not see that happening in the crowd? - A. Not to my
recollection.

      MR. MANNING:     Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Curry.


               Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Curry, you told us that you looked at your watch and
you wondered how many people, how many more people were
going to get in before the game started? - A. That is
correct.

What time was that that you looked at your wataft? - A.
That was around quarter-to-3. As I say I didn't take
specific .... I have got one of these watches, it does
not have actual minutes, but it was around quarter-to-3.

What was it that you were seeing around that time which
made you wonder how many more people were going to get
in before the game started? - A. It was the crush at the
front of that particular stand which was already evident,
as I have said to you. That is why I looked.   I thought
"I wonder how many more people have still to come in."

Was that a cause of concern for you? - A. It was a cause
of concern from quarter-to-3 onwards.

But you actually went through the thought process of
wondering .... A. I know I did because I kept my focus
of attention on it and I was moved enough to mention it
to the guy sitting next to me.
                                    S.R. CURRY
                                                     *$

     MR. KING:   Thank you very much.


            Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. Curry, what you have just said in answer to the gentleman
who has just asked you a question it seems that your
attention was drawn to this particular area of the ground
because there was a crush occurring at the front of those
pens and that was the first thing that you noticed? - A.
Yes.
Do I take it from that that you did not see any movement,
you were looking at a packed terrace. You were just seeing
heads and shoulders, people at the front? - A. Not at the-
front. You can see through the barriers with a pair of
binoculars.

What could you see. Were people actually up against the
front who were looking in discomfort? - A. Yes, as I say
young people were trying to turn round to see what was
going on. I think they were conscious that there was
beginning to be a crush of bodies there.

I wonder if I could show you some pictures just to see
whether this is the scene that you saw or didn't see.
- A. Yes.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sergeant Griffiths, have you got
DB16/29 and DB16/30.   They are in the original composite
bundle.

It is fair to say, while that is being searched for,
on a packed terrace although you can see the people right
at the front when it is packed on a normal game what you
see is a row of heads, even with binoculars you are
looking at the heads and shoulders and above. That is
right, isn't it? - A. Yes, but you can tell a crush
in the crowd.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: Oh I am not disputing that,
Mr. Curry, believe me.




                 MR. GRIFFITHS:   Can I just check
                                                         * i
                                                  S. R. CURRY


     MR. GRIFFITHS:     Can I just check, sir - DB16/29
and 30?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   That is right.      Could I start
with DB16/29, please?

     THE CORONER:     That is a new one, is it?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     It is a new one, yes.

     MR. BEECHEY:     The "C" number is   C477.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   If you look Mr.     Curry, you see
the gate with "4" on there? - A. Yes.

And you see the radial fence running backwards, just to
the left of that gate?   If you go down to gate 4 and
move   very slightly to the left, there is a gentleman at
the front with a white shirt on? - A. Yes, Iknow the
fence you mean.

You see there is a great big gap around - it lookslike
a Scotland banner, or is it Liverpool - a great big gap
around him? - A. Yes.  That is in the next section
though, isn't it?

That is in one of the central pens.   3 and 4 are the
central pens.  It is just to the right of the goal.
There is a great big gap in the central pen - I am not
saying this is what you say, Mr. Curry, I am just
asking you does this equate with what you are
describing when you first saw this scene?- A. No.   If I
may say so, sir, if I could have the previous plan back
that I have just looked at, the area I was
concentrating on was this one here . I think the
section you are referring to is her e.

Yes, it is, Mr. Curry.   I just wanted to see .... - A.
It was in this corner here that I was concerned about
principally.

I appreciate that.  What I am trying to do with the
photographic evidence that is available, I want to see
what the scene was like at that end of the ground
generally.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sorry to interrupt.       Could
the shorthand note record that?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, you are quite right.  The
witness was looking at C242 and saying that the area
that he was concentrating on was a triangular area
bounded by the fence between pens 2 and 3 and gate 3
towards the front.
                                                    * $
                                             S. R. CURRY


That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, that is right.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Could you go back to DB16/29,
please?  If you look to the other side of that fence,
Mr. Curry. - A. Yes.

Can you see people standing at the front? You can
quite clearly see the head and shoulders of a gentleman
in white, standing right down at the front? - A. Yes, I
can see him.

There is a young man leaning quite happily against the
fence.   If you go further back you can see, almost
straight back to the left with his head cut off by the
top of the perimeter fence, there is a gentleman in a
blue shirt, you can see his shoulders? - A. Yes, I can
see him.

If you look right the way up this side of that radial
fence, you can see people standing talking to one
another; you can quite clearly see space in amongst
them? - A. Yes.

I know we can't see the corner that you were
concentrating on but we can see further back and we can
see that it is a sea of people but there are people
standing there talking.  That doesn't sound to me as if
it is the sort of scene that you first saw? - A. What
time was that picture taken?

Well, I will tell you in a moment.   That does not sound
to me as if that is the scene that you first saw? - A.
That is not the scene that drew my attention, no, but
then that is not the area specifically that I was
looking at, that I was referring to.

Mr. Curry, I understand that, but what you were saying
was that you did not witness any movement in the crowd,
and we know from other evidence movement of the crowd
needs space around people, and it is quite obvious at
that time there is space around people? - A. At that
time it looks reasonably comfortable, I must say.

For your benefit the photograph is actually timed at
14.45; we know the corrected time is 14.46, so that is
about in the middle of the timespan that you had.  If
we could look at DB16/30, again it is difficult to see
where the dividing fence is in this particular pen, but
do you see the yellow inflatable in the middle? - A.
Yes.

That is what my learned friend two along from me was
referring to; that doesn't ring any bells? - A. It
doesn't but I think if I am right in saying, there were
                                                     *t
                                              S. R. CURRY


quite a few inflatables all round the ground, weren't
there, that day? - A. Yes, there were, but when you
were observing this crowd you don't remember seeing an
inflatable like that or a beach ball being patted
around? - A. I remembered the beach ball when the
Coroner jogged my memory but I don't remember the
inflatables as such.  I remember a ball.

That was not happening presumably when ...? - A. I
could not put a time on that.

This was before you really first began to concentrate
on it? - A. Well, it was during that period.  It was a
period from when I moved into the press box.  I am not
specifically saying it was the period I had my glasses
on but I do recall, and I could not give a time, the
beach ball.

It is not the sort of thing you would necessarily write
about but sometime when you were sitting in the press
box you saw people playing with an inflatable at that
end of the ground, and at some later stage your
attention got drawn because of what you saw at the
front of that pen? - A. Yes, that is correct.

     MR. BEECHEY:     The "C" number for that photograph
is C478.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I should say that is exactly the
same time as the last photograph, 14.45 on the
photograph itself and 14.46 is the corrected time.

     THE CORONER:   On that photograph those
youngsters sitting at the back there I think are on the
wall by the tunnel, aren't they?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I think one of them has
given evidence.  The gentleman sitting right at the
back in a blue shirt has also given evidence.

     THE CORONER:     So that must be in pen 3 then,
mustn't it?

     MR. PAYNE:     You can see the tunnel.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, that is right.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Mr. Manning quite rightly points
out, although it is difficult to see the radial fence,
this does cover much more of the area that Mr. Curry
was looking at initially so it may be of more benefit.
I don't know whether you want to explore it further:
                                                   *t
                                            S. R. CURRY


Mr. Curry, if you just look at the front of the fence -
I am treading carefully because I have not managed to
work out the line of the radial fence - again we see
lots of space over to the left hand side really.  Do
you see lots of people standing around, you can almost
see the full people from their jeans upwards? - A. Does
that go to the bottom of the fence?

It does go to the bottom; you can see the bottom of the
fence; if you look at the middle stanchion you can
actually see the top of the wall just showing - middle
stanchion down to the bottom of the photograph, and
right at the very bottom you can just see the wall
where the fence is running so that is the very front of
the perimeter fence.  Mr. Curry, I am not seeking to
challenge what you saw, I am just saying that is not
the scene that drew your attention? - A. No, that is
not the scene that drew my attention.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Curry, I am very much obliged
to you for coming and for helping us this morning.
Thank you very much indeed.

                TREVOR HIGGINS Sworn

                      By THE CORONER

Good morning.  You are Trevor Higgins, I believe, is
that right? - A. That is correct.

Is it still                                 Rotherham?
- A. That is right.

I think you are now a company director but at the
relevant time you were, on 15th April 1989, a Sergeant
in the South Yorkshire Police Force, that is right,
isn't it? - A. That is correct.

I say at the relevant time - in fact, you ceased being
a Sergeant in July 1988, that is right, isn't it? - A.
That is correct.

Therefore in 1989 you had nothing whatever to do with
the policing of Hillsborough, that is right, isn't it?
- A. No.

But in 1988 you were the serial Sergeant in the
concourse area, is that right? - A. That is correct.

           /Q. This was, of course
                                               T. ft&GINS


This was, of course a semi-final on the 9th of April,
1988? - A. Yes.

It was the semi-final in which Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest were playing? - A. Yes.

You were in the Leppings Lane concourse area which was
the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

We don't need to go into the details of the Operational
Order but you had various duties to perform within the
concourse area, including searching fans and that sort of
stuff? - A. No, that was done at the turnstiles.

What was your duty and responsibility? - A. It was the
supervision of the tunnel through to 3 and 4 pens.

Tell me a little bit about that. - A. It was a case of
keeping an eye on the crowd entering pens 3 and 4.   If
it was a case of there were too many fans getting in
there we then supervised or directed them to the end
pens.

Was that written into the Operational Order in 1988, can
you remember? - A. I cannot recall, sir, no.

How many people were there allocated to that task in
1988? - A. Well, there was one Serial, my Serial, which
was allocated supervision of the tunnel.

You may or may not remember but the Operational Orders
were in phases - phase 1, phase 2 and phase 3. - A.
That's right.

Do you recollect whether this was a phase 1 duty, a phase
2 duty, a phase 3 duty, or all three phases? - A. I can't
recall.

I think we are going to need the 1988 Operational Order
because we need to have a look at that.   We will press
on with what I want to ask you.   We will look at the
Order in a moment.   Whatever it said in the Operational
Order, you were stationed somewhere near the tunnel? - A.
Yes.

I want you to tell me now from what time to what time
were you there? - A. If memory serves me right perhaps
from half an hour before kick-off.   When kick-off took
place again it was a case of looking at the amount in the
pen.   Anyone who was there after had to go direct to the
end pens.

I want you to tell me what in fact you did.   When you
say half an hour before kick-off, where were you before?
                                                 T. KlfcGINS


- A. Probably placement of the Serial.   That is ensuring
that the Constables were round about the tunnel, in and
outside of the pens.   Perhaps have a walk around the
whole of that stand.

Are you saying you physically placed Constables within
the terrace in that year? - A. It's difficult to relate
in detail to the 1988 match, that is the first thing to
say. Generally from memory of football duty at
Hillsborough, we would keep an eye on the crowd build-up
within 3 and 4.   Constables would stand just in the
entrance of the tunnel, the end of the tunnel to the
stands, and as the crowd built-up they would signify it
was getting a little bit crowded, keep them forward away
from the exit into the pen, and then we would come
through the tunnel into the enclosure and make sure
people went round to the end pens.

Are you describing the practice at a league match or are
you describing the practice at a semi-final, or are you
saying the practice was identical? - A. It was generally
the same.

Tell me what in fact you did, or what was done? - A.
Again, if memory serves me right, it was a case of
walking down the tunnel, backwards and forwards, keeping
an eye on fans who got into that centre pen.   Some would
stand on the top step. We would move them forward.    If
the amount seemed to be so great that it might create a
problem the doors were closed and the fans were directed
to the end pens.

Are you saying that in 1988 the tunnel doors were closed?
- A. They were closed, yes.

Which end of the tunnel doors are we talking about? - A.
the entrance to the tunnel.

Can you say at what time those doors were   closed? - A.
No, sir.

Can you say for how long they remained closed? - A.
Again, I would think for the whole of the match until
perhaps the half-time whistle, when people are allowed to
leave, of course.

How were the doors controlled when they were shut? - A.
Two Constables stood there.

On which side? - A. On the inside.

Were both leaves of the doors shut?   - A.Yes.
                                               T. ft#5GINS


Are you saying to me they were shut and remained shut
until possibly half time when people might wish to leave
and then they would be opened? - A. Unless, of course,
someone wanted to pay a call to the toilet or something.

You would open them for   that? - A. Yes.

Do you recollect in 1988 whether, apart from shutting the
tunnel, any other steps had been taken perhaps earlier
than 2.30 to divert and direct fans round the sides? - A.
Not that I can recall, no.

Are you saying that the control of the tunnel in 1988 was
by means of these gates? - A. by the gates and the
Constable on duty, yes.

Do I gather from your evidence that the decision on the
filling of the terraces and the closing of the tunnel was
in fact yours and the Constables immediately under your
control? - A. The only specific thing I can remember
about the 1988 match was being told on that occasion to
close those doors.   Where that instruction came from I
cannot remember.

Are you saying that the closure in 1988 emanated from
some other source, other than your own observations? - A.
I remember being at the entrance to the tunnel and
receiving the order to close the gate.   Whether it came
by radio from Command I cannot remember, or whether it
was the Serial Inspector.   I just cannot remember.

When you say you received it from Command, I take it you
would not treat one of your Constables in your Serial who
might come up to you and say he thought the pen was full,
as a command? - A. No.

What you are saying is that wherever it came from, it
came from somebody who in rank, at least, was senior to
you? - A. Yes.

I have understood what you said with regard to the gates.
What I want to try and be sure about is: was that your
regular task the tunnel job, if I can use that
expression, at matches? - A. Obviously since the request
to attend here, I have given it thought and of the times
I have attended Hillsborough, the majority of times were
on the tunnel, yes.

From your experience was it normal practice to control
the tunnel in the way you have described? - A. Yes, I
think it would be fair to say that.
                                                   T. H & G I N S


How many semi-finals, apart from the 1988 one, did you
yourself do? - A. About four or five semi-finals in my
time and then there was the occasional league match.

Can you specify the semi-finals? - A. No.

Do you remember doing the 1987 semi-final? - A. If you
gave me the teams that were playing, sir, probably yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Leeds and Coventry, sir.

     THE WITNESS:     No, I wasn't.

     THE CORONER:   Can you think of any semi-final you
did, either by team name or year? - A. I can remember a
Newcastle attendance.   I can't think who they were
playing then.

I take it you had thirty years' service? - A. No, sir,
eighteen.

So your length of service goes back quite a long way? -
A. Oh, yes.

Do you remember doing the semi-final in 1981? - A. Again,
without reference to the teams.

     MR. DEVONSIDE:     Tottenham and Wolves, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Tottenham and Wolves, we will assume
that's right!   Thank you, Mr. Devonside! - A. No.

You don't remember doing that one? - A. I have never seen
Tottenham play live, so...

So it couldn't have been that one? - A. No.

I am going to show you page 26 of the 1988 Operational
Order in which you are mentioned.   I think it was
Serial 14? - A. Yes.

You may not remember that, but have a look. - A. Yes.

Is PS 1483 Higgins, you? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Has everybody got a copy of this?          I
am inclined just to take this one page rather than the
whole Operational Order.

     We will pause for coffee and get this page
photographed and then we will come back and complete the
matter.   Mr. Higgins, you are still on oath.

                    (Short adjournment)
                                                T. HIGGINS


     THE CORONER:  We have got copies of this page
now, and it is headed "Sub Sector 7". What C number
are we going to give to this one?

     MR. BEECHEY:   The C number, sir, will be C.479.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Higgins, I wonder if you
would be kind enough to look at it? - A. Yes, sir.

I have already asked you whether the PS 1483 was
yourself, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

You will see that the duties of you and your serial,
I take it that is the serial you were in charge of? -
A. That is right.

It is divided, as I have alluded, into three
sections? - A. Yes.

Phase 1, Phase 2 and Phase 3, is that right? - A.
Yes.

Have a look at Phase 1? - A. Yes, I have read that,
sir.

Tell me what that section means so far as you are
concerned? What does it say? - A. It talks about the
supporters entering through the turnstiles are not in
possession of banners etc. but I mean on the inside,
because the supporters had already been searched,
there is very  little in that context for us to do.

Have a look at  Phase 2 and just read me out what that
says? - A. Locating the central tunnel and to
supervise.

Just read the whole thing, "This serial will be"? -
A. "This serial will locate in the central tunnel to
the Leppings Lane terrace to maintain order as
required".

All I am trying to find out, because I thought you
said your serial had no duties at the turnstiles but
simply at the tunnel, is whether in fact what you
were referring to was the Phase 2 of the Order rather
than Phase 1? - A. Yes.

That is right,   is it not? - A. Yes.

That is not to say, of course, that you  did not shut
the gates of the tunnel at a time which you cannot
remember as a result of an order from somebody you
cannot recollect.   I was not challenging that in any
way.  I was simply wanting to understand where your
serial was located during Phase 1? - A. Yes.

It seems to me that their job was in the concourse
area? - A. On the inside of the turnstiles, yes.

They also had a duty to maintain order on the
terraces? - A. That is right.

If that were to become necessary? - A. Yes.

I want to ask you one further question and then we
will let other people ask questions.  You have told
us about the shutting of these gates.  Can you just
tell me, were they properly shut or were they just
leant to, if you know what I mean? - A. They were
closed but not secured.

Do you recollect whether the doors were padlocked
back and had to be unlocked in order  to enable them
to be shut? Do you remember that? -    A. I  cannot
remember that.

I have one final question.  We have heard from one or
two people, not very many, that at around two o'clock
in 1988 at the Semi Finals the gates were not shut
but they were diverted round the sides.  Do you have
any recollection of that happening at all? - A. I can
remember diverting fans but the time   — I   mean I
could not even think of the time.

You have got no idea? - A. No, no.

     THE CORONER:  There is a gentleman at the end I
have met but whose name I have forgotten.

     MR. KILVINGTON:   Sir, it is Kilvington for the
Ambulance Service.

     THE CORONER:   Do you want to ask this witness
anything?

     MR. KILVINGTON:   I have no questions,   sir.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

We have got the Order C.479 which the Coroner has now
helpfully photocopied, Sergeant Higgins, so that we
can see actually the names of the people who were in
your serial.   You did mention at one point before you
were shown this extract from the Operational Order
that two men were stationed by the doors when they
were shut.   Who were they please? - A. It is not
specifically just two men.   They would take it in
    A
                                                               **     23

                                                              T. HIGGINS


             turn.  There were those members of the serial who
             would stand at the back of the fans.
    B   Q.   Who? - A. It is impossible to say specifically
             because they would take it in turn during the whole
             of the match.  They would change places.

        Q.   That is during Phase 2, is it?   - A. Yes.

        Q.    That is the time you were referring to in your
             evidence? - A. Yes.   If Phase 2 is the appropriate
             time then, yes.

                          Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

        Q. I am sorry, Mr. Higgins, but we are going to have to
           investigate this a little further.  Would you bear
           with me? - A. Yes.

        Q. You tell us that you had as the Serial Sergeant
D          responsibility for this serial of men? - A. Yes.

        Q.    We can see who the men are by name and part of that
             responsibility you tell us was to ensure supervision
             of the tunnel, yes? - A. Yes.

        Q.    And to supervise fans entering into Pens 3 and 4, is
             that correct? - A. That is correct.

        Q. With a view to looking at the numbers of those fans
           going into those pens? - A. That is correct.

        Q. You personally were carrying out that duty during the
           period up to the kick-off? - A. Yes.

        Q. Who had told you to do that? - A. It would be fair to
           say over the years that it became standard practise.
           I did that duty quite regularly.

        Q. You would not do it at a specific game unless it was
           in the Operational Order? - A. Why not?

        Q. It is not in this Operational Order, is it? - A. I do
           not know.  I do not know the contents of the
           Operational Order.

        Q. Have a look in relation to your serial? - A. Yes.

        Q. You have got the page in front of you? - A. Yes.

        Q. Is it in that part that relates to your serial? - A.
           Not literally, no.

        Q. Not at all? - A. All right, not at all.


H
                                               T. HIGGINS



Would it be fair to say that if you carried this duty
out on that particular day that that would be the
result, for example, of your Inspector telling you to
carry that out? - A. That may well have been the
case, yes.

Because the Operational Order for a Semi Final is
going to be quite different, is it not, for what
generally happens at a League game? - A. I think the
biggest consideration was the assessment of the
amount of fans that would arrive.

Is it not right though that the Operational Order for
a Semi Final is going to be different from what
tended to happen at a normal League game? - A. Yes.

You, as a Sergeant, would wish to be guided by what
was in your Operational Order rather than what may
have been the case in a League game? - A. The basic
principles were the same.

You may think that, Mr. Higgins, but we have heard
that there were different principles that applied.
You have told us that this is what you used to do in
other Semi Finals? - A. Of the ones I can recollect
of Semi Finals.  It may have happened in a normal
League match.

Just let us leave the normal League match for the
moment but you tell us you have been to four or five
Semi Finals and this is what generally happened? - A.
Yes.

That you would be there looking to see whether too
many fans had gone into Pens 3 and 4? - A. If I was
on that duty, yes.

You tell us that you were not at the Leeds and
Coventry game in 1987? - A. Not that I can recall I
was there.

You were not at the — thank you, Mr. Devonside —
Tottenham and Wolves game in 1981? - A. Definitely
not at that one.

The problem that then exists, Mr. Higgins, is that
the only other Semi Finals that took place apart from
1988 and 1989, which we know you were not at having
already left the Police Force, were the Semi Finals
that took place during the late 1970s.  Could those
be the ones that you are referring to? - A. It is
impossible for me to recollect that.
                                               T. HIGGINS


Those Semi Finals we understand were — and I have
this on good authority, sir — 1976, 1977 and 1978.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I would not say on good
authority.  That is my understanding.

     MR. ISAACS:  If we are right about that, those
could be the only Semi Finals that you are talking
about? - A. Yes.

The difficulty there, Mr. Higgins, is that those Semi
Finals took place during the time when the terrace
was not sectioned into pens at all and so there would
be no need for you to determine during a Semi Final,
any of those Semi Finals, to ensure that Pens 3 and 4
were not packed because there were no pens, do you
follow me? - A. I will have to take your word for
that, yes.

It means, therefore, you have become a little
confused as to what your normal role was at a Semi
Final, does it not? - A. Not confused, no.

What does it mean? - A. It is hard to recollect every
football match that I attended, whether it was Semi
Final or League.

May it be.the case, Mr. Higgins, that what you are
telling us took place in 1988 at the Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest Semi Final where you were
undoubtedly on duty that, in fact, you have confused
what you say you did on that day with what you may
have done on a number of League games, big or small,
in the past? - A. What I have said about the 1988
matches is that I received an instruction to close
the gates.  I was on supervision of the tunnel.

May it be the case — I am not talking about the
instruction to close the gate now but I am talking
about your supervisory duty of ensuring that Pens 3
and 4 were not too full — that what you have told us
about that duty, that you have confused your carrying
out that duty in 1988 with what you were actually
doing possibly on a regular basis in League games? -
A. It is difficult to say.

May it be the case? After all, so that I can put it
in context for you, there is nothing about it in the
Operational Order.  Your comparison with other Semi
Finals perhaps now seems a little hazy.  May that be
the case? - A. It may be the case.
                                                T. HIGGINS


So far as receiving the order to close the gates is
concerned, could you tell us when you received that
order in 1988? - A. Specifically?

I do not mean the exact moment but was it before or
after the kick-off? - A. Again I cannot recall.

It would be unlikely, if it made any sense, to be
after the kick-off, would it not, because by that
time you would expect all the fans to be in and there
would be no reason to direct fans to different sides
away from the tunnel? - A. I cannot be specific about
that.  I cannot say before or after kick-off.

Did you not make a statement about this matter when
all the Officers in all the serials from 1988 — no,
let me put that a different way.  We understand that
all the Officers in your serial were asked about this
matter and were asked to make a statement.  Are you
aware of that? - A. I was not aware, no.

You certainly were not aware and by this time you had
left the Force? - A. I am sorry?

By this time you had left the Force, when you were
asked about this? - A. Yes.

You were first asked about this in June 1989.   Would
that be right? - A. Yes.

So it was approximately fifteen months after the
event? - A. That is right.

You had no cause to think about what you had done in
1988, since April 1988? - A. That is right.

You were asked about your recollections in relation
to that game and particularly in relation to the
closure of the gate? - A. Yes.

Did you not sign a statement which you submitted to
Force Headquarters to the effect that you had
received the instructions to close the gate during
the game? - A. If I said that then that would be
right.

Yet you cannot recall who gave you that
instruction? - A. No, sir, I cannot.

After every Semi Final there is a system of
debriefing, is there not? - A. Yes.

You would be a party to that? - A. Yes.
                                               T. HIGGINS


You would have to submit a debriefing sheet? - A.
Yes.

You would have to record in that sheet anything that
you had done which you considered to be of moment? -
A. Of relevance.

Having to shut the gate would be something that you
would include, would it not? - A. No.

Why not? - A. Because, as I have said before, it
became a practise I became used to.  It was not
something out of the ordinary.  Consequently I would
not make a note of it.

You would not think that was worth giving information
to your superiors about? - A. Not at all.

This is right, is it not, that you never made any
note in your debriefing sheet about closing the gate?
- A. That is right.  That is as I recall I did.




             /Q. The men who were stationed.
                                    T. HIGGINS   .   0   |


The men who were stationed at the gate you tell us were
stationed inside the gate? - A. Yes.

When I say "gate" I mean those two doors? - A. Yes.

Where were the rest of the men? - A. At the other end
of the tunnel at the top of the terrace steps.

And did they all take a turn? - A. Normally they would.
I can't recall specifically.

Well can't you recall whether you at some stage said:
"Right, Jim and Bill have had their turn now, they have
been on it ten minutes, it is now your turn Dave and
John"? - A. Yes, that might be the case.

Well was it the case? - A. I cannot remember.

And that would have keen the case in respect of all
members of the Serial? - A. Again it is a general
statement.  It is not specific or special to the 1988
match, but there were those P.C.s who were not interested
in watching a football match or observing that part of
it as it were and would have preferred to stay at the
top of a tunnel.

Would it surprise you to be told that each and everyone
of the Police Constables in that Serial had been asked
as to whether they had carried out a duty by that gate
in the way you have described and not one has said that
they did.  Would that surprise you? - A. Yes, it would.

Could you also now again look at the Operational Order
for your duty. The suggestion is, if we look down the
names, that your Serial was to take its meal after
kick-off in the gym. Do you remember that taking place?
- A . No, I don't.

You don't? - A. No.

Because if that had have taken place of course it meant
that your next duty, being located in the central tunnel
to maintain order as required, would take place after
the meal? - A. Well thinking about it again I cannot
recall whether the whole of the Serial would go for a meal
at the same time,  it may have been that they were split.

Let me just ask you this final question, Mr. Higgins.
As a Police Sergeant on duty in that area in charge of
Serial 14 with some knowledge of the layout of the ground,
would you accept that it would be part of your role or
would you say that it would be part of your role to
carry out this supervision of Pens 3 and 4, to see that
it was not crowded? - A. Yes.
                                                                 29


                                           T. HIGGINS       *$


Q. In other words to move from the concourse area down the
   tunnel prior to kick-off? - A. Forgive me for saying so
   but what is written on there in black and white we could
   extend on that.  We had a responsibility for the people
   in the crowd.

Q. So as a Sergeant being positioned behind the concourse
   you would not need to be specifically told:  "Just keep
   your eye open for the filling of Pens 3 and 4 to make
   sure that it does not get too crowded"? - A. I can't
   say whether I was told specifically to do that.

Q. No, but you are saying you would not need to be told that?
   - A. May be not, no.   It is commonsense if a thing is
   filling up and there are vacant spaces at either end to
   do something about that.

Q. And if as a Sergeant you saw that happening you would not
   even need to be told to close the gates? — A. I may request
   of a Serial Inspector to do that or I may have even done
   it on my own initiative.

Q. That would be something you would feel able to do? - A. Yes.

Q. And can I ask you this then:  if that was the case senior
   Officers would be entitled to expect you to carry out that
   role as a Police Sergeant, plenty of years' experience on
   the job? - A. Yes.

           MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Mr. Higgins, this piece of paper was part of a large
   Operational Order? - A. Yes.

Q.   In which you were   a cog in a wheel? - A. That is right.

Q.   A lot of Officers, many hundreds of Officers on duty        in
     1988? - A. Yes.

Q. Important that each part of the wheel performed the
   function that was  provided for it? - A. Yes.

Q.   You knew what was   required of you? - A. Yes.

Q. You had attended a briefing? - A. Yes.

Q. You in turn would have briefed your men? - A. Well they
   were at the briefing as well.

Q. But you are the Sergeant, you are their immediate boss
   and you would no doubt have a word with your men and make
   sure they fully understood what was required of them?
   - A. Yes.
                                                                30

                                          T. HIGGINS
                                                        * $




Q. Item 1, behind the turnstile gates; Phase 1, after Phase 1
   gym for a meal; Phase 2 tunnel and terrace; Phase 3
   exiting of supporters? - A. If it was carried out to the
   letter of the law, yes.

Q. Those were orders though - they weren't the letter of the
   law - they were orders.  It was called "Operational Order"?
   - A. Right, yes.

Q. You are a Sergeant, you are subject to the order of Officers?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And if there is a departure from orders that would be
   something that would be in your mind as a departure from
   what you had been ordered to do? - A. Commonsense would
   apply.

Q. Absolutely.  So why then at the time did you not note
   that you had departed from your stated Orders to do something
   different in the debriefing note? - A. And how have I
   departed?

Q. You have not, as I understand it, noted in your debriefing
   that instead of doing what was written down you were asked,
   if you were asked to do something different, namely close
   the gates or you did that on your own initiative? — A. No,
   my understanding of the debriefing report is if it was
   necessary to make an arrest or an ejection then that is
   something that is relevant.   In terms of closing a gate,
   in those circumstances no.  In hindsight it is easy to say so

Q.    So with hindsight you would agree that a departure from
     orders in the way in which you are now accepting was a
     departure should have been noted on the debriefing? -
     A. Not in the circumstances of closing the gate.

           MR. KING: Well with respect, sir, he has not
     accepted that he departed from order.

             THE CORONER:  No, that is true he did not accept
     that.    You are quite right.

q.         m r . MANNING: Let me establish then that, Mr. Higgins.
     Do you accept that what was done in closing the gates was
     not written in the order? - A. Probably not, that is right.

Q. So it was a departure from the order? - A. But in 1988
   I received an instruction from someone to do it on that
   occasion.
           MR. KING:  Sir, I am sorry.  I get into trouble all
     the time for allegedly misleading witnesses.  That does
     not follow at all what has just been put to the witness.
                                                       31

                                          T. HIGGINS


        THE CORONER:  I don't see the point of it either
  because if I may put it like that from a different
  perspective, it does not say in this Order he should open
  or shut the gate.  I agree with that.  I don't think
  anybody can argue with it. We can all read including
  Mr. Higgins.

        There are two issues which are relevant as far as
  I can see with regard to this witness.  (1) did he or did
  he not shut the gates pre-match for whatever reason and
  (b) did he report it and that is all we need and (c) ....

        MR. ISAACS:  He is actually acting on his own
  initiative it being part of his duty and Senior Officers
  being entitled to expect him to do that if he thought it
  was necessary.

          THE CORONER:   Well you   have already established
  that.
        MR. MANNING:  Sir, it is only (b) that I am looking
  at.  I think we are on common ground all the way through
  the rest of it.  I think the point is now made, he
  accepts that it was not written into the Order.  He says
  he did it but it did not go in the debriefing.

        THE CORONER:  We don't need to     go through whether
  or not this was a departure from the     Order or not.  It
  is simply whether or not he reported     it.  He has given
  us an explanation why he did not do      it.

        MR. MANNING: Absolutely and the only point of the
  last question, with respect, was that Mr. Higgins said
  that with hindsight and I was purely putting ....

          THE CORONER:   But I don't think we even need that.

          MR. MANNING:   Very good sir.   I will leave it at
  that.


                   Cross-Examined bv MR. KI N G :

Q. Mr. Higgins, can I see if I understand your evidence.
   First of all you have told us that you regarded it as
   coirunonsense that if the centre pens were filling up and
   there was vacant space on either side that something
   should happen.    What was the "commonsense" of it. What
   did you think should happen in that circumstance? - A.
   Well to supervise fans within an enclosed area.    The
   way that football fans were taking place at that time,
   people were fighting or doing whatever, close supervision
   was necessary.
                                                          32


                                       T. HIGGINS
                                       -------------   . *   f


Q. And if the centre pens were filling up and there was vacant
   space on either side, what was commonsense, what steps
   would you take to make sure that fans went to the vacant
   sides? - A. To supervise them there.  Close the gates and
   send them round the corner.

Q. That first of all is a matter of commonsense.       That is the
   first point I want to establish.

         Secondly, it appears from that answer that you also
   regarded as commonsense that you actually had to take active
   steps to encourage fans to go to the vacant spaces? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You could not just leave it to their own devices by the
   sound of it? - A. Well no, I mean visiting fans came through
   the terraces and they were confronted with a tunnel entrance.

Q. Yes, exactly.  Now can I also see if I can establish this
   through you: whether or not you regarded it as a super­
   visory duty, your evidence is that in 1988 those tunnel
   gates were closed at the semi-final? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been told about evidence which has been heard.
   We have heard a body of evidence of fans who came in the
   1988 semi-final to find the tunnel gates shut and having
   to go round to the sides.  That would be consistent with
   what you are telling us, wouldn't it? - A. You are saying
   that has happened in 1989?

Q. Sorry, in 1988, that would be consistent with your
   evidence, wouldn't it? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. We have also heard one witness, Mr. Edwards sir, who gave
   evidence that in a semi-final he put in 1980 when there
   were no radial fences at all, that he also found the
   tunnel gates shut off and he had to go round to the side.
   That again would be consistent with your evidence,
   wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been pressed a lot about what   was or wasn't
   in the Operational Order.  This way in   which an eye was
   kept in the pens in the centre to make   sure they
   weren't too full, that was a matter, I   assume as much
   as anything, for crowd safety reasons?   - A. Yes.

Q. We have heard a lot of evidence from Officers who have
   said, when it has been put to them that there is nothing
   in the Operational Order about a specific Safety Order,
   "Well just because it was not in the Operational Order
   does not mean that it was not part of my duties" and that
   would be consistent with what you are telling us,
   wouldn't it? - A. That is right, yes.
                                                      33


                                         T. HIGGINS


Q. The closing off of the tunnel when the two centre pens
   appear full to direct fans to the more vacant side
   pens was something, as I understand your evidence, which
   was so matter of fact that you did not regard it as
   something which you would have to report as an unusual
   occurrence.  Is that right? - A. A matter of fact in my
   case?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes.

Q. So you were being pressed about why wasn't it in the
   debriefing.  I wanted to see if I understood what you
   were saying.

         You yourself regarded it as part of your specific
   duty to ensure or keep an eye on the two centre pens to
   make sure they didn't get too full and if necessary to
   take active steps to put fans who were coming afterwards
   elsewhere? - A. Yes.

Q. And whether you acted on your initiative or by reason of
   a direct order you would do it in order to ensure that
   fans who did not know their way in would get to what you
   regarded as the right place? - A. Yes.




                    Q. Can I just investigate
    A
                                                                   *<84

                                                             T. HIGGINS


        Q. Can I just investigate a little as to where the
           instruction might have come from, if you did get a
           positive instruction in 1988? You say it might have
    B      come from your Inspector, but equally it might have
           come from, did you say Command? - A. Command, yes.

        Q. Where would Command have been positioned? - A. This is
           only a presumption on my part.

        Q.    Of course. - A. There is a box where   Police Officers
             have a view of all the ground.

        Q. A box inside the ground? - A. Yes.  They would no doubt
           make an observation, pass the information to the radio
           control room, who would then pass out the appropriate
           instruction.

        Q. Are you talking about the control box - if Mr.
           Griffiths could perhaps point it out on our model -
           which is inside the ground, looking out over the pitch
           and the terraces? - A. That is right.

        Q.    So one possibility is that somebody in the command box
             who had a view of the terraces would make the decision
             that the two centre pens were too full and send out a
             radio message to shut off the tunnel?    A. Yes.

        Q. That again is a matter of commonsense, if you see the
           two centre pens are full and there is vacant space on
           either side ....

                  THE CORONER:   No.  I don't mind you asking him
             where it might have come from ....

                  MR. KING:   Sir, I won't pursue it any further but
             with respect, with all the muttering to my right, this
             witness was the one who said it was commonsense, I
             didn't, and he also said it was common ....

                  THE CORONER:   Yes, I don't mind that.     He said it


                  MR. ISAACS:   My learned friend once again takes
             the opportunity to do exactly what he criticises
             everybody else for but seems to do more often than
             anybody else.

                  THE CORONER:   I have said no to the question.       I
             don't think we need discuss it any further.

                  MR. KING:   I think we all lose our dignity a bit
             if we banter insults to each other.




H
                                                    T. HIGGINS


          THE CORONER:   And it is Friday.  You were
     exploring where the order might have come from.

Q.       MR. KING:    Yes, I can perhaps put it in this way:
     the reason why you feel that it is a possibility it
     came from Command, is Command were first of all in
     overall control of the crowd on the terraces? - A. Yes,
     but with respect they would not see everything that was
     taking place.

Q.       MR. KING:   No.

          Sir, I don't think I can take it any further.

                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Higgins, did you say that the doors of the tunnel
   were closed for the whole of the match in 1988? That
   is what I wrote down. - A. I can't categorically say
   they were closed for the whole of the match.  There
   would be occasions when they were open, half-time,
   people wanting to leave.

Q. But you are saying they would be closed for the start
   of the match then, and they would be opened later?  Is
   that what you are saying? - A. It would depend on the
   amount of fans in pens 3 and 4 that would dictate when
   they were closed.

Q. You are saying they would be closed for the beginning
   of the match, so people wouldn't have gone in then,
   would they? - A. I can't recall whether they were
   closed before or after kick-off on this particular
   game.

Q. I thought the main purpose for closing them was when
   the pens were full? - A.  That is right.

Q. But you said that they could be opened later at half-
   time, or something like that .... - A. For people to
   leave.

Q. But you are saying they were closed before people
   started going in there?  That is what I have got down
   here. - A. I am sorry?

Q. You are saying that they were closed at the beginning
of the match, and yet the purpose you said later, was to
close them off when the pens were full, and that is not
making much sense really.

          THE CORONER:     Mrs. McBrien, I think you have
     misunderstood.
                                              T. HIGGINS


     MRS. McBRIEN:    I have got down here that the
doors ....

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry, may I have a try and
tell you what I think this witness has said.

Mr. Higgins, please listen very carefully because if I
have misrepresented what you have said I want you to
correct me, all right?

     What this witness has said is that he remembers
distinctly closing the gates in 1988, or that the gates
were closed; he remembers that.  He also remembers that
in 1988 he was told to do so but he can't remember who
told him, where the order came from.  He remembers that
the gates were shut and he thinks they were shut for a
considerable period of time, but he cannot say
precisely what time he shut him or, indeed, what time
he opened them, and he also said, and I think this is
more a deduction than anything else, that the reason
for the shutting was that the pens were full, and
therefore you had to divert the fans who were coming in
other directions, round the sides in effect, and that
was, in fact, as far as he was concerned, his common
practice in football matches where he happened to be on
this particular serial duty.

That is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir,
yes.

Have I got it wrong in any respect? - A. I don't think
so.

     Is that clear?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Because it is a long time ago, and
also because it did not become a problem, if I can put
it like that, until 15 months or so after the match,
when people started looking at 1988, his memory of the
detail is not very good.

I am not blaming you for that in any way.

     Does that help you with your next question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes:

Were you aware that the pens, when fans went down the
tunnel, that the pens were not self-contained pens at
all, that they had access to the other areas.  You can
only say a pen is full when it has a boundary; you can
only say a box is full of items when you know the
                                              T. HIGGINS


bounds of it; you cannot say it is full when there are
ways through, can you?  Do you agree with me?

     THE CORONER:   I think you should ask him whether
he knew that there were radial gates at the back:

Did you know that there were gates at the back of the
radial fence? - A. I didn't know, no.

You didn't know? - A. No.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sorry, did you say you didn't know
there were radial gates? - A. I cannot recall that, no.

But you were the Sergeant in charge of a serial, and
you were to position your serial on the terrace, I
believe - maintain ....

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, if you wish you may
repeat the question.   You can say, "I am surprised that
you didn't know that there were gates at the back of
the pen", but you can't say, "You were the Sergeant".
We know he was the Sergeant.   Let me repeat the
question:

Mrs. McBrien is expressing surprise that you didn't
know that there was an access way at the back of the
terracing through gates along the radial fence.   Are
you saying that you did not know that or what? - A.
What I am saying, sir, is that I can't recall that.   I
can't recall - I presume you say gates, they were
hinged gates?

Yes. - A. But I can't recall that.

     THE CORONER:   I think you have got to accept it.
He can't remember it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   But you knew there were radial
fences? - A. Yes.

Had you had a walk around the ground before you took up
your position at the semi-final in 1988? - A. We would
walk from the briefing, which would take place in part
of a stand, to our positions for kick-off time, so we
would walk from the briefing in the stand, which would
be in the South Stand area - I think that would be
right to say it was in the South Stand area - we would
walk round the outside of the stand to our positions.

Yes but your duties were at the Leppings Lane terrace
and the rear enclosure, weren't they? - A. Yes.
                                                   T. HIGGINS


So surely you would have wanted to inspect that area if
you were going to supervise that area that day,
wouldn't you? - A. That is what I am saying.  We would
leave the briefing and go to that area.  The briefing
took place well   before the fans  were let in.

And you did not     notice that you   could get fromalong
that terrace by     way of gates at   the back?

     THE CORONER:   He has already told you twice, Mrs.
McBrien, and it is no use asking him a third time
because he will just say, "I didn't know there were any
gates".

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   He does not remember if there are
any gates, which is a very different thing, it seems to
me.

     THE CORONER:      That is right, I agree.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     When the tunnel gates, doors, were
closed you said that   there were two Police Officers who
were standing inside   of those doors? That is what I
have down here. - A.   Yes.

Is that where they remained? - A. As I have tried to
explain, in turn they would be replaced by other
Officers during the duration.

So they were just standing there, away from the crowds?
- A. Yes.

Just in a dark tunnel .... - A. That is right.

Behind closed doors? - A. Yes.

What was their main purpose then there? - A. The gates
were closed to but not secured, and there would be an
occasion when someone would try to come through those
gates.   The Police Officers would stop them coming
through.

Sorry, from the terraces you are saying? - A. No, from
the enclosure side,   theturnstile side.

     THE CORONER:       The concourse area, we call that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:There would be people          who would
try to go through those doors? - A. Yes.

Well, they were quite heavy doors, I believe, weren't
they?  If they were closed I don't think somebody ....
                                              T. HIGGINS


     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I don't quite know
what it is that you are trying to establish.  I have
got a sneaking suspicion, but it is not going to help
us in establishing how 95 people died, including your
lad, in 1989.  Are you trying to establish that it was
unsafe to close the gates, in your view?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Certainly, yes.

     THE CORONER:   That is a very interesting
observation and we have explored it in some respects
with other people.  I don't think we need to explore it
with this witness.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   I did receive information, my son
did attend the match in 1988, and he was directed
around to the side areas, not because the tunnel doors
were closed but Officers or stewards directed him that
year.   Did you see any Officers? Were there any
Officers directing fans in the concourse that year? -
A. When I say that I would direct fans round to those
corner pens I don't mean literally me on my own; there
would be Officers that would do that as well.   If our
duty was to maintain supervision of the tunnel and we
were then told not to allow any further fans into the
pen, then anyone would be directing; it could be any
one of ten Officers.

Yes, what I am saying is that they did not see the
tunnel doors closed, they saw Officers or stewards who
told them to go round to the side. - A. I am afraid I
will have to accept what you are saying.

So once the doors are closed are you saying the only
way onto the terrace in 1988 was to the right, or to
the left through the gap in the wall, that any fans
coming into that concourse, they would only have two
routes? - A. As far as I was concerned on the tunnel,
they would have one route either side of that stand.  I
don't know anything about the gates that you are
talking about.

No, the doors of the tunnel.  If the doors of the
tunnel were closed as you said they were. - A. Yes.

Then fans coming in that year would only have two
routes to take, wouldn't they? - A. Either side of the
tunnel gates, yes.

Yes.  A lot of people have given evidence here and they
did not seem to be aware of these other routes.  If
they had only been using ....
                                              T. HIGGINS


     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry, we are
wasting time.   I can't allow it to go on.  I am very
sorry.   He has told you, and if you would listen to his
answers you would have heard, that fans were directed
round the corners of the stand.   The tunnel was either
blocked, he says, by the gates, or he has accepted that
it may well be that Officers, including himself but he
can't remember, may have pointed - what more is it that
you want him to say, and in what way can it possibly
help us?   It can't, so move on to the next question.
The issue of whether or not the tunnel gates were
blocked off in some way or another in '88 is an
important issue to the Inquest.   Whether or not the
fans in '88 knew that you could get round the sides is
totally irrelevant.   Unless you have some other matter
which is relevant I must ask you to bring your
questioning to a close.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Right,   thank you.




           Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN
                                                T. B E G I N S


           Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Just  one general matter, Mr. Higgins.    You have already
told   the Court that you made no mention in your de­
briefing sheet of what occurred with the tunnel gates in
1988? - A. I said I didn't recall making a reference in
the de-briefing sheet regarding those doors.    I wouldn't
consider it necessary.

You didn't consider it necessary, I know that is a reply
you have given previously.   However, what I want to ask
you about is just a general matter about the de-briefing
sheet.   Can you tell me if you agree with this, that one
of the reasons why you do fill in a de-briefing sheet
with matters of relevance is so that appropriate
modifications can be made to the following year's
Operational Order, if it is deemed necessary?    That is
one of the reasons why you fill in de-briefing sheets
with matters of relevance? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, this is a different topic, but I
thought this witness might be able to help from all his
experience.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

In all the time you were attending at the various matches
that you have been speaking about, have you ever known of
an occasion when the gates have been opened, the
concertina gates have been flung open to allow the crowd
to come in, the crowd outside? - A. Not at all.

With regard to the safety of this practice of closing
these tunnel doors, do you know whether this practice was
ever discussed with anybody from the club? - A. I
wouldn't be privy to that, sir.

Do you know whether the safety of that practice was
discussed with the Fire Service? - A. No, I don't know.

               Further by THE CORONER:

Have I understood your evidence correctly that the reason
why you didn't mention the closing of the doors in your
de-brief was because as far as you were concerned there
was no difference between league and semi-final policing
methods, at that location? - A. That would be a fair
assumption, sir, yes.

That would be right? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mrs. McBrien.
                                                 T. fflfeGINS


     MRS. MCBRIEN:  Just one question arising from what
you have just said.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Mr. Higgins, were you aware that at league matches there
are only about a quarter of the people attending compared
with a semi-final match and that the pens could be used
in a different manner altogether on those occasions? - A.
I will accept what you say.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, just one matter.   In the last
question you put, that was canvassed earlier on.    It was
put to Mr. Higgins that the Operational Order was
different for a semi-final from league games.    He said
it depended on the assessment of the fans coming and he
then went on to say the basic principles were the same.
I am not sure whether you want to explore that further;
whether he is referring to his basic understanding of his
duty, and he may not know what the Operational Order was
and what the assessment was.

     THE CORONER:   That was the reason why I phrased the
question in the way I did.   What I wanted to find out
from him is whether he equated league with semi-final
matches:

That is basically what you have told us, haven't you?
Whatever it might have said in the Operational Orders,
you treated the two as being a football match? - A. The
only difference being the amount of people who would
attend.   That was the factor of the whole thing.  The
main ingredient would be the amount of fans attending a
particular match, that would make any sort of difference.
More men to supervise etc.

     THE CORONER:    Did you want to say anything more to
that, Mr. Catchpole?    Personally I don't feel it is
necessary.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It was just that I wondered whether
the question you had put, with respect, had actually
changed the answer he had given before, but I understand
it is exactly the same.   I was focusing on what he was
saying as opposed to the general idea of the system being
employed.

     MR. ISAACS:   As I understand it, there will be a
witness or witnesses who will deal with the differences,
if it be necessary, in actual fact, between league games
and semi-finals.
                                               T. tflfcGINS


     THE CORONER:   We do intend to have at least one,
possibly two, senior officers come along who hopefully
will be able to say what they understood.

     MR. ISAACS:   Of course this Officer can only give
his evidence as to what he thought was the case.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, and that is all I was
trying...   Whether he is right or wrong is another
matter.

     Mr. Higgins, I think we had you here once before,
abortively, for which I apologise but you understand it
is not as easy as all that to get our timings right.   In
fact it is terribly difficult.   However, I am most
grateful to you for being here today.   Thank you for
your help.

     Mr. Eason.

            PAUL ANTHONY JAMES EASON Sworn

                   By THE CORONER:

Are you Paul Anthony James Eason? - A. That is correct.

You are a Station Officer? - A. Yes.

Of course you are in the Ambulance Service of South
Yorkshire? - A . Yes.

Just tell me how long you have been in the Ambulance
Service in very round terms? - A. Thirteen years now,
nearly.

It has become the practice, for whatever reasons, that at
Sheffield Wednesday, at major matches, a few ambulance
people attend? - A. At league and cup games.

Not for every minor event but where you anticipate there
are going to be large numbers of people? - A. Yes.

Being ambulance people of course you drive up in an
ambulance, I take it? - A. Yes.

What I want to do is just make sure that I am right that
you actually were at the match on the 15th April, 1989? -
A. That's correct.

I think you were with several colleagues - Mr. Higgins,
Mr. Worrall and Mr. Chippendale? - A. Four in all.

I think you arrived at the ground at about ten past two?
- A. That's right.
                                             p.   a   .   js   Re a s o n


You parked up somewhere.   In fact it was near the
gymnasium you parked? - A. That's correct.

Then having done the routine things you would normally do
you entered the ground? - A. That s right.

I think you went to a spot somewhere between the North
Stand and the Spion Kop? - A. On the perimeter track at
the angle between the two.

Would you mark where you were on the plan?    (The witness
marked his position on plan C.480)

Was it about quarter to three or thereabouts that you
took up that position? - A. That's right, sir.

All four of you? - A. All four of us.

I think you had pocket radios? - A. That's right, hand
held portable radios.

I think there were some St. John's Ambulance people there
and a few Policemen as well? - A. At the side of us, yes.

Do you recollect the players coming out on to the pitch?
- A. Yes.

Do you remember the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Between the time you took up your position in that corner
which you have marked, and kick-off, did you move away
from that position? - A. Not at all.

So that is where you remained.   Not with hindsight, but
at the time, did you notice anything of any moment that
concerned you? - A. Not at all.

Tell me when you first became aware that something wasn't
quite as it should be. - A. I would say about three to
four minutes past three.

So well into the match? - A. Yes.

What was it that attracted your attention? - A. There
seemed to be some type of disturbance at the Leppings
Lane end.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt, sir, but
did he say three to four minutes past?

     THE CORONER:   Three to four minutes past three
o'clock.
                                             P. A. J£ &ASON


     MRS, MCBRIEN:   Yes, all right,     I am sorry to
interrupt.

     THE CORONER:   Would you please sit forward.   It is
very difficult to hear.   You said it looked to you as if
there was some type of disturbance at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. That's right.

Were all four of you still together at that point? - A.
Yes.

Were you able to distinguish what was going on or not? -
A. Not specifically, no.

You decided to move, is that right? - A. I took an
ambulanceman and walked towards that end.

One of your colleagues? - A. Yes.

Not Mr. Higgins because he is another Senior Officer? -
A. Yes.

So it was one of the other two? - A. That's right.

I take it you were walking over to see whether you would
be needed? - A. Basically to find out what was going on,
yes.

Which route did you take?   Did   you walk across the field
or along the perimeter track by   the North... - A. Along
the perimeter track.   The game   was still in place so we
walked down the perimeter track   adjacent to the North
Stand.

It would be fair, would it, that at that point when you
set off on your walk you weren't particularly disturbed?
You wanted to know what was going on but you weren't
running? - A. No, I wasn't overly concerned.

When did you first begin to realise that action by the
Ambulance Service would be needed? - A. Our actual
involvement didn't become apparent to me until some time
later than that.   Having got down to that corner of the
ground, somewhere in the location of pen 6, there didn't
seem to be too much going on in pen 6.   They seemed to
be watching the game.   There seemed to be a little bit
of commotion going on in pens 3 and 4 and there were
people starting to come out on to the perimeter track
who, upon examination, were winded, but were capable...
They were supporting themselves, there was no need for us
to take any direct action in respect of those people.
We actually started to be come involved with injured
people when it was brought to our attention there was a
                                                         46

                                              P. A. JfREASON


   young man with a leg injury and that is when things
   started to involve us a little more.

Q. Can you tell me whether the match had already been
   stopped at that point? - A. By the time the two young
   chaps drew our attention to the gentleman with the leg
   injury the game would have stopped because he was by the
   goalpost.

Q. Do I understand from your evidence that from where you
   were positioned, nothing had attracted your attention?
   I am not blaming you in any way for this.    All I am
   trying to establish is what you saw would be that three
   or four minutes into the game you noticed something was
   happening at that end but you couldn't distinguish from
   the distance what it was? - A. That's right.




             Q. You then approached
You then approached the Leppings Lane end.     Pen 6 did
not look too bad to you? - A. No.

In Pens 3 and 4 there was something happening but the
people who you came across outside the pen were
winded but not ill in the sense that you felt that
they had to be attended to? - A. No, they were winded
and they were bringing themselves round.  Some of
them were sat down catching their breath and then sat
up and stood up.  Others were just generally winded.

It was not until somebody drew your attention to the
lad with the foot injury that you thought, "My
goodness, we will have to intervene here"? - A. Yes.
Having had a look at the chap's leg it was obvious he
was in need of attention.  He became a priority then.

This time, had Mr. Higgins come down as well or were
you by yourself? - A. I was by myself.

After that, the ambulance which was parked somewhere
at the pack, I am just interested in this, who went
and fetched that ambulance, do you know? - A. The
ambulance stayed where it was.

That ambulance did not   come on to the   pitch? - A.
That ambulance did not   come on to the   pitch,no.

The South Yorkshire ambulance which did eventually
appear on the pitch was not the one that you had
initially brought? - A. No.  There was a St. John's
ambulance came on to the pitch and we put two
vehicles on to the pitch later on.

You have told me that when you realised people were
genuinely injured and there was this lad, which was
just after kick-off, when did you realise that this
was much more than just injuries and you were dealing
with what we now know to be a disaster? - A. Yes.
While the ambulancemen   were splinting the young man's
leg, the other officer and myself had time to look at
the situation and make an assessment and it was quite
apparent to us then that we were getting into a
serious incident.

I take it that once that had happened you tried to
use your phones and communicate as appropriate? - A.
Station Officer Higgins went back to the ambulance
and started setting up the gymnasium as a casualty
clearing centre.  I remained down the field trying to
keep an updated assessment.

You have marked the plan where you started.  Do you
remember where you dealt with the youngster with the
                                               P. A. J. EASON


injured leg? - A. Yes, it was around — as you look
at that plan and look towards the Leppings Lane
terrace — the left hand goal post.   The other side.

So you had come right across by then? - A. Yes.

Do you remember the gates being opened and people
coming out from there on to the perimeter track? - A.
I can remember seeing a gate open at some time and
people being assisted through the gate.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Mr. Eason, I wonder if I might just be permitted to
ask you a question, quite a broad question arising
from your experience as an officer in the South
Yorkshire Ambulance Service for 13 years.  Have you
during the period of your service frequently had to
work closely with members of the South Yorkshire
Police Force?

      THE CORONER:    Mr. Payne.

      MR. PAYNE:     I understand what is in your mind.

     THE CORONER:   If I allow you that question then
we have to allow hundreds of questions on the inter­
relationship of the Police and Ambulance Service and
what I am interested in from this officer is what he
saw on the day.   I think the answer is no to the
question, I am sorry.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, I just wondered whether it
might be helpful for the Jury to know something about
the background of the general level of co-operation
between the Ambulance Service and the Police Force?

      THE CORONER:     I do not think it is going to help
us.

      MR. PAYNE:     I accept your ruling.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I think you have given a ruling,
have you not, that you do not want questions directed
to the adequacy or otherwise of the rescue with the
Ambulance Service.  I think you have made that clear.

     THE CORONER:  I think that is right because I
have taken the view we do not need to explore that.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I started like that so that
those behind me know that I am only directing
questions to that which you have ruled.
                                           P. A. J. EASON


     THE CORONER:   I have indeed.

     MR. KING: As always, sir, I obey.   I may argue
about your rulings beforehand but I always obey them
in the end.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:  I confine myself simply to that which
you have asked questions about, sir.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Mr. Eason, you were positioned in a corner of the
ground well away from the Leppings Lane terrace, were
you not? - A. That is right.

You were not in a position, and nobody expects you to
be in a position, to be able to see what was
happening on the Leppings Lane terrace before you
walked round.  That would be fair, would it not? - A.
No, you could not see what was going on.

We really want to take your evidence from when you
say that after three to four minutes past three when
you started to walk round, all right? - A. Right.

I just want to see if I can investigate slightly that
timing.  You say that you did at that time, you
started your walk around that time, yes? - A. Yes.

How long would it take you to walk round? - A. It is
difficult to quantify, a minute at the most I would
have thought.

So you might have walked round to where Pen 6 was and
you would get there round about five minutes past,
something like that? - A. I would think so, yes.

Then did you keep walking to that goal post where the
injured man was? - A. No.  I stopped at Pen 6 and
tried to see what the situation was from that angle.
I then continued to walk along.

While you were around Pen 6 you met people who were
winded, did you? - A. Yes.

How did they manifest that they were winded? - A. I
am sorry?

How was it that they looked winded? What were they
doing, or how did they appear? - A. They were puffed.
They were sat down and they were trying to catch
their breath.
                                           P. A. J. EASON



That of itself is not a usual state of affairs to be
in, is it? - A. No.

What as an ambulanceman conclusion did you draw as to
how that had come about? From what you could see? -
A. That was difficult to say.  Again with hindsight
it is obvious.

Not with hindsight? - A. At the time it was very,
very difficult to say.

I just wish to investigate ever so slightly, because
you have given evidence that you saw nothing
untoward, as an ambulanceman how does someone become
winded? What has to happen? - A. You can become
winded by a direct blow to your stomach.

Did you see a lot of people around when you got to
Pen 6 on the perimeter track side? - A. No, not a
lot. Not as many as I saw later on.

Can I just show you some photographs? - A. Yes.

Can we just have the series of photographs beginning
with C.326A in the bundle?  In fact, I will start
with C.327.  Have you got C.327 there? - A. Yes.

Just pause a second whilst we get the photograph on
the screen.   Have a look at that photograph, Mr.
Eason.  When you arrived outside Pen 6, how far did
you get along Pen 6 around this time when you first
arrived? Can you show us on the photograph? - A. How
far along it?

Yes. - A. I stopped at the angle of the perimeter
track.

So you would be able to look along the track? - A.
That is right.

That photograph is at one minute past three, you can
take it from me, and if you are right that would be
before you arrived.  Was the scene when you arrived
like that along the track, worse than that or better
than that in terms of the numbers on the perimeter
track? - A. As far as I can remember and I note the
time on the electronic scoreboard, as far as I can
remember that, in my mind, is very similar to when I
arrived.

Just turn the page again if you would and here we see
a scene at three minutes past three.  Do you see
that? - A. Right.
                                               P. A. J. EASON



The first photograph I showed you was just after
kick-off.

     THE CORONER:     Please give the C reference.

     MR. KING:   C.328, sir.

You would agree with me, Mr. Eason, that that
photograph shows a situation which if you turn the
page back, which was two minutes earlier, has
worsened considerably as far as the numbers of
spectators who were apparently on the perimeter track
or on the area of grass behind the goal? - A. Yes, I
would agree with you.

Was the scene when you arrived like C.328 or C.327 if
we can put it that way? - A. In my mind's eye, as I
told you earlier, I would have said as in the earlier
picture but obviously looking at this that was more
the situation.

That, in fact, is not a situation where you would say
to yourself, "There is nothing untoward here", would
you? - A. If you look at that picture I cannot see
too many people injured on that photograph.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Kilvington, are there any
questions that you want to ask?

     MR. KILVINGTON:     No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Eason, I am most grateful to
you for coming.  Thank you.

                    PETER WELLS Sworn

                       Bv THE CORONER

It is Peter Wells? - A. Yes, it is.

Of                                        Sheffield? -
A. That is correct.

Mr. Wells, you too have been here on a previous
occasion I think and I am very sorry about that but
at least we have made it today.  You are, I think,
what is known as a Divisional Superintendent in the
St. John's Ambulance Service? - A. I was at the time,
yes.

You were at the time in 1989.  Does that mean you
have moved up or left? - A. Moved up.
                                           P. A. J. EASON


Well done.  In fact, you have been with the St.
John's Ambulance for a long time? - A. Twelve years.

Twelve years? - A. This last session twelve years.

Pardon? - A. I joined when I was a cadet at ten years
old but we had a break in between.

It is common practice, is it not, for St. John's
Ambulance to attend at major football matches? - A.
Yes.  We attend all the League games in Sheffield.
Both grounds.

The objective of the attendance is to render first
aid? - A. Correct.

You would not class St. John's Ambulance as a fully
qualified medical unit? - A. We are trained first
aiders and we are there to render first aid.

That is exactly what I am trying to say but what I am
trying to say also is that you would not set yourself
up as being staff only by doctors or anything like
that? - A. No, we do have doctors in the movement who
will assist us at functions.

I know that.  On the 15th April 1989 you in fact were
at the match together with quite a lot of your
colleagues? - A. Yes.

Were you in charge of them? - A. I was in charge of
them actually.

I think as one would expect you would position your
staff, and I use the word staff but you know what I
mean? - A. Yes, we allocated each member a separate
corner.




                                     /Q. In fact that.
                                                      53


                                         P. WELLS


Q. In fact that is what I was going to say, you put them
   round the corners.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. And you then expect them to respond if a first aid
   situation presents itself? - A. That is right, yes.
   They are all in radio contact with me and they respond
   and let me know over the radio what they are attending
   to in a particular area.

Q. Where did you position yourself on that particular
   day? - A. On the particular day I was in the corner
   of the South Stand and the Kop because my ambulance I
   was driving, I was responsible for, was in that car
   park just behind there.

Q. Behind the South Stand? - A. Behind the South Stand,
   yes.

Q. Can you show us where you were.   We will put a plan up
   and you put a cross on it please.

          MR. BEECHEY:   C481 sir.

Q.         THE CORONER:  That is in fact the opposite corner
     to the Ambulance gentleman? - A. Yes, my ambulance was
     in this corner sir.

Q. I am not complaining.  That is right, yours was behind
   the South Stand? - A. That is correct.

Q.    And   I think    I am right in saying that you      in fact did
     not stay at that location the whole   time because at about
     quarter—to—3 you set off on a tour of your points? — A.
     Yes, all our crews were in position for 2.15 on the ground
     and at about quarter-to-3 I left and went round each
     corner to make sure they were all fully familiar with
     the emergency procedures, the Mr. Meadows and things like
     that.   I went right round the ground at that point.
     That is when I noticed there was an absence of Liverpool
     fans. We remarked on it actually.

Q.    I will come to that in a minute but just tell me which
     way you went? - A. I went along the front of the South
     Stand and worked my way right back round.

Q. So South Stand, Leppings Lane, North Stand, back to your
   position? - A. Yes.

Q. Now how certain are we that it was at 2.45 that you did
   this tour? - A. I am not certin it is.  It is only
   approximately.  That is all I can say.

Q. You went past tne Gouth Stand; there was nothing there
   that concerned you; you met your colleagues at the corner;
                                                           54


                                          P. WELLS
                                                          * $


     you talked to them; you walked along Leppings Lane. Now
     you said something and I want you just to repeat what
     you said that you noticed at that time? - A. Well if we
     can go back to the semi-final before just at Gate 4 we
     fetched a young lad out of there with a broken ankle
     prior to the match starting.

Q.   Which year? - A. 1988.   And as I was going past there two
     young girls spoke to me and   they said:   "We shall not need
     you this year".   I stopped and said:    "Why is that?"
     She said:  "Well you took our friend out last year and
     he has not come this year" and that stuck in my mind them
     saying they would not need us this year.     I then walked
     on to the other corner but that pen was not packed at
     that time.   There was still room in it.

Q. This is Pen 4? - A. Just behind Pen 4 yes.        It was not
   really desperately full at that time.

Q. Can you remember as you were walking past Leppings Lane
   whether you noticed a beach ball being knocked about?
   - A. No, I didn't notice a ball, no.

Q.   Did you see that at any point? -   A. No.

Q.   But at whatever time it was that you walked past somebody
     actually stopped and talked to you? - A. One lad asked
     me if I had got an Aspirin for a headache and I said:
     "You will soon forget that when they score the first goal"
     and he just laughed.

Q. What you are saying is that as far as you           were concerned
   at that time there  was nothing to concern        you at the
   Leppings Lane end? - A. No.

Q. You continued your   journey and came back to your position.
   Would that be right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see the players come on to the pitch? - A. I saw
   the players come out because shortly before that the
   Police Sergeant in our corner had told us there was going
   to be a delayed kick-off and I tried to go over the
   radio to my colleagues and we could not hear them for the
   noise of the Forest fans, so I walked across to the middle
   of the Kop, met him, told him there was going to be a
   delayed kick-off, walked back to my corner and the players
   came out.

Q. What I want to know is when you saw the players come on
   to the pitch which made you understand there was not
   going to be a delayed kick-off, had you already completed
   your journey? - A. Yes.

Q. So there is no doubt that your journey, if I may use that
   word, had occurred before the players came on to the
   pitch? - A. Yes.
                                                             55


                                         P. WELLS
                                                       * $


Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you in a position to say how long you were back in
   your location before the players came out.  Have you
   any idea? - A. Two or three minutes before.

Q. You don't think you were there very long? - A. No,
   because I had already walked across the front of the Kop
   and back to tell my colleague that there was going to
   be a delayed kick-off before they came out.

Q.   At what point - now I want to come to that - at what
     point were you told about the delayed kick-off? - A. I
     should think about two, two or three minutes before
     the players came out.   I don't know what time the players
     came out but it was two or three minutes before that.

Q. Was it somebody at the Spion Kop end who was telling
   you? - A. It was the Policeman in that corner.  He told
   me there was going to be a delayed kick-off.

Q.   You of course accepted that. You did not have any reason,
     you did not ask him why? - A. No, well we assumed it was
     the fans outside.  That is the usual reason for a delayed
     kick-off the fans are not in.

Q.    What you are saying is you then walked across the Spion
     Kop to the other side .... A. Halfway across to meet my
     colleague.

Q. Told him ___     A. Told him there had been a delayed
   kick-off.

Q. Then walked back and it was then ....     A. that the
   players came out.

Q. And you realised that whatever he had said it was not
   right? - A. Yes.

Q.    Between the players coming out and kick-off, do you
     remember kick-off, I ought to ask you? - A. I never
     saw the ball kicked.

Q. Well tell me then what happened, as far as you are
   concerned, between the time when the players came out
   and I will stop you when I think it is necessary? - A.
   The players came out on to the pitch and we were still
   remarking about the absence of Liverpool fans at that
   end.   We thought there would be more in than what there
   was at the time and then suddenly we noticed what
   appeared to be a pitch invasion at the time.   Fans were
   coming over the fence and I said to my wife who was also
   in the corner, I said:   "That does not look like a pitch
   invasion to me.   They are not reacting as they would do."
                                                         56


                                               P. WELLSf f


   I mean normally on a pitch invasion they run about
   jumping and shouting but they were getting on the ground
   and sitting down as if they were glad to be out, so I
   said:  "Stay by your radio and I will go and have a look
   at what is happening".  I set off up the front of the
   South Stand and by the time I got to the tunnel entrance
   it was obvious that there was some problem at that end.

Q. Hang on, "tunnel entrance" you mean the players'? - A.
   When I got to the players' entrance, yes.  It was obvious
   from seeing our members running from both corners that
   there was some trouble so I then ran up the second half
   of the pitch.  As I arrived there it was immediately obvious
   that there was a problem.

Q. You said you did not see the game ... A. I think the
   kick-off occurred just as I was going past the players'
   tunne1.

Q. Did you see it finish? - A. No.

Q. I don't mean tactically were you watching   and saw the
   game finish, but did you realise that the   game had stopped?
   - A. No, I did not see the players go off   the field at
   all.  I was too busy trying to get to the   fans that were
   in trouble.

Q. When you got to that end and you looked and as you say
   you could see straightaway that there was something
   definitely wrong, what did you actually observe.   Can
   you just describe what you observed? - A. The scene I
   was greeted with was the one that was published in all
   the daily papers; people crushed up against the fence;
   faces going blue and obviously they were in trouble.
   I jumped on the hoardings and tried to assist the Police
   in pleading with the fans to move back.  It became
   obvious from the high angle that they could not move
   back because of the crowd behind them.  I tried to pull
   one girl out.  She was holding her arms up.   I could not
   move her at all.  I then jumped down and asked the Police
   Inspector who was stood behind me if any of his vehicles
   or if he knew of any cutting equipment so we could
   release the fence because it was obvious unless the fence
   came down we could not possibly get them out, and he just
   shook his head and he was talking to his radio and I
   heard the words "Major disaster" and then I knew that
   things would be moving from that point on.

         I realised the only way I could possibly do any­
   thing was by possibly getting some oxygen to get to the
   fans because you could not move the fans o r  the fence
   so we had to get amongst them somehow, so we then
   returned, ran down the pitch to our ambulance, got the
   oxygen cylinder off and went back with it and tried to
   feed it into the fans' mouths through the fence.
                                    P. WELLS
                                                 * &


Was it Mr. Gillatt? - A. Yes, he ran down with me.

Did he go back with you and fetch the oxygen bottle? - A.
Yes, he went down with me to help me get it off.

Then I think you returned.  Was it you who tried to
administer the oxygen to an elderly gentleman? - A. Yes,
I got the cylinder slung over my shoulder and I was
feeding it to anyone who I could reach.  The face mask
was too big to go through the gaps in the fence so I
threw that and used the tube, just feeding the tube
into their mouths.

You said it was an Inspector behind you who was speaking
into his radio and using the words "Major disaster"? -
A. I heard the words "Major disaster".

What makes you say the man was an Inspector as opposed
to something different? - A. Well I have spent 27 years
in the Fire Service and I know the rank markings.  He
had got two pips.

He had pips and there were two, did you say? - A. He had
two pips.
We know that the St. John ambulance came on to the pitch.
Was that yours? - A. No, it was the one from the North
Stand behind the first aid room.  The Police said an
ambulance was required at Leppings Lane and he came round
on the pitch.

Was that conveyed to you by mouth or radio.  How did you
find out that an ambulance would be needed, I mean apart
from your own observation, of course? - A. He was in
position when I first saw it.  He was already on the
pitch when I saw it.  I was not told it was coming.

Oh I see. Are you saying the ambulance was already on
the pitch before you got down to Leppings Lane? - A. No,
when I got back down there I was busy giving the oxygen
to the people I could give it to and I turned round and
the ambulance was already there.

 I see, it was not there initially? - A. It was not there
 initially.

You had beaten the ambulance? - A. No, it was not there
till the players went off I think, till the players
went off the pitch.

 I know that you of course assisted or attempted to assists
 several people didn't you apart from this gentleman who
 we know about? - A. Yes.
                                                      58



                                          P. WELLS


                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. I wonder if you would look in the folder in front of you
   please at 277.   You see this timetable of events? - A.
   Yes.

q . if you run your eye down the times column you come to
    1454.08:  "Liverpool team on to the pitch". About halfway
   down the page under "Internal" column? - A. Yes.

Q. Now by that time you were back at your station at the
   far corner of the ground from the Leppings Lane end? - A.
   That is correct, yes.
Q. I want to just work back from that and find out when you
   had walked past the Leppings Lane end.  That time there
   we have got is 6—minutes—to—3, the teams are coming out
   on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. So just work yourself backwards.   You have got to go
   backwards and forwards across a short distance of the
   Kop.  Then you have got to make the journey round the
   ground from the Leppings Lane end.   So putting the
   minutes togfether what time does that put you back at
   the Leppings Lane end? - A. I would say approximately
   20-to or quarter-to-3. Sorry, I did not look at my
   watch at the time.   It was approximately that time.  That
   is all I can say.




                             Q. You say
                                                        ./9
                                                    P. WELLS


Q. You say 20 or a quarter-to-3 approximately? - A.
   Approximately, yes.

Q. Right, well you can't be more accurate than that.  You
   stopped outside gate 4, or at least you were stopped? -
   A. In that area, yes.  It was gate 4 where we fetched
   the lad out from in the previous semi-final and it was
   roughly the same position where the two girls spoke to
   me.

Q. Where was the lad who asked for the aspirin,
   approximately? - A. In approximately the same position.
   They were all together.

Q. In pen 4? - A. Round about gate 4, yes.

Q.   One other question please:   what was the reason that
     your men stationed at the corners of  the ground were
     supplied with radios? - A. For communication purposes.

Q. Yes, with you? - A. It is an internal one that St. John
   have.

Q. In what circumstances were they required to use the
   radio? - A. If they are called to an incident by the
   Police in each corner, rather than the Police coming
   through me every time, if they are called individually
   to a local incident then they come on the radio and
   inform me that they are moving so that I can then cover
   that corner.

Q.   Is it the practice of the St. John's   - I expect
     everybody who has been to a big function has seen you
     chaps working - is it the practice to watch the crowd
     rather than the match? - A. Yes.   There are very
     football fans in the St. John's.

Q. You keep a beady eye really, on the crowd?  Sorry,
   perhaps that is not the right expression to use. - A.
   We spend more time watching the crowd than we do
   watching the game.

Q. So if your men stationed at the corners actually see an
   incident themselves .... - A. They would attend.

Q. They would attend on it immediately but would they
   report to you over the radio that they were about to go
   into the crowd? - A. That is right.  They report before
   they move and then they report when they get to the
   casualty.

          MR. PAYNE:   I wonder if Sergeant Griffiths could
     put up that map of the ground again - C274.
                                               P. WELLS


You can find 274 in that bundle, Mr. Wells.  Do you
happen to know the names of your men who were stationed
at the two corners at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I
know who was in charge of the corners, yes.

Can you say who it was? - A. Divisional Superintendent
John Towler was in the North Stand/West Stand corner,
and George Saxton, who is a Divisional Superintendent,
was in the other corner at the South Stand.

At sometime after the teams had come out, which we know
is at 6-minutes-to, that was when you saw the people
start to come over the railings, the fence? - A. That
was when it was noticeable that there were people
coming over the fences.

And you set off yourself on your own initiative to walk
down there? - A. Yes.

Sometime after 6-minutes-to, and you are not able to be
more -- or are you? - A. No.   I saw the teams come on
the pitch, that was all.

What I want to know is this, prior to that had you
received any radio message from either of your teams at
the Leppings Lane end that they were having to do
anything about the crowd? - A. No.  I had not received
anything, but there again the noise was so intense from
the Kop, with the Forest fans, that we could not hear a
thing on the radio virtually, that is why I went down


     THE CORONER:   Could you speak up? - A. Sorry, the
noise was so intense from the Kop, from the Forest
fans, that it was making it difficult to communicate by
radio.

So you don't, in fact, know whether there was a radio
message or not then?- A. Apparently there was one from
John Towler; Dave Senior in the other corner, where
Paul Eason was stood, he heard it, "All St. John's
members to report to Leppings Lane end".

That did not reach you? - A. It didn't reach me, no; I
was already there.

Is there a log kept of the timing of messages? - A. Not
the timing of the radio messages, no.

You are reporting something that you have been told by
somebody else now, are you? - A. Yes, I am reporting
something that has been passed on to me afterwards.
                                               P. WELLS


What? - A. I am reporting now that someone passed a
message on to me afterwards that there had been a radio
call go out for all St. John members to go to that end.

I don't know how important this might be, but are you
saying that what you have been told is the message went
out by the time that you had already, of your own
initiative, gone down there? - A. Yes.  I saw John
Towler coming in from the other corner; I presume that
was when the message went out.

Where were you when you saw that? - A. I was at the
Leppings Lane end.

That was after you had arrived at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. Yes.

But what I was asking about was before you set off on
your journey, do you understand that? - A. Yes.

Before you started, had there been any message before
that? - A. There had been no message.  I had seen our
people move in just from the corners inwards, but there
had been no message.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Can I just deal a little more with timings first of
all.  Whatever time it was that you first went round,
20-to, quarter-to-3, you then returned back to your
original position and were still looking towards the
terraces, that is right, isn't it? - A. Correct.

From that time onwards is it right that you did notice,
even from that position, that there was a change in the
state of affairs on the terrace? - A. Yes, it seemed to
fill suddenly.  It seemed to start getting full
suddenly.

It is right, isn't it, that your observation was that
it started filling and the pens seemed to be getting
overcrowded? You noticed that, didn't you? - A. I was
at the far end of the pitch ....

Yes, I know you were at the far end of the pitch .... -
A. We couldn't see the actual crowding.  It seemed to
fill suddenly.

Wasn't it your observation, your initial observation,
that you thought it was getting overcrowded? - A. No,
we couldn't see from that end of the pitch.
                                                   P. WELLS


Filling up rather rapidly? - A. It seemed to fill
suddenly.  From being nobody there, there seemed to be
a lot there suddenly.

At that time, you would put that time, wouldn't you,
before the teams came out onto the field, when you were
noticing things were rapidly changing on that terrace?
- A. Probably round about the same time.

It was before, wasn't it? - A. I don't know.   I
couldn't say exactly.

Let me remind you.

     MR. KING:   Could he be shown page 14, please, of
his transcript at the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry?  It
is between letters D and G, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Wells, that is a page of the
transcript of the evidence which you gave to Lord
Justice Taylor.  Just go to letter D, where you see
there is a question starting, "And then you went back
to your corner, is that right?", and you said, "That's
true", so that is after your initial walk round, all
right? - A. Yes.

Just read to yourself the questions and answers then
from that letter D, down to letter G. Have you read
that? - A. Yes.

Do you accept that is a true record of what you were
asked and the answers you gave to Lord Justice Taylor?
- A. It says here, yes, probably just before the teams
came out on the pitch.

I don't want to be unfair to you.  Do you first of all
accept that those were the questions which were put to
you at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry? - A. Yes, I
accept that.

And do you accept those were the answers you gave? - A.
Yes.

And do you stand by those answers? - A. If those are
the answers I gave, yes.

You do stand by them? - A. If those are the answers I
gave, yes.

In those circumstances, they are very short, I will
take you through them so that we can hear the questions
and the answers.  I will ask you the question and you
                                                P. WELLS


give us the answer you gave.  Question: "Then you went
back to your corner, is that right?" Answer? - A.
"That's true".

Question:   "And were you keeping an eye on things from
afar? And then did you see any change in the state of
affairs in the West terraces from that point onwards?"
What answer did you give? - A. "It suddenly started
filling up.   The West Stand end started filling, the
Stand above started filling and the pens seemed to be
getting overcrowded." - seemed to be getting
overcrowded.

Question:  "Seemed to be getting overcrowded, you
say?", and what was your answer? - A. "They seemed to
be filling up rather rapidly".

"LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   They seemed to be what?" - your
answer? - A. "Filling it rather rapidly.  There was a
sudden influx of fans."

And the next question:  "What time would you put that?
Have you any idea?" - what was your answer? - A.
"Shortly before kick-off; I can't say exactly."

Question:  "Shortly before kick-off.  Was this after
the teams had come out on to the field?" - A. "No, I
think it would be before the teams came out on to the
field."

And you stand by those answers today? - A. Yes, I think
it would have been before the teams came onto the
field.

Let me go to another matter, but keep that page there,
we may need it again, we will see.  You have already
told us that when you went over after you had seen the
invasion, which wasn't a pitch invasion, sorry, you
spoke about commenting then about the absence of
Liverpool fans, is that right? - A. Amongst ourselves
we remarked on the -- you see, what it was, the
Nottingham Forest fans were in and the Liverpool fans
we expected would also be in, and they just were
noticeable by their absence.

Absence where? - A. Their end of the ground seemed
rather empty to what we would have expected it to be at
that time.

Let me go back in time.  You took up your position at
about quarter-past-2, didn't you? - A. Correct.

Isn't it right that at that time the comment was made
about the lack of people who had arrived at the
                                                 P. WELLS


Liverpool end at that stage? - A. Yes.  The Nottingham
Forest fans were already in; the Kop was almost full.

And what was the position at quarter-past-2, from your
eyes, as to the Liverpool end? - A. It appeared as if
there had been some delay in the fans - we were asking
if the trains had been held up.

I don't want you to speculate why but what was it you
could see? - A. We were putting those questions to
ourselves.

Yes, but what was it therefore you could see which made
you ask those questions? - A. An absence of fans.

On the terraces? - A. On the terraces and in the
stands.

So at quarter-past-2 you saw that there was absence of
fans on the terraces and the stands at the Liverpool
end which surprised you? - A. Yes.

At that time you would have expected far more Liverpool
fans to be there, obviously? - A. With the following
Liverpool has got yes, I would.

It made you realise at quarter-past-2 that there were a
lot more people, Liverpool fans, still to come? - A.
Yes.

Far more than you would have expected at quarter-past-
2? - A. Yes, I would have expected more in.

Then if we go on, you were also able to see, weren't
you, at the same time that you saw the centre pens
filling up rapidly, the piece   of evidence  you have  just
given us - so we are back now   at the time  when you had
done your rounds, when you had gone back to your corner
.... - A. The two centre pens were already full when I
went round.  They weren't overcrowded, they were full.
There were plenty of people in them.

Yes, there were plenty of people   in them .... - A. But
they would always fill first.

Then you got back to your position and you have already
given evidence that before the teams came out you
noticed that they seemed to fill up rather rapidly, all
right? - A. Yes.

This is the centre pens, but you were also in a
position, weren't you, to see what can be called the
north-west corner pen and the elevated section above
it, and just so we know what we are talking about could
                                               P. WELLS


we see again the plan, 481, on which you have marked
your position?  I wonder if Mr. Griffiths might point
out what I have described as the north-west corner of
the Leppings Lane pen and the elevated section above?
You were in a position to see that because you were
directly opposite? - A. That is right.

And at a time when you could see that the centre pens
were filling up rapidly .... - A. No, the centre pens
were already full.

The centre pens were already full, I beg your pardon,
at that time, and this is before the teams have come
out, isn't it? - A. Yes.

What was your observation as to the state of the north­
west pen and the elevated section above that? - A. I
can't say actually because I didn't take particular
notice of how many fans were on there, but there was a
noticeable absence throughout the entire area, apart
from the centre pens, of fans.

But you actually were able to notice there were not
many people in that pen, weren't you? - A. There wasn't
as many as I would have expected at that time.

At that time - I am guessing now, and roughly we are
talking about - I don't want to put words in your
mouth, but it is certainly after quarter-to-3 anyway? -
A. It was --- yes.

Certainly after quarter-to-3 because you had done your
rounds at between 20-to and quarter-to.  At that time
you would have expected what to be the position, as
regards the pens other than the centre pens which you
have already described were already full? What would
you have expected to be ...? - A. In my opinion I would
have expected the whole lot to be full with the
following that Liverpool have got.




               /Q. In the other sections
                                                    P? &ELLS


In the other sections they were noticeable by their
absence? - A. There was a noticeable lack of Liverpool
fans throughout the entire Leppings Lane end*

Just have a look again at page 14 of your transcript of
Lord Justice Taylor, going to the passages after you had
been questioned about the earlier matters I drew your
attention to.   In other words, letter G.   Read from
letter G to H. - A, Yes,

     MR. KING:   Could he be shown, sir, page 15?

Just read that page 15 down to letter B. - A. Yes,

Again, if you accept that transcript shows the questions
put to you and the answers you gave to Lord Justice
Taylor? - A. Yes, which is what I have just given to you
now.

You stand by it? - A. Yes.

You actually were directed about the north-west corner
pen.   Again if I could just read the question out and if
you say it is the right answer that is fine:

     "Q, You would be directly opposite, of course, the
     north-west corner pen and the elevated section,
     would you not?"

What answer did you give? - A, "There wasn't many people
in that pen."

Question:

     "Were there less than you would have expected at
     that time?"

What answer did you give? - A, I said:

     "Yes, because normally with Liverpool - I have been
     there before with Liverpool and Manchester United,
     and teams of that sort of nature - they pack those
     pens.   They have a good away following and we would
     have expected them to be the same for a semi-final,"

You were then asked to cast your mind back to the
previous year in 1988? - A, Yes,

You were asked to recall how they were filled on the
previous year? - A, Yes,
                                                             67

                                                    P? &ELLS


Q. What answer did you give to Lord Justice Taylor? - A. I
   said:

        "They were full as normal the previous year.   They
        seemed to be quite orderly and everybody in by the
        kick-off."

Q. Then the question:

        "I'm sorry?"

   What answer did you give? - A. I said:

        "Everybody seemed to be quite well in, you know,
        established well before the kick-off.

   That's the fans, of course.

Q. That is right, is it?   You stand by those answers? - A.
   They did appear to be in, yes, the year before.

0. So the difference to your eyes and the differences you
   noted, I take it, started at quarter past two, did they,
   between 1988 and 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. You said in 1989 from quarter past two onwards you
   noticed the lack of Liverpool fans at a time when you
   would have expected them to be there? - A. Correct.

Q. You hadn't made that observation in 1988, had you? - A.
   No.

Q. The difference was in 1988... - A. They seemed to come in
   in an normal orderly fashion.

Q. The normal fashion meant all sections of the Liverpool
   end were filling up equally? - A. Normally.

Q. What you noticed about 1989 was something very different,
   there was a marked absence of Liverpool fans in many
   areas of the Liverpool end? - A. Yes, but I was only
   observing from the far end of the pitch.

Q. Of course, and I am only interested in what you could
   observe.   There was a marked difference between the
   centre pens and the other areas? - A. There appeared to
   be.

Q. In 1989? - A. That's right.

Q. You noticed that in 1989 from your position? - A. The
   centre pens always fill up first.
                                                         P/&ELLS


                Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Mr. Wells, you mentioned a sudden influx of fans into the
central pens just before kick-off.    Now "just before
kick-off ' could that mean a minute or two before kick-
off? - A. I didn't say into the central pens, I said
there was a sudden influx of fans to all areas and it
appeared to be roundabout the same time as the teams came
out, just before the teams came out.

So they dispersed?   They didn't go to a certain area? -
A. All the pens seemed to fill together.   Whether some
went into the central area I couldn't see from the far
end.   I didn't know there was any problem until I got
down to the far end, to Leppings Lane.

Do you know there are radial fences with radial gates
along the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, I knew that,
for access purposes.   We have to know our way round the
ground to through to casualties.

You said you saw the centre was more crowded than the
outer parts? - A. They always do fill up first.   The two
pens behind the goal always do fill up first.

Did you see any Police Officers standing at the radial
gates directing fans to the emptier outer pens? - A. I
couldn't see.   I was on the pitch at the far end.

           Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Wells, you were cross-examined for a quarter of an
hour on the statement and evidence you gave to Lord
Justice Taylor.   Did it seem to you there was any
difference between the evidence that you had already
given here and what you told Lord Justice Taylor? - A.
No, only the odd word that was different.

     MR. ISAACS:   May I ask one or two questions arising
out of what has been asked?

                 Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

You tell us, Mr. Wells, that there was a sudden influx of
fans to all areas? - A. The entire Leppings Lane end
appeared to suddenly...

Insofar   as    you had noticed there had been    an absence of
fans to   the    side areas, what you saw was    not unexpected
then? -   A.    No. We expected them to come      in.  They had
to come   in    sooner or later and they came    in.
                                                  P? &ELLS


From your past experience, particularly of the year
before, what surprised you was that the Liverpool fans
were so late? - A. That was noticeable, yes.

And a real surprise to you? - A. Well, it was, because we
knew the Liverpool fans from the year previous and we
have seen them three or four times and they are usually
in.

You would expect them in around quarter past two? - A.
Well, not as early as that but they are usually in well
in time for the kick-off.   I mean, the fans don't like
missing the kick-off.

But it made you think about it certainly at quarter past
to half past two? - A. Well, from my point of view.

From your point of view it is an unusual event for them
to be coming so late? - A. Well, I thought that and I am
sure a lot more did.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Wells, I am very much obliged to
you for your help.    Thank you.

     We have got no more witnesses so we are going to
stop and we will start on Monday at 10.30.

                (The jury left court)

     THE CORONER:   On Monday we are planning to have
Mr. Mackrell and we have got Mr. Lock.  We will on our
little list as stand-by.   We dropped a couple of people
yesterday.  Inspector Hemmingway and PC Packer.  We are
going to fit those in if we can in gaps or if the worst
comes to the worst we will have to fit them in on the
day, but I don't know when it is going to be.   My plan,
insofar as I have a plan, is to hear Mr. Mackrell,
Mr. Lock, Dr. Nicholson, Dr. Eastwood and then we move
back to either these two chaps whom I have mentioned or
Police Sergeant Goddard, PC Ryan and PC Bitchard and then
we will see what happens after that.

     I am not going to try and say which day anybody is
coming because it is very difficult to estimate that at
the present time.   On the other hand I do want to repeat
- because we are going to get into an area with some of
the witnesses where the technicalities which we have had
up to now will be child's play compared to what we could
have if we allowed the witnesses to develop their
expertise.   As far as I am able I am going to prevent it
because I don't think it is conducive to progressing
these Inquests and I don't think it will actually advance
the information that we need in order to reach the
verdict.   It may be very relevant in other contexts, but
                                                   pt Ezells

I am going to try and avoid, as far as I am able,
developing matters which may be interesting but which are
entirely peripheral to us.   I hope you will bear that in
mind because if you do it saves my having to say you
can't ask that question.

    Very well, 10.30 on Monday.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 on
             Monday, 18th February, 1991)
