                    Sheffield Archives Ref:                                           MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised   ^   I                    Number
                                                                                                         D.ss:          " j   ‘




Title
          WJUZXSi\ -vOw*)
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —urgent action — Ye
                                                                                                             Receiver

                                                                                                         3133
                                                    Q                                                          ndexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated        O Q \J

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions     ^    e> o


                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    O/M        SIO




Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                     GJD/AMS

Tipton
West Midlands
                                                      ?2 May 1989




Dear Sir


I read your letter concerning the Hillsborough tragedy with great
interest and found your comments of help.

I am grateful to you for writing*


Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
  f
                                                                Tipton,
                                                                   West Midlands
                                                    r
                                                    (
                                                          t^h

                                                             7th May 1989


Dear Sir,
            I hope this information will be of assistance to you in your task of making
recommendations after the Hillsborough disaster.
            It would appear, from media reports, that the initial cause of the surge inside
the ground was a crush outside the turnstiles caused by late-comers. I am confident
that this crush would have been avoided if there had been barriers installed similar
to the ones outside the Boothen end turnstiles at Stoke City's ground. These barriers
only allow single-file queueing at each individual turnstile, and also ensure that the
queue is directed in a line along the perimeter wall rather than away from it. As a
result, queues are always more orderly, and there is never any pushing or jostling, aa
there is less risk of losing one's place in the queue.
            I have been a Stoke City supporter for 23 years, and have visited over half
the league grounds, but I cannot recall seeing this type of barrier installed at any
other ground. Indeed, most grounds have no barriers whatsoever outside turnstiles,
which means that crushes like the one at Hillsborough are commonplace. A few grounds
(e.g. Wolverhampton and Bolton) have barriers which are perpendicular to the perimeter
wall, but, if a large enough queue forms, there would still be a crush further back.
The advantage of Stokds barriers is that they are parallel to the perimeter wall; this
has the effect of discouraging people from queueing more than two or three abreast, as
they tend to keep to the line of the wall rather than fanning out in all directions.
            There has been talk of compelling larger clubs to make their grounds all-
seater. This, however, would still not solve the problem of crushing outside the turn­
stiles. The installation of this type of barrier would, I feel, be a more effective
solution.


            Yours faithfully,
