f . ■
      4 'S   Ijthcr Document Form                               ime raised
                                                     Date and time                  0         ^      ■       Number


                                                C)
  \          r a.       Qn?-. \h                              II'? . f t i   Mm    .'U ln fi'v £<'■{
             (Include source end eny document number if re/event)

             Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




             Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                  Indexer

             No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                      Statement
             Statement readers instructions
                                                                                                                      Reader



             Indexed as indicated                                                                                      Indexer

             No(s) of actions raised

             Examined - further action to be taken                                                             0/M               SIO




                                                                                                                       Indexer
             Further action no(s)


             When satisfied all actions raised Office Maneger to endorse other Document Master Number Form

              MIR 15
                    PART VI


EMERGENCY PROCEDURES IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH

         OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                                         PART VI



               E MERGENCY PROCEDURES IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH

                         OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



             E MERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLANS AND THEIR IMPLEMENTATION


                                                             PARAGRAPHS
  INTRODUCTION                                                6.1 - 6.10
  PREVENT FURTHER DANGER                                     6.11 - 6.29

  MOBILIZE EMERGENCY SERVICES                                6.30 - 6.51
  COMMAND OF INCIDENT
                                                                       6.52
 SITE CONTROL AND SECURITY                                   6. 53 - 6 . 5 6
 OFF-SITE CONTROL                                            6. 57 - 6.60
 COMMUNICATIONS                                                       6 .61
 CASUALTIES                                                  6.62 - 6.69
 LOGISTICS                                                   6. 70 - 6.75

, INVESTIGATION AND REPORTS                                  6.80 - 6.82

 POLICE MANPOWER RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO                      6.83 - 6.89
 RESPOND TO EMERGENCY SITUATION

 FURTHER INFORMATION                                                  6 .90




                                 *   *   *   *   *   *   *
                                   PART VI




EMERGENCY PROCEDURES IN TOE IMMEDIATE

AFTERMATH OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




EMERGENCY CONTINGENCY PLANS AND THEIR IMPLEMENTATIONS



Following the tragic events which took place at around 3 00pm on

Saturday 15 April 1989, at the Hillsborough Stadium, emergency

procedures aimed at dealing with the aftermath of the disaster were

brought into effect.




in the event of any major disaster in their area South Yorkshire Police

have contingency plans contained in the Major Incident Mannual aimed         APPENDIX

at dealing with all aspects of the results of the disaster being faced.      67



in ce: inition tne major incident clan identifies a "ma^or incident" as




         "a serious disruption of l i f e , arising with little

         or no warning, causing or threatening death or

         injury to numbers of people in excess of those that can be

               witn bv the Public Sc^v""css         ’"sr          no”"’"''

         conditions, and which require special mobilization and

         organization of those services."




The plan further outlines the objectives and states




         "it is impossible to cater for every contingency which might

         arise in a major incident situation.    The major incident plan,
           therefore, contains a basic format   on which all major

           incidents should be based.   Whilst setting out basic

           principles and responsibilities to be adhered to, it also

          allows for flexibility and initiative in the prevailing

           circumstances".




The plan details full descriptions of action to be taken but

specifically outlines police duties and responsibilities as follows




1-       Prevent further danger.

2.       Mobilize emergency services.

3-       Command of incident.

          Site control and security.

5-       Off-site control.

6.       Communications.

7.       Casualities.

8.       Logistics.

9.       Investigation.

10.      Reports.




— n tns csss of t-hic H^llsbcr'ou.srn

responsibilities were addressed and action taken.




Due to the fact that the disaster took place at an event which was

already being policed, many of the resources and facilities required

under the Major Incident Plan were already in being.     Examples of this

 refer to manpower,    first aid facilities, police control point and

communications.     To this end the police response was enhanced and was
clearly able to take efficient and effective control of the situation.




Despite this the nature of the events which took pla.ce created

considerable difficulties as a consequence of the attitude of

supporters, many of whom were suffering from the effects of drink.




There was confrontation with the police and with the rival supporters

and a tendency made to lay blame in one direction or another.     These

actions clearly hindered police operations in the early stages.




Eacn of the ten areas of duty and responsibility outlined in the plan

have been addressed separately and the police response was as follows:-
          PREVENT FURTHER DANGER



6 .1 1 . -In dealing with any major disaster one of the first priorities of the

          police is to prevent further danger to the'public.                                             So far as the

          Hillsborough disaster was concerned there were a number of areas where

          danger might occur due to the fact that there was a concentration of

          some 5 ^ , 0 0 0 people at the event, the event was taking place in the mid-

          afternoon of a busy Saturday and in close proximity to the centre of

          the City of Sheffield.                     Bearing these facts in mind it was clear that

          in the first instance the actual area of the disaster had to be

^        contained and rescue operations put into effect and interference                                                from

         other areas of the Stadium likely to hinder those rescue attempts had

         also to be dealt with.                      Further to this the problem extended beyond the

         Stadium,       firstly into the immediate vicinity of the Hillsborough Ground

         and secondly into the city centre and surrounding areas where at some

         stage the supporters would be disgorging to.                                              A further consideration

         wsls         security of1 bodies s.nc 'orccer‘~v which were subsecue"tlv 1 oc s.te d

         m      the temporary mortuary facilities at the Gymnasium.




^12.     It is clear tnat ail the factors were in the minds of the Senior

         Officers in charge of the event and the actions and decision making

         p r o c s s s 6s v m e h   f'o —i c v e d   t r i e s c t u s - l G i s s . s t ^ ' ’"'           th e * - ^

         considerations .
    OJ




         ihe first indication of problems on the Leppings Lane terraces was fans

         climbing the perimeter track fencing.                                      As a result, Chief Supt

         Duckenfield sent Supt Greenwood to that area to appraise the situation.
   f U.     Supt Greenwood attended in the area of Gate 3, realised that there were

           problems anc after being unable to contact Ground Control via radio,

           waved his arms indicating for officers in the Control Box to stop play.

           Chief Supt Duckenfield agreed and sent Supt Murray to the pitch to
                                                                                           STATEMENT
                                                                                           5
           contact the linesman.     Mr Murray attempted to speak with the linesman

           but was unsuccessful,    the linesman being engrossed in his duties and

           ran away following play.     At this point, Supt Greenwood ran onto the

           pitcn, spoke with the referee and stopped the game at 1506.
T> <T\




           V*ni±st these attempts were being mads, Ground Control contacted Force
  M
           Operations Room at (1504)    for cog handlers to attend the Stadium for

           poss_oie deployment•    Simultaneous actions then followed which can best

           be c e s c n c e d using tne officer concerned as reference.




           SUPERINTENDENT GREENWOOD

6.16,
          On returning    to the Leppings Lane end of the ground,         Supt Greenwood
                                                                                           STATEMENT

           found rescue attempts were being hindered by the press and an officer

          was deputed to clear them    a w a y .   Mr Greenweed was then joined by Chief

          Supt Nesbit who took command of the situation on the pitch. . Supt

          ureenwcoc o o t a m e c a louc hailer and used this to ask the Liverpool

          ■^■^ppcrlo     remain cairn a m      cc~ocerative .   He also used the loud




          operation.




          SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY

  . .
6 17
          Following his return to the Police Control Box, Supt Murray heard                STATEMENT
                                                                                           5
          Police Constable Ryan ad dres s i n g the crowd vis the ground Dublic

          address system asking for calm and for supporters to leave the pitch.

          Mr Murray again returned to the pitch and requested use of the public
 address system to ask Leppings Lane spectators to move back.       He then

 deployed a Serial to the South Stand perimeter track and,     following

 liaison with Supt Chapman regarding the Spion Kop track and Insp

Wallace regarding North Stand track supervision he returned to the

Police Control Box.




At approximately 15^5, Mr Dalgleish, Manager of Liverpool Football Club

went to the Control Box and appealed over the public address system for

calm.   A request was received from Chief Supt Nesbit to deploy dogs on        STATEMENT
                                                                              61
the Spion Kop perimeter track and this was done at 1546.




CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD

ihis oificer remained in the Police Control Box during the initial            APPENDIX
                                                                              68
stages. At 1506 he requested implementation of Operation Support (1506)
                                                                              Log to
                                                                              prove timing;
which was authorized by the Assistant Chief Constable      (Operations)

   Jackson at lplO.    A request for a fleet cf ambulancss was rslavgd to

-ores operations   !
                   V1--Cs).   This was followed by Mr Duckenfield zivir.e

instructions for the implementation of the Major Incident Plan and for

r'olice Constable Ryan to continue to broadcast via the public address

system requesting calm and for fans to leave the “ itch.




oi ficia_s and the Football Association and informed the.” of his

ceicisicn not to tell supporters of the extent of the incident or

attempt to evacuate the ground as he felt such actions would hinder

removal of casualties as well as create further public disorder.

Officers under the supervision of Superintendents Chapman and Marsh,

Chief Inspector Price, Chief Inspector Beal, Inspector Meek, Inspector        STATEMENTS
                                                                              15, 69, 70
Beresford and Inspector Wallace formed cordons around the perimeter           7,71,56,72
 track to prevent a pitch invasion and possible further public disorder.




 At the instruction of Chief Supt Nesbit,                                   a further cordon was placed           STATEMENT
                                                                                                                  61
 across     the full length of the halfway line to isolate the Liverpool

 supporters who were already on the pitch.




A number of officers successfully ripped away a section of the Leppings                                           STATEMENT
                                                                                                                  41
Lane perimeter track fencing to speed up the method of egress from the

 terraces whilst others assisted fans through the gates and over the top

of the fencing.




Inspector icwnend ana a Serial of officers formed a cordon near to the                                            STATEMENT
                                                                                                                  73
gymnasium to isolate it from supporters due to the fact that it was

being used as a temporary mortuary and casualty collection point.




inspector Charges and officers approached the terraces from the tunnel                                            STATEMENT
                                                                                                                  It
tc mcvs supporters bacx ar.c thereby rslievs the pressure on these at

the front.           Once casualties/fatalities had been dealt with the decision

was maae at          l6 iC to release               the supporters from the Stadium and

c.i fleers ar .2 supervisors were deployed outside the ground to ensure

supporters          — e f11 s a *e _ y ir.z z rcnistcr.s Road.




Prior tc that at              1 16C7 ’ arrangements were made for 1F I ’ Sub-Division

                                  1a   — r-   c--    ar a,s L i v e r o o o .   sucrorters     vcr1


c o n c 6 rriec .    Si.mu« t a n e o u s — v . e 0 b 1 1 e s e r i a l s    were   ccclcvsd   to   deal   with


any   reports        of puDiic         disorder       and    indeed         reports   were   sutseouentlv


received at several locations, including Wadsley Lane, Parkside Road,

Bassetts Public House Cowper Avenue and Penistone Road.
' ^6 .   At 1638 the Assistant Director of the Health and Safety Executive

          informed the police that Mr Ford from his Department was en route.




6.27.    At 1646 Acting Supt King,   'Dl' Sub-Division, authorized all town centre     STATEMENT
                                                                                       75
          public houses to be closed and this was implemented.    This action was

          taken in an effort to encourage supporters not to remain in the City

          and to reduce the possibility of disorder through drunkneness.




6.28.     During the course of the remainder of the evening following the

          clearance of the public from the Stadium security was maintained.       At

          2005 containment was placed on the gymnasium area of the Stadium which

          operated throughout the night as a temporary mortuary and

          identification centre for relatives.   These proceedings finished at

          0530    the following morning, once the bodies and property of the

          deceased had been removed and there was no further likelihood of danger

          to any individual in and around the Stadium.   Despite this a police




6.29     Throughout no further danger was caused to members of the public and

         .. cespite difficult circumstances rescue operations were able to take

          place effectively and the crowds dispersed from the area.
  MOBILIZE EMERGENCY SERVICES




  During the planning stages arrangements were made with the Ambulance

  Service for Liaison Officers to be available at the Stadium throughout

  the operation.       In the event two Ambulance Service Liaison Officers

 were present at the ground and were accompanied by one ambulance with

 c^ew.    This ambulance was located at Gate 0 and was insitu by 2 10 pm.

 In addition a second ambulance and crew dedicated to the semi-final

 were on stand-by at Middlewood Road Ambulance Station.




 Through the Club arrangements had been made for the service of St Johns

Ainoulance Brigade to be available on the day and they had an ambulance

on stand-by at the rear of the North Stand adjacent to the First Aid

Room.     St Johns Ambulance personnel were on duty around the ground and

aiso operating from their room situate at the rear of the North Stand.

•rs.       ci   *o it Jonns Aztbuxar.eeten were avail av:® »*■ *-ho       —




In normal circumstances these facilities would be adequate for any

situation which might arise.




whiist liaisor. had beer, maintained with the Fire Service and they were

* uAaJ' <=•'■*«-e Oi   ;.ne events,   including possible congestion in the area,

they did not have the facility of a Liaison Officer at the ground, but

felt that their ability to respond to situations from normal Fire

Stations was adeauate.




Following the stopping of the game by Superintendent Greenwood, members

of the St Johns Ambulance responded to the Leppings Lane perimeter
                track and rendered first aid.     In terms of alerting emergency services

                the following action took place          •




6 .3 5 .        At 15 07    the Ambulance Service was told of the incident by Force

                Operations Room as an advance warning.       Officers on the pitch including

                Supt Murray and Chief Inspector Sumner requested ambulances to be
                                                                                               STATEMENTS
                                                                                               5, 76
                directed to the Leppings Lane Terraces and this was relayed via Force

                Operations Romm to Supt Clark of the Ambulance Service.      The time that

                this message was passed was   15 0 8 .




''-•36.         At 15 10 the Ambulance Service confirmed their resoonse and this was

                further confirmed one minute later at 15 1 1 .




6.37.       ^      ^   ^   Ground Control requested the closure of Leppings Lane to all

            but emergency services and this was achieved at 15 19.          This course of

            ac iion was made in an effort to ensure free soveinerit of einersiencv




6 .3 8 .    Following identification of the difficulties in recovering bodies and

           '■    Jured persons from tne terraces at in lc Ground Control reouested the

            attendance of the Fire Service with hydraulic cutting e c u i c m e n t , with a

            view tc removing the fences.        The Firs Service arrived at 1~ 2~ .   Ir

            aaaiticn to this 2 traffic mobiles also responded with the "jaws"

            cutting equipment and arrived at 15 16.




6.39-       In an effort to facilitate free movement of emergency vehicles Police

            motor cyclists were put on stand-by at Claywneels Lane Traffic Office

            at 15 17.
 Following requests from Chief Inspector Sumner the Royal Hallamshire

 Hospital and the Northern General Hospitals were alerted as to the

 problems in hand, this communication being transmitted at 15 1 9 .




 By 15 20 three ambulances were present at the Stadium and Police

 Control contacted Operations Room to confirm that more were on route.

 Twenty additional ambulances were suggested.




 At the same time the Ambulance Service contacted Rotherham District

 General Hospital and Barnsley District General Hospital and informed

 them of the incident in the event of further facilities being required.




At 15 24 an ambulance and a motor cycle escort was brought to Gate 0 of

 the ground and confirmation was made that motor cyclists of the

     field Wing of the Force were covering routes to the Rcva"*

Hsllamshire Hospital to ensure free               r----,                   ___

ether Divisions of the Force area were covering the routes between the

ground and the Northern General Hospital.' At this same time Ground

Control requested a further ambulance to be directed to Lepoings Lane

j.n ’.is* 01   tne fact tnat some of the bodies of the deceased had been

removed   from the terraces and taken tc that location.    Injured oers-rs

were also in that locality.




At 15 31 Ground Control requested Operations Room to contact the

Ambulance Service Senior Officer and arrange for his attendance at

Police Control.     In response to these requests the Chief Ambulance

Officer Mr Don Page and his Deputy Mr Alan Hopkins both attended at the
 Despite the attendance of Ambulance Service and the presence of the

St Johns Ambulance Brigade it was quite clear that facilities of other,

medical staff in the form of doctors were required at the scene.




At 15 33 broadcasts were made on Radio Hallam and Radio Sheffield

requesting doctors to attend at the ground, this was linked with a

request for off-duty police officers to report immediately at Hammerton

Road Police Station.




At 15 53 Police Force Operations Room were requested to arrange for a

medicaj. team and drugs to attend the Gymnasium.         At 1555 the Ambulance

Service responded with One Team at the scene, two others en route, one

from the Barnsley District General Hospital and the other from the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital.




were required.




During the course of the operation medical        :ent           given

persons who were dealt with at          s.— arc              :easec serf




Anns:   there wss cj.ss.rj..y sorns confusion in ths esrlv stssss due in the

main to tne attitude of supporters, it is clear that medical assistance

was on hand and was quickly supplemented by the Ambulance Service.




The role of the Fire Brigade was less than that of the Police and

Ambulance Service.   However, they responded promptly and were quickly

at the scene once requested.
        COMMAND OF INCIDENT




6.52.   The Major Incident Mannual provides for the setting up of a Police

        Incident Post under the control of the Site Commander.     As indicated

        because of the nature of this event and the presence of the police an

        Incident Post was already in being in the form of the Police Control

        Room at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.     In addition to running

        the Operation this Control Room took on the role of the Police Incident

        Post and co-ordinated police response to the emergency.     In the initial

        stages this control was under the command of Chief Supt Duckenfield,

        who directed operations for the containment, rescue and general

        recovery 01   tne situation.   Chief Supt Duckenfield continued with this

        role until 5 15 pm when he was required to attend at Force Headquarters

        and the continuation of the role was undertaken by Chief Sunt Mole.       By

        this time ail emergency procedures had been implemented and were in the
#   SITE CONTROL AND SECURITY



    Following the requests through the media and Force Operations Room,

    medical staff and additional Police Officers were initially requested

    to attend at the Police Room adjacent to the Gymnasium at the Stadium.

    Whilst this procedure was arranged in the event doctors and medical

    staff who attended in fact made their way into the Stadium and rendered

    what assistance they could directly to those requiring it.                                                     To this end

    the control was somewhat fragmented but was brought about by the

    difficult circumstances being experienced concerning the attitude of

    supporters and the need to clear the Stadium to ensure free passage of

    emergency vehicles.                         However it was noted at an early stage that the

    additional police officers attending should be re-directed from the

    ground to avoid confusion and in fact they were asked to rendevous at

    Hammerton Road Police Station, where the Reception Officer, Chief Insp

    McRobbie was appointed to receive and subsequently deploy them.                                                                       STATEMEN
                                                                                                                                          55


    Following the vacating of the Stadium Supt Murray organized Officers to




                                                                                                                                           V)
    c o r*. ~ s   i.r     n 0 s ir e si sinci o c C c   oi~   ~ r.s   rc is vsnt   s c c 11 o n e   ?*\n0 i' 3   uiic ^    ^ c. ^ u ~ -




                                                                                                                                           in
    had occurred.                   A twenty-four hour oolics presence was maintained to

    ensure that the site was not tamc-ered with.




    So far as security of property was concerned ail items of found




                        Constables Newboi




    Prooertv taken from deceased persons were recorded s e p a r a t e l y ,                                              remained

    with the body and was subsequently taken to the Medico Legal Centre.

    However the West Midlands Police enquiry team initially refused to hand

    the property over to relatives for evidential reasons, but undertook

    to personally return it at a later date.
                  OFF-SITE CONTROL



    £  C7
    c •S i •
                  Once again the nature of this event has some bearing on this aspect of

                  the major incident m a n n u a l , in that we were already in com m and of the '

                  locality in and around the Stadium.              Whilst a number of officers had

                 been d r a m   m    to provide emergency assistance to the injured, a number

                 of officers were still in the vicinity outside the Stadium and were

                 able to ensure that routes to and from the Stadium were passable.                         To


                 C" ‘“ ’ "n tn*S ”ne Grcund Connander, Chief Supt Duckenfield took the                          STATEMENT

                 cecisicn net to officially abandon the match for seme time, bearing in

                 mine tr.e difficulties that would be encountered with a large number of

                 supporters being in and around the Stadium and the congestion in the

                loC“      ' '   -n         tne abandonment wasn't announced until io 10. By

                wr.ich time s u e ’
                                  " w
                                    a-' '
                                        ,■.'.-.
                                              «e
                                               » -   r   1 action_ has
                                                                   1. - .seen taken.



 6.5a.
                SC far £S e!E6rssnc** accsss of vehicles tc the Stadium is concerned the

                plan involves the use of Gate 0 in Penis tone Road and this was utilised

                w.n       occasion anc maintained free from ctr^” ve'~'^’              dv   0 1   :icers




h    ~   -




               amoulances were also directed to that location 1 or recepi
                                                                                             mrpcses




6 .6 0         Throughout, routes and escort duties were monitored and undertaken by

               motor cyclists of the South Yorkshire Police .Motor Cycle Win-.
                COMMUNICATIONS



6 .6 1 .
                In aaaition to the communication already in being at the ground, the

                following were taken into use :




            1-            Loud nailers were used to issue instructions to officers

                          at the Leppings Lane end of the Stadium,             to make appeals to

                          the crowd for calm and co-operation and to also inform the

                         crowd tnat an incident had occurred as many were apparently

                   :=    unaware of the fact.




                         Hoad Traffic -cbilss were utilized in the initial stages as

                         C ^ ^ u ^ . c a . ^ o n s venicies utilizing YrJ channels.      Three such

                         vehicles were in position at the ground at 1 5 1 5 , 1519 and

                               h ,£ U rs   r          7* ' v
           in




                                           •re
                                                  isrgeant cut_er, Ccrn.~unications Decart.~e.nc

                         ■k'k'c*iCei t.i6 r or-e i r a i m n g Centre to s e ** u ^ &v   ^

                        co"unications            for the Casualty Bureau.




                               ‘.umcaticns vehicle was directed tc the u£sua_tv oureau




                             ;0c the Northern General Hospital wa

                        ex-directorv           'ro'-'c= i




                        .-it ±i 2 i direct rauio Iihks to the Casualty Bureau were set ud

                        at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Northern General Hospital,

                        Rotherham District General Hospital, Barnsley District General
        Hospital and the gymnasium utilizing Road Traffic mobiles




 ^'     Direct teisjucr.e lines              t-' t'-p r-c-i-i---
                                             tw       ^asacLl^y nBureau w e n

        installed at the Northern C-e^e^'    F V - ; - ' i
                                  '~C..C_=._ r.OSui!,ci    caG ~
                                                               fiOyai

        Hallamshire Hospital at 175o.




        At 17'° a^citionai telephone lines were installed i- the

        Casualty Bureau.




       Cellnet telephones were made available az

       issued to the mortuary (2 ), Rcyal Halla-shirs Hcszital            (2 '

       Northern General Hospital       (2 ), Casualty Bureau (1 ).



10 .   .-.t 1 S 22 a further six lines were -‘-ct= n *<-• -?n t - 0        ...

       Bureau by British Telecom.
                 CASUALTIES




c.62.            ihs Major incident Mannual provides a number cf sections v/hic
                                                                                            h deal with the
                 following    :-




                 a)     Assist in the rescue and care.




                 !)     Set up the Casual ty Enquiry Bureau.




             c)        ___Make provisions for £
                                              a tes
                                                i-efitcrary mortua:




                        .cer.^.-cation ar.c notifying next of kin.
  v>|




             C
        •    —o :a: as tne first aspect is concerned, that is the rescue an:

                             , w.._s ivzs i“ = c : = : e i y taken up by Police Officers,

                                                           s ec — on ci me.^ters cf the

            * = re attending as supporters,
                                                            it has seen said that d''7’

            were encountered bv som
                              y some supporters who were truculent, unc=~ t

                  --     C..;v_ ci;




            coiice offi cer s who were di rectly involved in the rescu
                                                                               e Drocedu rss
AVAILABLE
         purposes.




c.&e.    -tn dealing with the identification photographs were taken of all deceased

         persons in order that they could be viewed by relatives with a view to

         formal identification in due course.       Throughout the night relatives were

         brougnt to the Gymnasium and were ms: by police officers together with

         Social Workers and representatives cf the Churches who had attended in large

         numcers to assist with counselling and welfare.      Upon identifying a

        phonograph the body was brought to a viewing area where formal


^ ■0    identification could be Eads £nd the relatives were then taken for statement

        purposes by CID officers.       Cnee identification had been completed the bodies

        were transported to the city mortuary.       Throughout cne police officer was

        allocated to each body for continuity purposes.       This procedure continued

        until 4 3 0 am by which time a total of 74 bodies had been identified and the

        remainder of the bodies were then transported to the Sheffield City Mortuary

        for t*e procedure to continue the following d a v .




        On Sundav i£ srr--   icflo   *•-= -     t        ^             . . .
                     ..              w..c               yi.oceaure continued ana oy

        the end of that day all bodies had been identified.
   +
            LOGISTICS



c.70
           In dealing with logistics it must be
                                             ce aaorscistsri
                                                appreciated that many of tne

           aspects covered overlap the other areas referred to in the Major

           Incident Ks n n u a l .    In general this deals with the organization of

           manpower and equipment and includes welfare and ca{«-<n»

           facilities.



O. / I
           In c e a u n g with manpower many references are made to deployment by

         .-Chief Supt Duckenfield in overall command, assisted by his Sector

           Commanders in the fora cf Supt Murray in the Control Room ar.d Suzt

           Greenwood in charge of the Ground Sector.                 Supt Greenweed played a

          prime roie m      tr.is aspect and in essence dealt with the rescue and

          evacuation from the terraces.                  During the course of this he took

          action m     organizing officers to recover the bodies cf the

          decease- ar.c rescue the injured and deputed ether officers to

          maintain order and keep press and other interested parties at bay

          tc ensure    tr.at they did noc hinder the rescue operation.

          Mr Greenwood appointed a police constable as his communications




         he could address the crowd.




                                             . C   C .   _




         Spicn Kcp perimete:         uracy.s to maintain public order.         During

         these actions the operation was still in being and mobile units

         were deployed to deal with the reports of fighting outside the

         Stadium.     Subsequent action by Supt Murray involved the organize:
           searches of terraces and the containment and sealing off of the

           terraces and the containment of the gymnasium to prevent

           inter:ersncs with the temporary mortuary facilities and

           identification procedures.
Vil




           T il.   ougnouv. these actions Chief Supt Nesbit who had beer, at the

           ground toes over as overall co-ordinator on the ground and

       arranged for a cordon of officers to be stretched across the pitch

        tc prevent, furtner confrontation from Nottingham Forest supporters

       -           u..e south o*   u.ie Stadium anc tr.e Livsr~cci s uDtcrters. In

       “                 i-ii-s course c: action allowed the rescue operation tc gc

                           d         ... .u...sa 5 r.. u.,_s coracn cogs were crought on

       (.0 L.~e per .meter track to ensure that suroorters remained in

       respective locations




      com...anc, ar.c. he was assisted by Det Supt McKav,          Insosctcr Char1®®

      and Eet Inspector Webster.             In general the officers of the

      Criminal Investigation Department were used for this task and were

      involved in the receipt, searching and identification cf the
               deceased and the preservation of property.




6.76.             recognition of the major disaster which was in being the Force

               Operations Room activated the call out procedures for the Casualty

               Bureau Enquiry Teams and Hospital Liaison Officers.        This action

               took place at 15 17 and 15 29 the Medico Legal Centre was alerted

               regarding fatalities.        Major Incident Boxes which are held at Sub-

               Divisional Stations were requested and deployed to the s c e n e .




^^7-           At 16 32 the Major Inciaent Room staff were called out to set up

               operations at Hamraerton Road Police Station to co-ordinate police

               activity and follow up enquiries.       From 16 ^*0 contact was made

               with the Salvation A r m y , the Emergency Services Organizing Teams

               and the WRVS.     These facilities were for counselling and assisting

               relatives and friends of the deceased and injured.        At 17 02 the

           Force Welfare O f f i c e r ,                      was contacted and

                                     CL -   -




6 78       Conscious of the needs of relatives at 17 ^0 arrangements were
m      '

           ■        for tne care and reception of relatives and friends and this

           was directed under the control of Supt Sleath and Inspector




           Ponce      Station.    However, in view of the numbers involved this was

           extended to the Hillsborough Boys Club and Police Officers were

           assisted by Social Workers and Clergy who were in attendance.
V7C
  «/•
        xn teras of catering previsions had been mads in view of the

        operation Ih c.t had been planned.   However this was extended

        through Headquarters Manarment Services Department who ensured

        that sufficient provisions vers available for what clearly was to

        be a pro-longed enquiry in particular with the identification of

        deceased persons.   In fact this proved to be correct in that the

        icer.-ifica-ion procedures ran through the nigh- and did not

        terainate until 5 30 as and resumed the following day.
    #
           INVESTIGATION AND REPORTS




6 .8 0 .   At 1804 Acting Detective Superintendent Smith began setting up the

           Major Incident Room at Hammerton Road Police Station.      The room

           contained the HOLMES computerised system and all information to
                                                                                 APPENDIX

           hand was inputted into that system.
                                                                                 68



6 .8 1.    Because of the magnitude of the disaster it was later decided that

           an outside investigation should take place and Mr Geoffrey Dear

           the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police was requested to

           carry out that investigation.




6 .8 2 .     E d i t i o n a judicial inquiry has been embarked upon under the

           chairmanship of Mr Justice Taylor.
           POLICE MANPOWER RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO RESPOND TO EMERGENCY SITUATIONS



 6*83-     In any major incident manpower.availability 'is a crucial element and

           once again the South Yorkshire Police have plans inbeing to cater for

           such contingencies.   The plan in question is headed Operation Support      APPENDIX
                                                                                       69
           and in brief identifies the method by which manpower can quickly be

           assembled and deployed to situations requiring immediate increase in

           manpower levels.




           In the first instance the manpower is raised from that on duty and each

           of the 14 Sub-Divisions of the Force is required to identify its

           minimum manning levels capable of maintaining normal policing and to

           deploy the remainder to the scene of the incident to which the manpower

           is required.   In addition there are facilities for the call out of

           0 1 ficers off-duty should further manpower resources be reauired.

           Details of the plan are incorporated in the Appendices.




6-85       In tne case of the Hillsoorough Disaster it was quickly recognised that

           additional resources would be required to deal with the aftermath of

           tne situation, bearing in mind the large crowds which were still in the

           vicinity and the large number of deceased persons and relatives whc
                                                                                       70
                                              k w*iC Alit

           frienas.   To this end Operation Support was activated at 1510   under

           the direction of the Assistant Chief Constable   (Operations) Mr Jackson.




0 -8 6 .   Tne co-ordination and activation of Operation Support is controlled by

           the officer in command of the Force Operations Room, and at this time

           this was Chief Inspector Edmundson.
                                                                                               /




6.87.        As accnsequence of the activation of C r e a t i o n Support, Officers „ „

             requires to atcend a- the Hillsborough Stadium and to report t= the

             Police Room.




6 .S-S.     In response to Operation Supcorc a minimum total of 2 5 i

            responded and were available for deployment.




6 ,Sr.
               -*■’          0,1         f°*"e " ec._vacion oi tne Operation recuests wer,°

           passed over the local radio for off-ducy officers tc respond and tc

           attend at Hammerccn Road Police Station.               In response to that call a

           tCLc._ o.        _,o o.: »cers a»»enc=c and were received by Chief Insce''~"~

           JicP.occie, who was designated as the Reception Officer at that

          lo cation.             These officers were also deployed to duties around t‘
                                                                                     -«

          S^aciuis m             an effort tc maintain calm and
                                                                  5 _ve reassurance rc

                                                 T‘~'—    C;   L.1 S icacium fcllcvinx

          e .c ::C O t:i.S r.;   01
FURTHER INFORMATION

Despite all efforts following implementation of the criteria set out in

the Major Incident Manual there were:

     Fatalities                   95
                                                                      APPENDIX
     Injuries (supporters)        140                                 ^

     Injuries (police)            20

Additionally during the policing of the operation there were:
