                                                                                         MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised                              Number



 itle   U   ih   /                                      M    t M A W o rv

(Include source and a n y%
                         p o c u m e n t num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/No           ft)               ^ P/V                            V-fcC-
                                                                                                                            Receiver
                                                          (3)           V o Ldtb&i        ._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
                                                                                                                        l&'P Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Statement reader's instructions       0/(               L*T)                  G onqp         Z                          Statem ent Reader


                                              &
                                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




Further action No(s)                                                                                                         Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
                                                            T>.3iZfe.




R McMahon Esq                                        GJD/AMS


Clwvd
                                                     4 May 1989




Dear Sir


RBt HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989


I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included
in your letter will be of great interest to my investigative tea®.

It may be that we shall be in touch with you again to take up the
points that you have made.

Thank you very much for writing.


Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
                                                     Clwvd



Mr Mervyn Jones
Deputy Chief Constable
West Midlands Police
Lloyd House
Birmingham


24th April 1989


Dear Sir

I enclose a copy of a letter sent to Lord Justice Taylor last
week but from news coverage I understand that general enquiries
will be your responsibility.  As you will see from my letter I
was in the central area of the Lepping Land end terrace with my
son and daughter and we are all available for interview if
required

I can be contacted on             at home or                  ext
during office hours.

Yours faithfully




R McMahon




                            x. "To             t c w u jj :         | . £.




enc.
                                                  Clwvd




Lord Justice    Taylor
Hillsborough    Enquiry
c/o The Home    Office
Queen Anne 1s   Gate
London
SW1H 9AT


20th April 1989


Dear Sir

I am writing to you in your capacity as the person responsible
for the Hillsborough enquiry.  I was at the the game on Saturday
15/4/89 and in my opinion in an ideal position to comment on the
happenings, before, during and after the incident.

I am a                              for
                          I am forty years of age, married with
two c m i a r e n , figea 17 a n d ^ g e d 16. We are all season
ticket holders at Anfield and very keen supporters.   I have never
been involved in any trouble with the police and consider myself
to be an honest and responsible member of society.   I have heard
and seen a number of reports since the incident and although I
have never written a letter like this before I felt it essential
for the ordinary supporter to make their point.

We arrived at Sheffield at Approximately 1.00pm by car after
travelling from Nottingham, where I left my wife with her sister.
Due to extremely heavy traffic, we did not arrive outside the
Leppings Lane end entrance B until 2.25pm.  There I found a large
crowd milling around outside the six turnstiles.  There were four
mounted policemen and two or three policemen on foot.   For the
next twenty minutes we were pushed and knocked backwards and
forwards and to the left and right without making any progress
towards the turnstiles.  There appeared to be a total lack of
organisation and the police were unable to control the crowd or
ensure safe, easy entry to the ground mainly due to the lack of
a queuing system.  At approximately 2.45pm a policeman literally
dragged my daughter away from me.  I protested but was reassured
by the policeman that "it was OK and to come with him".   This we
did and entered the ground via the large exit gate which was wide
open.  We were not asked for our tickets.  Once we had entered
the ground there were no stewards or police to be seen.   Almost
directly in front of me I saw an entrance to a tunnel and
followed the crowd through that tunnel to the terrace.
C o n t/.

The tunnel was very crowded and you could only really shuffle
through.   There was no running or pushing or general bad
behaviour.   When we arrived at the other end of the tunnel we
came out of the dark into the bright sunlight and I immediately
realised that we were directly behind the goal and within twenty
yards of the pitch.   I couldn't believe it and attempted to push
my way to the left to get away from the goal and the incoming
crowd.   The terrace was already extremely packed and it was
impossible to move easily.   Within minutes the crush was
unbearable and I knew we could be in trouble.   Within feet of me
one man was trapped against a barrier and had begun to scream for
help, we tried to push back but it was impossible.   I knew I had
to keep my daughter away from the barrier and the crush just
seemed to get worse.   There was another surge and we were thrown
towards the barrier.   I managed to push my daughter away but I
hit the barrier.   Luckily I was again pushed to the left and
escaped with my life.   I felt a soft feeling under my feet and
knew it was not a concrete step.   We tried to push back and
realised it was a man on the floor.   After two or three attempts
we got him on to his feet and he was safe.   My daughter is not
that tall and kept disappearing as taller men were crushed
together.   She did however keep on her feet although she did find
it difficult to breath and almost fainted on a couple of
occasions.   By this time my son had disappeared but I was unable
to cope with my son and daughters safety, so I was unaware that
he had gone.   I found out later that on one surge he had got fiis
foot on the barrier and was propelled by the crowd over the heads
of the people in front and eventually passed over the perimeter
fence.   Even with my experience of being in large football crowds
over the past twenty five years I was terrified and unable to
control my own body or protect my daughter as the crush was just
too great.

As the crush died down, the true horror unfolded.   I saw fans and
police pulling at the fence until it was broken and forced open so
that the poor people at the front could be pulled out.    My son
was missing and although I did spot him unhurt behind the goal
after a few minutes, it seemed like hours.   A few minutes later
we attracted his attention and when he knew we were safe he
immediately broke down and cried with relief but I could not get
to him.   He was then involved in helping and assisting others
more unfortunate than himself.   I then went down onto the pitch
via the hole in the damaged fence to contact my son and bring him
back to the terrace.   I had to pick my way through bodies and
injured fans with their distraught friends and relations kneeling
over them.   I saw fans and police trying to revive people by
either thumping chests or the kiss of life but most cases were
hopeless.   There was again a total lack of organisation.
Individual policemen were trying to help but it was too late and
there did not appear to be any direction from senior officers.

 In conclusion I should like to make the following points.
C o n t/.

1)     The kick   off should have been delayed.

2)     The police outside the ground should have ensured orderly
        queuing.

3)     The exit   gate should not have been opened.

4)     Once the decision had been taken to open the gate.   Police
        or stewards should have been on hand to direct fans away
        from the central tunnel.

5)      The side and front fences should have been capable of opening
        quickly to relieve pressure.

6)     With all the new technology around grounds ie cameras and
        radio, good communication and organisation could have
        prevented this tragedy.

7)     Once the decision had been taken to open the gate one
        policeman at the entrance to the tunnel could have saved 95
        lives by redirecting fans.

Although all these points are made with hindsight they should
have been part of standard contingency plans for a well organised
major event like this.

This is obviously an emotional but brief account of events in my
own words and should you require any additional information or
attendance for questioning or interview then I would of course be
willing to help.

Yours faithfully




ROBERT McMAHON
