f                                                                                        MIR.15



                 \
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised
                                                                                                    Number



Title
(Include source and any docum ent number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No i J                    o L -.--------                          Receiver




                                                                                                                 Indexer

Document registered/indexed as indicated

          of actions raised            ^                                                                     Statement Reader

 Statement reader's instructions

                                                                                                                  Indexer

    Indexed as i n d i c a t e d _________   _

    No(s) of actions raised

    Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                                                  Indexer

    Further action No(s)

                                 ised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
    When satisfied all actions raised
                                                     London


                                                     Tel:

Peter Robinson
Secretary
Liverpool FC
                                                      20th April 1989

Dear Mr Robinson,

                         Hillsborough disaster

For the purpose of the official enquiry, I wish to draw to your
attention some important information which has gone mainly unnoticed in
the media coverage that I have seen so far.

In April 1981, Hillsborough hosted an FA Cup Semi-final between Spurs
and Wolves. As on this occasion with L iverpool and Forest, Spurs,  whose
average home attendance was well over twice that of Wolves, were given
the Leppings Lane end. At the time I was living in Sheffield and was
                                                                 As such
we were particularly worried about the terrace arrangements and made our
feelings clear to the FA and Sheffie Id Wednesday.    Our warnings went
unheeded,  despite the fact that we had told them that we knew that
several thousand Spurs fans had only been able to purchase tickets for
the Kop end and would try to get into Lepping's Lane.

By 2.10 pm on the day of the match there was severe congestion outside
the Leppings Lane end. Police were forced to allow all supporters
through,  both to avoid the crush outside and to avoid large numbers of
Spurs fans being mixed with Wolves fans at the other end. As on this
occasion security gates were opened and many spectators’ tickets were
never even inspected. As a result severe overcrowding occurred on the
terrace, resulting in hysterical scenes with people believing they were
going to die. Fortunately on this occasion, the stewards realised the
seriousness of the situation and convinced the police to open the
perimeter fence to allow spectators onto the pitch as early as 2.30.  In
doing so,   a catastrophe as bad as we saw on Saturday was narrowly-
averted,  although even so there were several injuries and many younger
spectators passed out. That the opening of the gates o f t h e perimeter
fence saved lives on this occasion was confirmed by ______________ (who
was a Sheffield Wednesday steward at the time) on Channel 4 news on
17.4.89.

The stupidity of the FA and Police’s decision to give the small end to
Spurs was brought home by the fact that the only place for the overspill
of spectators to go was to the Kop end, so that by 3.45 several thousand
Spurs fans had been directed around the pitch to the Kop where the
police set up their own cordon to separate rival spectators.

As a result of these farcical and almost tragic scenes, we wrote to     the
FA and contacted the South Yorkshire Police to seek both explanations
and to warn them how close we had been to a disaster. Our approaches
were  never acknowledged. Thus my feelings of sorrow last Saturday were
also  mixed    with anger, because it was clear that exactly the same
mistakes had been made made by the FA and police, the most crucial being
that  Liverpool had been given the wrong end. The argument used    about
this  need being' dictated by roads from the North West is a complete
nonsense as anybody who knows the geography of the ground will tell you.
Also it isinconsistent with the       fact that Spurs fans in 1981  were
coming on the same road as Forest fans did this time.

I was particularly outraged that a number of prominent Police,    and FA
officials,   as well as M P ’s, were saying that Hillsborough had great
experience of hosting semi-finals and that they had never had any
problems   before. This goes to show that people either have  very short
memories   or are only interested in the welfare of football fans    when
they are dead.

I believe that it is very important that the above information be
publicised and it must certainly be passed onto the official enquiry,
since it is already clear that both the FA and Police are going' to claim
that this was a freak incident which was totally unpredictable. I have a
large number c" cClleag'ues who were witness and party to the events of
1981, who will be more than happy to give evidence.

May I finally, extend to you and to the families of the bereaved      and
injured,  my heartfelt condolences which I am sure are shared by      all
Spurs fans.


Your sincerely,_______




                           2
                                                     FU RN IVAL HOUSE
J MERVVN JONES M Sc
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            Furnival Gate
                                                     Sheffield S1 4QN
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U IR Y T E A M
                                                     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 72 7 5 9 9

WEST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ                        S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STA TIO N
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                               Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                             Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 09 7190/7231
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5000, extn. 2 02 5           Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
                                                     Our Ref:       JMJ/SJA
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -35 9 3332                          Date:       23 June 1989




London




Dear

1 am grateful for you advising me of your information about the tragic events
at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.  I have noted the information which has also
been made available to Secretary of the Inquiry as well as the Treasury
Solicitor, who is instructing Counsel to the Inquiry at the oral hearings.

Having considered your contribution I do not intend to arrange a personal visit
to obtain any further statement.  However, if you have any additional
information since you last contacted my investigation team or you feel that a
personal visit is essential please do not hesitate to make contact at any of my
offices listed above.  Alternatively you can write to the Secretary of the
Inquiry as below:-

Mr R M Whalley
Secretary to The Inquiry
50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to convey his personal thanks for your taking
the trouble to make contact and for the contribution you have made to his
Inquiry.

Yours sincerely




J M JONES
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
