Other Document Form                       Date and time raised   u.   PS
                                                                                                Number


Title.             W      \                    €am      .
 (Include source end eny document number if relevant)


 Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No.
                                                                                                           Receiver



Document registered/iggetfid as indiceted

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                             dtaiviiivm
                                                                                                           Reader

Indexed es indicated
                                                                                                               Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action        tafcan
                                                                                                         0/M             SIO




Further action no(s)                                                                                        Indexer

When satisfied ell actions raised Office Manager to andorse other Document Mester Number Form

MIR 15
                      THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UP-DATE IV




The first phase of the Hillsborough Inquiry was concluded on 29 June 1989.
Oral evidence has been received from various parties including police and
civilian members of this Force. A total of 55 South Yorkshire Police
representatives have given evidence to the Inquiry and each has performed
creditably.

The policy adopted by the Force, and employed by each of our witnesses, has
been one of openness and helpfulness towards the Inquiry.  The purpose of the
Inquiry is to examine all the facts relating to the Hillsborough disaster and
to make suitable recommendations to prevent any similar incident occurring in
the future.  The South Yorkshire Police fully support those objectives and
have not sought to obscure any fact, for fear of embarrassment, that may serve
the very worthwhile aims of the Taylor Inquiry.

Neither the South Yorkshire Police nor Lord Justice Taylor have any control
over the press coverage of the evidence that has been given. Members of the
Force can be assured, however, that the journalistic 'slant' bears little
relation to the mountain of facts and claims that have been set before the
Inquiry.  The job of Lord Justice Taylor and his two assessors, now, is to
sift through that,mass of evidence attaching weight to, and dismissing, that
which they see fit.

All parties to the Inquiry,, including the South Yorkshire Police, are now
preparing written submissions to the Inquiry based upon their interpretation
of the evidence.

These submissions, and others from representative bodies such as the
Association of Chief Police Officers, the Superintendents' Association and the
Police Federation, will be considered by Lord Justice Taylor prior to his
publication of an interim report in August 1989.

The Inquiry is to reconvene at Sheffield on 14 July 1989 for one day only.
The purpose of this arrangement is to enable counsel, for each party, the
opportunity to summarise the submissions they have made to the Inquiry.   In
essence, it may be little more than a press call with certain parties seeking
headlines.  These presentations should not, however, affect the serious
deliberations of the Judge and his assessors.

The South Yorkshire Police has done all that it has been permitted to do to
present its case concerning the events of 15 April 1989. Those police
officers and civilians who represented that case by giving evidence are
thanked for all their efforts; those many many more who were prepared to do so
but were not called are not forgotten in those thanks.

We must now await the interim findings of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, and
the subsequent final report to be published in 1990. The South Yorkshire
Police will reflect, conscientiously and professionally, upon any
recommendations that are relevant to the Force and move forward from the
tragedy that touched all of us.




(Jhiel (Jctnstiable
30 June \& X 9
As a postscript, the West Midlands Police continue to prepare a report for
HM Coroner who is to hold an inquest, in January 1990, into the 95 deaths.
The West Midlands officers may wish at some stage in the future to take
statements from members of the South Yorkshire Police who dealt with the
deceased. When their intentions are more clear the relevant individuals will
be fully advised.




** Distribution:

  All Chief Superintendents
  Superintendent Parker   -   HQ Communications & Computers
  Police Constable Middup -   Secretary, Police Federation
  Mr Stothard             -   Special Constabulary Commandant
  Mr Richardson           -   Civilian Personnel Officer


  PLEASE ENSURE WIDEST CIRCULATION THROUGHOUT YOUR DIVISION/DEPARTMENT.
