                                                                                                        $              (sLc^tAJ?




 (2cu lo< jcL/U                                                                                                                    •
                        '                      o A cyX Jsi             C J ^L         Ki                                                         d c'C u - s * J u h


                                   kJZSju^M              -     7^           OJ~t




                                   D     'TfitynSCJ^t                 ^         ifwAO^o                                       -&*{djb*QA                 is       ........


                                        -L-y\,^^(^SLeJc,.                              ,..„   . .....................................




                                         'T+h^Jau^t ^ ^                                                                                    *r                      Jfyfdhk,
            (f     'T& q (<=>v           on       -^T        ...                                        a, /^t .G9 *h *{ L **.

                                                   c l^ cM v£(fc*/*L £                     C£>*GL* CA



                            .3 ^                                                      ^        fjjjL                                            yo^.Uo(v



       ^          rb+&A>(°('-V             -^ S -*        C o ^'T t^X jU J^l                      - ftl                      J2J>oULacJL              Jrv



  Cg>^UlctL£h\                     Z ' f l f e $<                               \ j       <^ Q
                                                                                             MS^ a^JL
c u ^jc*«                                     ^<x £sl^                            ^stt                     «ha ^ e .




   j^l            O-*                  & jfife, -SJa Q*J^                 - fin       ($X             JoJj?


  J 2^ c A ° & c {                      /fc     ^ f id s u c ji             1st       - fa *               a w sd b M zA


  ~~.. -     («)        /£         ^ i d £ + . < ^ „ d - , L s l L L . . t x / J ^ . , . 2 L . . . k ja x J u o J U                              & . . X k ^ 'h ~ + -
                        #i:te ^2x^< Abfc <£» ^                                                                                          ^cJUs^yjr <?o6<*y^
            (4>) r?ZL                                                             .*Lj^-i^i«bfc__. ( h i *5 'h *9h kl^                                                  _
                              ^j9f         - *U. J^_.|2p2<«^.Q-/,.... 4v' ^                                    k h Q ^ A c t^ k                 Q>     S jd d & jJ tL       ,
                               u*.^         d ju U J t                     ifc**                                                        ,H^JL.^xflL^..,,,.
    -~ (c)^ d j U            j QdL,™^                              v £ a J d ljB jA               ' ^ 1


           ( ^J    r^ >uCJui*jL&Ad.X ,&LA*A., ~£dl£ljLA£j.                                <2lA-                                   t^<a^JL Jo         / m ^ I qv
                                                                                                                           sLcjiaJI       19^ J




                                      ')                                                                                                                       tS-




                                     >)          2k£Laj C j ^ t                      <rj hMxj                                                      KlacJkJsdu                 jUrdLu

                       ^                                                             (
                t f     /           (ov      CM.          'ifc x             C      ^ ,s ^ cd z & \                * i M*         0*v/**f 4 ^ Y / W W




                                3)              ^ e A jig i u U j L i                ^ ^ ,/0| /i"(                                                              _ [ ju ^ ir




                                                                                                                 'tfcjl          j 2J'0(JLacA.                l^


   C s ^ u ? c J tjj> ^                                    $1               C 4 j^ jx                       d l^ c M d ^ a A U .                         Q s r^ d b u o ( -



CX^9     l jc   **                                                                                 ty b te .            <=ia ^            tt/jL jk & ^ J L s


                                                                                              ^ cju*As J o (q_                             C&tfAJt         u^j       uflifc-


       o l ^}         a s >uhej            %>     tfajL
                                                    7                                       fr n       1&X
                                                                                                        ^          *c J u ?                 Co m ^        ol J & A ju *


       ^ c j c ^ d                          it1 ^ / i d j u c x                             $JL                         CQvl* <dLQ.


                  (a   J     HX       J l^ id U U c A                  4         b d x^       bcU & I              r      L ( q C 6u & U                 is ' f o ^ ( c v / u o *
                            o d ’So             £o j K          Iffc L                                      ^                     ^JU s^y^r                  «? d b o i ^


                (^£)       'T i l    ~e^/<dJLAQX                   ^             E<cAaM                to       itu .       LfiJj u *Jr                          ~b*o^,L,lu
                        ca~          1 \d           A?        ^                         ^              <- /C. tlQ S U c ju J { -                    {q      Q j> c ld jX fjA ~
                                                  c fa ja M -              tfS tL         tfL*o         < X r,js d b            oJr       ib u i    lA S ju t d r


            (e)         T T si       -a jd
                                         ' u u       qa            « !        £<c4& e{             v                                  %     fc t 'T o ^ i^ y X a ^ oul^


           (d )                            h u d 's         O U ^            ^ {rijL A S J L                OVK.         f^ L                      (5     ' 7* L ^ lo v


                                                                       &(tud\                                                                                  1%,
t^     xc     M j is X                am ,       ^                                               ^



            [k \,                                    <PusM A>u^J)         **/       l/ ^   ' G^ -                                              ^o»*> .......   .,



                    tt<



-r d                               •S'cAjlpLuJ jl             iSU* CL.                      '^ a s + z.           'lo rf-

                     \^pt                     ( (q       <^i 'StutcA^,          M^OlAj^o                &           GAaaJq      i    OurP

                          J L a^      iA JU   L */        * < y \ o v iA ^          lz J )u r*-U L S      ! < * '* * ,   fio * *      ^Jovw


            it       ^cs^uJj.                   o -^ jju k           ti         c                               o*JLj          $j        -& /(g L £ acl

     < *j     lb * e b ~           h J < c id lj» H         ( f^ is n s *           ta /c jtf% .                                    J t& * ~   «^&u


                     a              * qA j £ X o a J ~         h f                              (£ slL U q ji/^ & s>i<t» .


                         ^u}o~Ajt                ~tdui          ffi                        <x        r-/9j J\    x^j                                           „


                 ^ t / ' d j u (U               fo             <ASjiA4*£                                                 <*j    <& ur*c         <^/clm.

                            iLo                                                                                                                                I
             A'CtwV'SU'-j/O    >OL&a.CA.

                                                              56

                                                 B, D. MURRAY


         THE CORONER:      We are going to pause for a few
m i n u t e s , and I think I will start on Superintendent
Murray because I think we are going to have a good
hour, and I reckon I will have finished my examination
within that time.

     MR. MANNING:      I don't therefore have to push open
and open door, w i t h respect, sir, because
Superintendent Murray has been sitting here n ow for the
best part of two days.     It is not easy, as you have
rightly remarked, for any witness.     It is not easy for
a Police Officer w ho perhaps one would easily assume is
not supposed to hav e emotions or feelings, but clearly
Superintendent M urray would have urged through me that
you at least try and start his evidence today.

     THE CORONER:   I am happy to hear you say that.           I
was concerned that you might say the opposite.

     MR. MANNING:         If we could get the 50 minutes or
an hour in ....

     THE CORONER:   I don't want to go beyond what we
would normally do on a Friday, but I am virtually
certain that I will have completed what I want to ask
him and then we can start on Monday with any cross-
examination there might be.

                    (Short Adjou rnm en t)

               BE R NA RD DEAN MURRAY Sworn

                        By THE CORONER

Good afternoon.  I know you w ere in Court so you will
have heard that what I intend to do, because of the
time, is to try and complete what I want to ask you
before we break for today and then we will carry on on
Monday. - A. Yes, sir.

You are Bernard Dean Murray, I believe,       is that right?
- A. Yes, sir.

You are a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police?
- A. Y e s , I am.

In fact, I think you were posted as a Superintendent,
was it in 1988? - A. In March 1988 to Hammerton Road,
yes.

It was as a result of that posting that you became
involved as Controller at Hillsborough, is that right?
- A. That is correct, yes.
                                                                57

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q.   Of course, the semi-final in 1988 followed very soon
     after your appointment? - A. It did indeed.  I think I
     attended two football matches before the semi-final.

Q. Were you then in fact the Controller in 1988? - A. Yes,
   I was.

Q. Not    '89, we are talking about   *88? - A. Yes, Iwas.

Q. You  had nothing to do with the '87 match, just so that
   we can get that cleared up? - A. No, I did not.

Q.   In 1988 of course Chief Superintendent Mole was the
     overall Commander, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes,
     he w a s .

Q. But   you   were supported in 1988, as indeed I think in
   1989, by    the three regular Control Room staff, is that
   right? -    A. Yes, that is correct, the same staff,
   Sergeant    Goddard, P.C. Ryan, P.C. Bishop.

Q. Is it right that Mr. Mole in 1988 followed his normal
   practice which he described to us, namely that he
   roamed and that he left you in the Control Room? - A.
   He did.  I also had an Inspector with me who was
   familiar with the proceedings, Inspector Calvert.

Q. So you had additional back-up?     - A. Yes,   I did, sir.

Q. In the shape of that gentleman? - A. Yes.

Q. I am not criticising Mr. M ole in any way, or indeed
   anybody else, I was just trying to establish the
   situation.

     As far as you were concerned with regard to 1988 have
     you any recollection of any major problems pre kick-
     off? - A. Before the kick-off - I think the problems
     have been mentioned - there were one or two that I
     noticed such as the problems that we had with the
     Liverpool supporters in the Kop and keeping them
     isolated from the Nottingham Forest Supporters.   There
     were also a few minor problems with the radio, that we
     had interference from outside, but I was not aware of
     any major problems apart from those.

Q. I think there was some sort of pitch invasion at the
   end of 1988 but it was from the Police point of view
   contained and did not present an insuperable problem to
   you? - A. It was not a particular problem.     It was well
   controlled.  The problem w i t h a pitch invasion is if
   the two sets of supporters get together, and it was a
   question of preventing the Liverpool supporters
   reaching the Notts. Forest supporters, or in fact the
                                                            58

                                                 B.'D. MURRAY


     Notts. Forest supporters coming over their end, and
     having a melee in the middle, that was the problem.

Q. 1988 is quite a few years ago now, but in the course of
   your duties you would have been looking round the
   Ground, I take it? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any recollection of anything unusual in any
   way about the terracing at Leppings Lane, in 1988? - A.
   No.  I didn't see anything peculiar about it at all.
   There was some climbing from the terracing at half
   time, into the West Stand, from both the terraces in
   front of the stand and the terraces at the side of the
   stand, but I noticed nothing unusual about it.    It was
   the first time I had seen a capacity ma tc h for some
   years and it seemed to go very well indeed.

Q.    You were not either aware at the time or later that
     there were some people who felt uncomfortable within
     the centre pens at Leppings Lane - 1988 I am talking
     about? - A. I received no information on that from
     either people who had attended the matches or any of
     the Officers who were there for that particular event.

Q. We have heard evidence from quite a lot of people - it
   differs in slight detail but the substance of it is -
   that in 1988 the tunnel was for shorter or longer
   periods closed off pre-match, with the presumed
   intention of diverting the fans.  First of all, did you
   know anything at all about that? - A. No, sir.

Q. The second question, of course, follows:  you therefore
   did not give the order for that to be done? - A. No,
   sir.

Q.   Was it reported back to you by anybody? - A. No,   I only
     learnt about it after the 1989 semi-final.

Q. So that is the first you knew about that? - A. That is
   the first I knew that the tunnel had ever been closed.
   I obviously made enquiries after that event.

Q. That brings me to the second aspect of the matter.
   Leaving aside the semi-final, thinking just of league
   matches, were you aware or had you ever seen anybody
   close the tunnel off? - A. I had no knowledge of the
   tunnel ever being closed.  No one had ever told me it
   had been closed; no one had ever told me it had been
   used as any sort of measure to prevent people going
   down.

Q. So what you are saying - I am not talking about se m i ­
   finals, I am just talking about ordinary matches .... -
   A. I am talking about every match I attended, sir, yes.
                                                         59

                                              B.'D. MURRAY


Q. May I ask you this, when you took the job on I assume
   Mr. Mole or somebody must have had some conversation
   with you as to what would be expected? - A. I took over
   from Superintendent Freeman who had left the Police
   Force sometime before I was appointed to Hammerton
   Road.  I had no opportunity to speak to him.   I spoke
   to Mr. Mole about football and he told me that the
   matches would be commanded by the Divisional Commander,
   which was himself, or in his absence his Deputy, and
   that I would operate as the Superintendent from FI Sub-
   Division, operating from the vicinity of the Control
   Room, which was normal.  I accepted that.   I had a
   Chief Inspector there who ha d been there for some
   considerable time and obviously asked his advice on
   different topics about football.

Q. From what you have said I take it that the occasion ^
   never arose where you were faced wit h the question,  We
   have got too many fans in this area, we have got to
   send them somewhere else", or did that happen? - A. I
   never had that occasion personally and I did not know
   whether anybody had ever taken any independent action.
   If that was the case it had never come back to me and
   the people I had spoken to had never told me, "We do^
   close the tunnel, we do deflect fans from the tunnel".

Q. So what you are telling me then is that was news to you
   after the 1989 event? - A. Absolutely.

Q. It became news? - A. Absolutely, yes.  It came   to my
   attention that someone had said the tunnel was   closed
   in 1988.  I disputed that but if people say it   was
   closed then it was closed.  It was never drawn   to my
   attention in any way.

Q. I would be right in thinking then from what you say
   that apart from the hiccups of pitch invasion and a few
   other matters which may have arisen in 1988, you were
   satisfied that everything had gone satisfactorily? - A.
   Yes, I was.  The Order was prepared by my Chief
   Inspector and another Inspector.  It was based very
   much on what had happened the year before, which I had
   not had the privilege of attending, and it seemed to go
   very well.

Q. Then of course after that semi-final you continued to
   do Control Roo m duties, I take it, for other matches? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. Throughout the season until some point when you were
   told that the next semi-final was going to be played at
   Hillsborough again? - A. At the beginning of January
   Mr. Mole came and discussed football with me again, and
   said that he was satisfied now that certain matches he
                                                            60

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


   would take command of, and there were some that I would
   take command of, and I a ct ua lly took command of one or
   two matches prior to the semi-final.

Q. In other words, what you are saying is that initially
   he was taking command of even relatively smaller
   matches? - A. All ca tegory matches, yes.

Q. It was only in January *89 w h e n he felt, shall we say
   confident enough to feel that he could leave you? - A.
   Probably.  He picked some matches out that he felt he
   would like to be present at and some that he felt he
   should leave in my hands.

Q. I understand.  When it b e c a m e clear that the semi-final
   would be occurring in S hef f i e l d again in 1989, I think
   you and your Chief Inspectors or Inspectors set about
   revamping the Operational Order, is that right? - A.
   Yes, sir.  The first information I had was when Mr.
   Mole told me we would be h avi ng the semi-final either
   on the Saturday or the Sunday, he was not sure which,
   because of the television.       Later that day he came back
   and said it would be on the Saturday, the traditional 3
   o'clock kick-off, we wo uld go ahead as before, and so
   together with my Chief Inspector and the Ground Liaison
   Inspector, we saw Mr. Mole, he presented us wit h the
   senior Officers he had c h os en to do the various tasks,
   and I delegated by Chief Inspector and Inspector to set
   about the task of prep ar in g the Order, which I would
   oversee.

Q. Would I be right in thinking that it substantially
   followed the 1987 Order? - A. Very much so.

Q. But there were several amendments which you made to it
   including, I think, the cal l sign which was changed for
   senior Officers, and matters of that nature? - A. There
   was no change to the ge ner al strategy of the Order.
   Like I said, I had noticed personally a number of
   problems which seemed mi n o r compared to the main Order
   itself, one of which was the call signs.     The Chief
   Inspectors used different call signs, and at the '88
   match I had noticed that one or two of them had
   reverted away from the one that they had been given in
   the Order to the call sign that they used back at their
   normal place of duty.   I felt this was confusing.
   There were no Chief Inspectors and Superintendents with
   similar names, so I arrang ed that they would use their
   names and then the Officers under their command, who
   were probably listening in, would know exactly who we
   were talking to.

   There were several other things that I wrote into the
   Order as well.  We did slightly increase the track
                                                     61

                                            B. D. MURRAY


serial.   I did arrange for additional serials to come
onto the track at the end of the ma tc h to prevent
problems with a pitch invasion.   I also had arranged —
- the year before I had found that a lot of Officers
who were situated down at the Claywheels Lane standby
point wer e too far away when we needed them, so I
arranged for two coaches to be available outside the
two ends of the Ground, with 50 Officers on board, so
that we could get them at very short notice, but
unfortunately that was not going to take place until
phase 2, which was after the kick-off.




        /Q* We have heard from
                                                             62


                                         B.D. MURRAY




Q. We have heard from one witness who says at about 2.35
   I think it was, w a s n ' t it, he was coming along Leppings
   Lane towards the groun d and he noticed a coach with
   about, in fact he sai d 50 Officers in it, parked part ly
   on the pavement and p a r t l y on the road.

         N o w before I ask you about the time, is that in
   fact the location w h e r e you wo u l d have wanted the coach
   to be between sort of on the roundabout and the stadium,
   somewhere along Leppings Lane? - A. I would have liked
   it to be right outside the turnstiles, opposite the
   turnstiles, because b y that time there should not have
   been a particular p r o b l e m there.   I would like the other
   one to be outside the P enistone Road end.

         I did hear a Se rg ea nt from 'D' Division speaking
   the other day.  The 'D' Division Officers were not
   part of our order.    T h e y had their own order and their
   arrangements were that they were to come down as escorts
   on the buses from the Rail way Station at Midland Station
   with the Notts. F o re st fans and then when they had dropped
   them off they were to go back and collect some more.        If
   they arrived at the g round after quarter-to-3 then they
   stood by in the gymna si um as reserve Serials.

Q. This is Sergeant Swift and his crew so to speak? - A.
   Possibly sir.  I do n ' t know them all by name.  It m a y
   well have been that if all the coaches were down from
   the Station several Officers - I d o n ’t know as many
   as 50 - but several Officers m ay have come down on
   one coach.  That is the only explanation I can offer,
   but the coach I had arranged should not have been full
   of Police Officers until we got into Phase 2.

Q. Can I put it another way, this is with hindsight.
   I realise it may n ot have be e n in the forefront of
   people's minds but was any report made to you that the
   coach, the one you h a d in mind, was in that location
   prior to kick-off? - A. No, the coach may have been
   there.

Q. I meant with Officers in it? - A. Not with Officers in
   it, no, it wo uld have been there I would have hoped
   with just a driver.

Q. So you are not in a p os ition to explain that witnesses's
   evidence, certainly not in relation to that time, unless
   you say it was the people w ho were coming from the
   Midland Station who for some reason were in that position?
   - A. It should not hav e been the coaches that I arranged.
                                                             63


                                       B.D. MURRAY



Q. That was an aside, forgive me.    And the other thing I
   think you organised was that you arranged for I think
   a radio engineer to be on site, is that right, in case
   you had further problems? - A. I did.    We had had a
   problem wi t h breakthrough, it was music that was
   breaking through the year before and not only I noticed
   it one of the Serials on the debrief sheet noticed it.
   I arranged for a radio enginee r to be there.

Q. And the final point on this is we have heard from
   various people that the total number of Officers was
   reduced by I don't know how many, about 70 in the
   Leppings Lane, I don't mean in the immediate area of
   Leppings Lane but in the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

Q. Were these reductions made in the Middlewood Road area,
   not all of them but were some of them made up there?
   - A. They were certainly made right across the board
   with a reduction in wh a t we call the public order
   serials of two Officers, reducing them to a Sergeant
   and eight.   I think we m a y have chopped one off what
   we call the Tango units w h i c h are the mobile Serials
   and p ut them down to a Sergean t and four or a Sergeant
   and five instead of a Sergeant and six.      Certainly one
   Serial in the Middlewood Ro a d area was taken out
   completely and one of the reserve Serials I think was
   also removed.

Q. One final question on this aspect of the matter and this
   is really relating to 1988.       Have you got any recollection
   of any arrangements wh i c h w er e made for people to be
   checked at either Catchbar Lane, Leppings Lane, Penistone
   Road roundabout or indeed nearer to the ground to try
   and w e e d out ticketless fans? - A. I don't know of any
   specific arrangements.     I certainly did not make any
   arrangements but I w ou ld think that Serial Sergeants would
   brief their men as to w ha t they wanted to do and if the
   numbers were controllable, amenable, that is a tack they
   may well have taken, but there were no specific arrange­
   ments made for them.

Q. Now I wa n t to go on to 1989 and the Order had been
   drafted, it had been eventually signed and you were
   on the day now on the 15th April 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. We have already heard that Mr. Duckenfield gave a briefing?
   - A. He did sir, yes.

Q. And you were there I take it? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. Did you yourself on that day also give a briefing or
   not? - A. Yes, I did.  Mr. Duckenfield gave an opening
   briefing.  I followed him w i t h my briefing and I think
   I was followed by the Divisional Intelligence Officer
   and also Inspector Sewell on some administrative
   arrangements.
                                     B.D. MURRAY



Did you also brief Inspectors and above on the Friday?
- A. I did indeed.

So you did two briefings? - A. I did one to the Inspectors
and above on the F riday and one to the whol e assembly
on Saturday.

Did the briefings w h i c h you gave, were these designed,
if I can use the word, this m i g h t be an incriminating
question so if you don't w a n t to answer it.

      Perhaps I had better give you a proper explanation
the first time I say this and then I will shorten it.

      THE WITNESS:   Fine sir.

      THE CORONER:    F rom time to time I or others may
ask you questions w h i c h m a y tend to incriminate you.
Because of the Rules in Coroners' Courts you do not
have to answer any such question.

      As far as I am able I will try a nd warn you when
I perceive that a question m ig ht have this tendency.
It is a privilege wh i c h you m ay exercise or not as you
wish.

      THE WITNESS:    I understand fully sir.

      THE CORONER:  A n d if you choose to answer that is
fine and if you choose not to answer it that is also
fine, is that clear, but to save time I won't give all
this detail everytime, just say "possible incriminating
question" and you will know w h a t I mean.

      THE WITNESS:     Yes, it is not necessary.

      THE CORONER:       Wh a t I was going to ask you with
this warning was was your briefing, I a m not talking
about anybody e l s e 's, designed by you, did you sit down
and write it out and decide w ha t you needed to do?
- A. Yes, I did.

What was its - again it is an incriminating question -
what was its main thrust? - A.   The Chief Superintendent
had shown me what   he was going to say in his briefing,
he had had it typed put.    I prepared a briefing touching
on those matters that I thought it was important be
made aware to the Inspectors and above w h o were at the
Friday briefing.   I also examined it for the Saturday
briefing because I was concerned that it was too long
and that Officers would not concentrate through too
lengthy a briefing and cut some items o u t that I considered
the Inspectors could well brief their own men on.
                                                                65

                                        B.D. MURRAY



Q. So can you sort of just give me headings if you remember?
   - a . The main thrust of the briefing would be the emergency
   evacuation procedure; the knowledge about communications;
   about call signs; about problem areas that we foresaw.
   That is about it w i t ho ut looking at m y notes.

Q. That will do as far as I am concerned.  This having taken
   place, this all happened during the morning of course?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. You eventually I think made your way to the Control Box?
   - A. Yes, I did.

Q. I think initially you were there on your own wi t h your
   three support staff, so to speak, b ut without Mr. Duckenfielc
   That is what I am saying? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. I think you had one or two visitors, people who were
   looking in to see how things ....  A. We always do have
   visitors in the Control Box.

Q. But of course initially things are relatively quiet,
   aren't they, as far as the ground is concerned, b ut I
   am right in thinking    that your job as Controller is not
   just restricted to the area, the pitch, you are controlling
   the whole of the m at ch in effect? - A. No, we have the
   stadium, we have the immediate surrounds of the stadium
   and then we have the far away points such as the motorway
   checkpoints and the Grenoside checkpoints.    We also try
   and keep liaison w it h Force Control and everyone else.

Q. Force Control communications are tape recorded.  That
   is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, they are sir, yes.

Q. But Control R o o m communications are not, is that right?
   - A. There is no tape recording facility.

Q. But you in fact attempted to keep a handwritten log
   as part and parcel on this particular year? - A. I did.
   Mr. Duckenfield asked especially for a handwritten log.

Q.    And you would have liked to have had somebody there but
     there was not  room? - A. There was not room in the Control
     Box.

Q.   So you decided you wou ld do your best? - A. Yes, we did.

Q.    We don't need to go into any details but between 12
     and half-past-1 you received calls from various outlying
     places with regard to the sort of law and order problems
     which one wo u l d have to deal with w hen a lot of people
     come along? - A. Yes sir, they were the usual problems
     that you associated w ith a big event.
                                     B.D. MURRAY



And these were dealt w i t h routinely and with out any
particular difficulty? - A. Yes sir.

I think is it right that at about 10-to-2 Chief Superintenden
Duckenfield actually came into the Control Box? - A. Yes,
he did.

You at that point said you were satisfied with the
situation as it was? - A. Yes, he asked wha t was happening
and was told that ev erything seemed okay.

I think both of you then left the Control Roo m to go and
find the referee and discuss w ith him the usual procedures
about evacuation procedures and things of that nature?
- A. That is correct, yes.

I think you then returned at just after 2 o'clock? - A.
Yes, it was a bit longer than I expected because the
referee was not available.     He was not in his office.
He was on the pitch w i t h the linesmen and by the time
he came back we had to wa i t for him and then spoke to
him.

On that occasion you had another visitor, namely Mr. Jackson.
Is that right? - A. Tha t is correct, yes.

But he d i d n ' t stay ver y long, is that right? - A. He
stayed and had a look wh a t was going on.     I don't know
how long he stayed but he asked wh a t was happening and
then he went.

Mr. Duckenfield stayed in the Control Room with you? - A.
Yes he did sir.

We have been to the Control Room, we know there is not
very m uch room in it.   Did he stand or sit? - A. I have
difficulty in recalling but I know certainly at one
stage he was behind me on the raised area standing next
to the Video Operator.     I don't know whether he spent
mos t of the time there b ut that was certainly where I
expected him to be.    He told me before the event that
he would be spending m o s t of his time in the Control
Room environment.




                   Q. Say that again
                                                              67

                                                 B, D. MURRAY


Q. Say that again? - A. Before the event Mr. Duckenfield had
   said he intended to spend most of the time in the Control
   Room where he could oversee the events.

Q. So it wasn't a surprise to you he was there? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. It was different to what Mr. Mole would h ave done? - A.
   Yes.

Q. But you knew it was going to happen and that was that? -
   A. Yes.   I think Mr. Duckenfield's was the textbook
   position.

Q. I think you looked round the ground at about quarter
   past, or thereabouts?   I am not holding you to the
   minute, but around that time.   Is it right that at the
   point you noticed there appeared to be more Nottingham
   people in than Liverpool? - A. Yes, there is no doubt
   there were.

Q. However, as far as you were concerned at that stage you
   weren't too concerned? - A. I wasn't particularly
   concerned.

Q. At some point you received a message from
   Superintendent Marshall that he wanted Leppings Lane
   closed? - A. Yes, I did.l

Q. Now I know there is a bit of dispute as to the timings
   because you have given much earlier timings than
   Superintendent Marshall seems to recollect? - A. Yes.

Q. I think your handwritten note was 14.17? - A. Yes,
   seventeen minutes past two I wrote.

Q. I know you have probably thought about this many times,
   but are you able to add anything to that now as to what
   time you think it was? - A. I can't.   My own perception
   is that was later, but the fact that I have put something
   else in the log after that time, and timed it at 2.21, I
   feel that that 2.17 is correct as far as I am concerned.

Q. Though perceptually you feel that it was later? - A. Yes,
   although times did tend to get very blurred.

Q. In any event some time between quarter past and, say,
   half past two - 14.17 - a request was made for that road
   to be closed? - A. Yes.

Q. That was the correct procedure, that he could come
   through to you and ask? - A.  Superintendent Marshall was
   on the ground.   He wanted some action taking at another
   part and so he came through to Control and asked for it.
                                                                 68

                                                      B~. D. MURRAY


Q. The appropriate order was given? - A. When I say "me",
   the radio operator carries out my instructions.          I very
   quickly identified the Serial at the bottom of Leppings
   Lane, that is the roundabout end.         I asked the radio
   operator to contact them and tell them to close Leppings
   Lane, which he did.     I then identified the one w h i c h was
   at the other end, Catchbar Lane, tried to get him on the
   radio and could not get him on the radio.         Tried two or
   three times and co ul d not get him.       I then went b a c k to
   Mr. Marshall and asked him, again through the radio
   operator, if he co uld des p a t c h somebody from where he was
   up to Catchbar Lane to close Leppings Lane.

Q. I think there were one or two other calls because the
   buses were still coming through and you had to intervene?
   - A. Yes, there was.    It is very difficult.   The
   instruction to close Lep pings Lane, it may well be that
   this Serial at the bottom had decided that they w o u l d let
   a bus, or a couple of buses through, but keep everything
   else out.    The fact there was a bus actually coming up
   the lane did not mean that the orders had not been
   carried out.

Q. You could not physically do it, all you could do was give
   the instructions? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We now come to about 2.30.   At 2.30 did you have another
   look round the ground, as far as you remember? - A. Yes.
   I would be looking round the ground all the time, from
   time to time, but yes at 2.30 I had a look round.

Q. What was your pe rc eption at that point? - A. Again, there
   were more Nottingham Forest fans in than there were
   Liverpool fans.     I thought that probably the Nor th Stand
   looked about half full and the West Stand itself was
   filling up.   The Leppings Lane end, there was plenty of
   room at that stage.     The North West terrace and the
   centre pens were filling, but there was plenty of roo m in
   the rest of the ground.

Q. You, of course, can't see the outside except by looking
   at the TV screens? - A. I can see certain views outside
   the ground from the TV monitors.

Q. Were you at that point - presumably you were looking all
   the time, but what I mean is, did anything strike you? -
   A. At 2.30 I would be looking around.   I am sat in a
   similar situation with the TV monitors above me and I
   have got the ground in front of me and the radio operator
   and telephone operators on the right hand side of me.

   I could see there was a good crowd of people outside the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles but when I say the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles I mean the whole turnstile conclave.   I was
                                                B, D. MURRAY


satisfied at that time that we would get tho3e people in
for three o'clock.

In fact that is what you told Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I did
indeed.   I said, "There is a good crowd there but we
will get them in for three o'clock."

What happened after that? - A. As far as I can remember
the crowd sort of stayed about the same for the next five
minutes, ten minu tes or so, and then we got a call from
the mounted Inspector on the radio asking for more
horses.   It was about that time that PC Bichard focused
in on a mounted Officer.    PC Bichard, his job is to
bring my attention to things that perhaps concern him, or
if I want something particular showing he will try and
pick it up.   I saw that the crowd was a lot denser than
my perception of it had been before.    Obviously the fact
that there had been a request for mounted Officers meant
that they needed some assistance.

Sergeant Goddard, who is very reactive, picked it up
straight away and radioed to Sergeant Sorsby, who was in
charge of the mou nte d Officers in Penistone Road and
said, "Send as many horses as you can spare round to the
Leppings Lane end."     As I looked this crowd seemed to be
getting quite compact.     I knew that I had one spare
Serial to deploy, wh ic h was in the gymnasium;  the other
one having been deployed to the Penistone Road end some
time earlier.   I deployed that Serial down to the
Leppings Lane end to give what assistance they could.

Do you know w h ich one that was? Can you remember? - A.
That would be Inspector Delaney and Sergeant Higgins.   It
was the C&V Serial, and continued to wa tch the situation
that was developing.

Having done that, what was your next event in the Control
Room? - A. Again I asked Sergeant Goddard to pass a radio
message, which he did.       It was about that time that a
reply came in w h i c h was extremely distorted.
Sergeant Goddard said, "Would you repeat your message?
We can't understand what you are saying," or words to
that effect.  Someone else came on the radio and said,
"It's not him, it's you, we can't hear you."       I could
see there was a situation developing in Leppings Lane.
I asked PC Ryan to get in touch with the sound engineer,
the radio engineer, the communications officer, but
before he could ring through to the gymnasium, or before
he could speak to anybody at the gymnasium, the guy
appeared at the door.       He said he had been monitoring
our messages.     He realised there was a problem and he
had come to have a look at it.       He said the messages
were breaking up.       They were breaking up quite badly and
we could not be understood.
                                                             70

                                                  B, -P.- MURRAY


   We have two radios.   We have one that we use normally
   and one that is used as a standby set.   I am not quite
   sure what he did.   My perception was that we operated
   with a tulip microphone, which may or may not still be
   there.   He undid the tulip mike and he attached some
   other microphone or telephone handset.  Sergeant Goddard
   then started to try and pass messages out.   All the time
   messages were coming in that we could not respond to, we
   could not acknowledge, and some of them we could not
   understand.   It was about this time
   Superintendent Marshall was asking for some PA
   announcement at Leppings Lane.

   We obviously picked that bit up and PC Bichard tried to
   get in touch wit h Force Operations to send a traffic car.
   PC Buxton obviously heard that over the air, because we
   were on talk-through and everyone could hear what
   everyone else was saying, and I heard him because I
   recognised his voice - he had w or ked with me - saying, "I
   am on my way round to Leppings Lane."     He had a Land
   Rover whi ch had been specially fitted out with four loud
   speakers for this very situation.

   The radio that Sergeant Goddard had, the handset h e had
   did not work.   He tried to send thfe message out and the
   replies came in that were terrible.    He actually threw
   it down on the table and said, "That's no good."    The
   engineer then tried to get to the relief set which was
   under the desk.   This meant total disruption.   Everybody
   had to move out of their places while he got underneath
   and fiddled about with the radios.

   I do not know how long it took him, but it was
   devastating.    It did destroy trains of thought, control
   of what was going on.    During this time as well I had
   noticed there was something wrong with the turnstiles.
   I could see that people were not coming through the
   turnstiles as they should have been.    The crowd - I
   don't know whether it was getting any denser but it
   certain did not seem to be moving.    I was then concerned
   that there was something wrong, that they could not get
   through the turnstiles.    I tried to get in touch with
   the club.    I tried to get in touch with the Safety
   Officer by the club's radio.

Q. That is a different radio? - A. This is a different radio
   system to our own.      This is a radio that we have.   I
   tried several times and I could not get a reply.      I
   tried to get Mr. Lock who was really the only one on the
   staff I know and he is ray point of contact and whom I had
   done business w i t h before.

  As I say, all the time things were getting worse and we
  still had no communication.
                                               B, D« MURRAY


Eventually the ra di o did start again and it was obvious
that we were getting through.     By that time we were
operating from the hand held radio sets which everyone
had.   I had one and Sergeant Goddard had one.     I
remember using mine at that stage and Sergeant Goddard
was using his.    We had totally given up the mains radio,
which would give us override and we were then in a
situation where everyone was on personal radios, on the
same channel, on talk-through.    We were always on talk-
through, but it meant we were in the same position as
everyone else.

That is, in fact, the major disadvantage, that you have
no override on those radios? - A. The normal situation at
football matches, at that particular ground, is that the
talk-through facility is used.      That means that everyone
can hear every message, whether it is going out or coming
in.   However, w i t h the mains set we are able to override
a signal that is coming in from someone else so if we
urgently wanted to contact a unit, we could drive them
out.




     Q. Sometime prior   to this
                                                                  72

                                                         B. D. MUPRAY


Q. Some time prior to this you ac tually h ad a conversation
   I think about possibly postponing the kick-off, is that
   right? - A. About half past two.    About half past two
   Mr. Duckenfield did ask me to remind h i m of what we had
   said about delaying kick-off.    All I kn e w it was what I
   had discussed with Mr. Mole and it was the sort of
   agreement that he wo ul d come to in the circumstances
   that kick-off would b e delayed.   He gave the example to
   me.  I h a d never been to a match wh er e a kick-off had
   been d elayed except once as a spectator and wanted to
   know what it was about.    He said, "If we get a
   situation whereby we have got traffic, the people don't
   get there for some reason such as delay on the
   motorway, a serious accident" or as in 1987 where the
   Police actually carried out checks on the motorway and
   prevented the Leeds United supporters from getting
   there in time, then you wo ul d normally delay the kick-
   off.

Q. This was at some point before a real crisis had arisen,
   is it not? - A. It was round about half past two.

Q. I will just stick with the kick-off point though I am
   taking it slightly out of sequence, and when I say you
   I mean the Control Room at this stage, did you receive
   any message from either PC Buxton or possibly Inspector
   Ellis to the effect that they w o u l d like kick-off
   delayed? - A. I do recall a message from someone and I
   think it was probably PC Buxton.      It was about the same
   time as the players had come out and Sergeant Goddard
   who, as I say, is extremely reactive said, "It is too
   late now, the players are out".     I agreed w ith that.
   If I hadn't agreed with that I w o u l d have told him
   different.

Q. What you are saying is that he mad e the response, you
   heard it, and you did not countermand it? - A. Sergeant
   Goddard wou ld often make responses, sir.

Q. I am not complaining about that in any way. - A. He
   would respond very, very quickly to any sort of call
   for help or assistance that was made.     If I agreed with
   it, fine.     If I didn't agree with it I would tell him,
   no, we wo uld do something else.    There were very, very
   few occasions when I had to, b u t there were times when
   I had said, "No, we will not send them.     We will send
   someone e l s e ” .

Q. You are saying that the players h ad     just come out and
   this wou ld be at about five minutes     to three or
   thereabouts? - A. It wo ul d be, yes,    sir.  I recall it
   was after the gates h a d been o pened   and people were
   already coming into the stadium.
                                                                   73

                                                        B. D. MURRAY



Can we then retrace a fraction?     You are taking m e
through the problems with the radio.     You h a d r e ­
established some f o r m of communication? - A. Yes.

I think you were rece ivi ng messages from Superintendent
Marshall at that time? - A. Yes, we were.

In fact, he was not quite sure whether it was three or
four.  Can you r em emb er h o w m an y actually got
through? - A. I se e m to think there were two.           I like
to call them two sets of two.         We h a d h a d information
from Superintendent Marshall that he w a n t e d the p u b l i c
address system.   I h a d instructed PC Ryan to pass a
message just to tell pe ople to stop push ing out sid e the
Leppings Lane terraces and to keep on passing it a n d to
continue to pass it until such time a s ...

Is this across the tannoy you mean? - A. This is over
the Club's tannoy, yes, sir.       Then we h a d the re que st
from Superintendent Marshall to the effect that w e are
going to have to open the gates at Leppings Lane.            "We
have got a problem out here.       People are being
crushed".   About that time, I can't say whether it was
immediately before or immediately after, an Inspector
came t hrough on the radio, Inspector Bennett, and said
he wa nted assistance down at Leppings Lane.        B e for e we
could ring the gymna si um Inspector Sewell rang and said
that some of the D Division serials w h o had come up
with the buses h ad arrived at the gym and w ere on
standby.   He said that he h ad got ten serials.         I asked
him to dispatch 5 a n d 50 down to Leppings Lane.         T he y
were eight man serials and so he actually sent 6 and
48. He sent them dow n to Leppings Lane.         They w e r e on
the way.   I didn't k n o w h ow long it wo ul d take t h e m to
get there.

    Before there was any improvement in the situation
Superintendent Ma rs hal l came through again on the radio
and said that the gates required opening, people w er e
going to be hurt, p e o p l e were going to be killed, and
within a short space of time he followed that by, as
far as I was concerned, he just said "Open the gates,
open the gates".   I was satisfied at that point th a t we
had no m ore time.   He was an extremely experienced
Officer.   He was out there.       He knew exactly what was
happening.   We had b o u g h t a bit of time, if you like,
but there had been obviously no improvement in the
situation.   My own decision was that w e couldn't w a i t
any longer.   I said to Mr. Duckenfield, "Are we going
to open the gates?" a n d he said, "Yes, open the gates".
                                                                    74

                                                          B. D. MURRAY


Q. Bow d id Mr. Du ckenfield k now that these m es sag es were
   coming through? - A. He was wit h us, sir.      He was with
   us in the Control Room.

Q. Could he hear? We r e the messages bei ng br oa dcast? - A.
   The messages at that stage, I don't kn o w w h e th er they
   were being b roadcast on the loudspeaker or w h e t he r they
   were just coming through the personal radio.        My
   impression was that everyone in the Control R o o m could
   hear those p ar ticular messages and I do not think — I
   can't rem ember whether I was sitting down or standing
   up at that stage, whether I h a d sat down after the
   radio engineer h a d been in or not.

Q. Your view of the Leppings Lane turnstiles was limited,
   was it not, because one camera was not working, the one
   that looked at B gate, is that right? - A. I don't
   think we can see B g a t e . We h ave already id en tified a
   problem wi t h that.

Q. Which bit of the turnstile area co uld you see?         How
   much of it could you see on your monitors I mean? - A.
   The m onitor wo u l d only pick up obviously w h a t it was
   pointing it.    It could point at the whol e area of
   Leppings Lane.      We could see probably, I don't know,
   150 yards down Leppings Lane to the right, towards the
   round about.    We couldn't see anything to the left.       We
   could see the turnstile enclave but not right up to the
   wall because the camera was set back.      W e co u l d
   certainly see some of the concourse a n d C g ate but not
   B gate on that particular camera.

Q. When Mr. Duckenfield said, "Open the gates", h o w d id
   you communicate that?  You did not run out and do it
   personally, did you? - A. No, it went b y radio.
   Sergeant Goddard, as I say, is very reactive a n d he
   just said on the radio, "Open the gates, open the
   ga t e s ".

Q. Did he identify which gates?   I do not m ea n by name or
   number but which par t of the ground? - A. I seem to
   think he said "Leppings Lane, open the gates, open the
   gates".   I cannot recall anything other than that.    He
   certainly didn't say, "Open B gate, open C gate, open
   whatever".

Q. Do you kno w w ho received that message? - A. I don't
   sir.   I h a d a mental picture.  Between the requests
   from Mr. Marshall, I ought to add this, w h i c h I p ut in
   two sets, C gate as I know it d i d open.   PC Bichard
   drew m y attention to it.    He said, "C gate has gone" or
   "C gate has burst", I cannot remember which.      I looked
   up at the monitor and I could see that people were
                                                           75




   coining in through that particular gate.    I cannot
   remember h o w many I estimated but it wasn't a
   tremendous number.    P ossibly 200 came through, I don't
   know.

Q. This was before Mr. Du ckenfield ha d given the order? -
   A. This was before the gates were officially opened,
    yes.  That situation was recovered and the monitor or
   the camer a stayed on that gate, and I have this vision
   of two people crouching behind the gate, two or more,
   and I can only say I think they were Police Officers
   because of what they appeared to be wearing, and then
   the gate being opened.

Q. So you can't actually tell us --- somebody must have
   received the message if it went over the radio? - A.
   Yes.

Q. And somebody activated it? - A. That is right.  I can't
   say who but of course we work off the presumption that
   when we are working on talk-through everybody wit h a
   radio can hear the messages.

Q. I am going to stop.    I haven't quite finished - I am
   taking a bit longer than I expected - but it is
   quarter-to-2, it is an hour and that is enough, so we
   are going to stop for today and carry on on Monday. I
   don't know h o w much longer I will be but I should not
   be that long and then we will just proceed, okay? - A.
   Yes, sir.

       THE CORONER:     On Monday we will stick to our
  10.30 start:

Q. Superintendent Murray, I say this to all the witnesses
   who break, you are on oath and you are technically in
   that witness box, so you must take it that you are not
   to discuss the evidence until we h ave finished? - A.
   Yes.

       (In the absence of the Jury and the W i t ne ss )

       MR. ISAACS:    Sir, it seems unlikely that Mr.
  Murray will have finished his evidence by Monday
  evening, by close of play.  If he does then the
  likelihood is that it will only leave a relatively
  short time.  I would ask you to say no w that you do not
  propose to call Mr. Duckenfield until Tuesday morning.

        THE CORONER:   I think that is fair enough, yes, I
   agree.  Can I just ask something?  Mr. Maxwell
   suggested written comments with regard to legal
   submissions, and I said it did not sound unreasonable.
   Is there anybody who wants to adversely comment on
               SIXTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   MONDAY,   11th MARCH,   1991


                 BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

                        By THE CORONER

Q. Now, Mr. Murray, you remember that I did not quite finish
   on Friday.   I think we had got to the stage where you
   had described Mr. Marshall's requests which came, I think
   you said, in two bursts, so to speak, two of two? - A.
   Yes, sir, that is the way I would describe it.

0. I think you had just described that a decision was taken
   that the gates should be opened, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I was asking you if you knew who actually implemented it
   and you explained that to me? -A. Yes.

Q. Are you back where we were,   so to speak? - A. Yes,   I am.

Q. I want to remind you again before we carry on that a lot
   of the questions which I may ask and, indeed, which
   others may ask, may well tend to incriminate you and you
   therefore have the privilege not to answer them if that
   be the case? - A. Yes.

Q. Although I normally try and warn you of the question, it
   is possible I may miss one.   If you were to think that
   one was of that nature you can say you don't want to
   answer it and we will sort it out from there. - A. I
   understand, sir.

Q. I think I am right in saying that the best view of the
   respective gates wh ic h you had from the Control Room was
   the view of Gate C? - A. Yes, that was the best v ie w we
   could get on the cameras.

Q. The first two requests which came through, they weren't
   actioned, is that right, in the sense they weren*t
   authorised?   The openings were not authorised at that
   stage? - A. That is correct.

Q. One of the things that puzzles me a little bit and
   perhaps you could just explain this to me and to the
   jury, when those requests came through you, of course,
   were in the Control Room, Mr. Duckenfield also was in the
   Control Room at the time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What actually happened?   Did you hear them and turn to
   him and say, "We have had a request"?   Or did both of
   you hear them?   Was there any discussion about them at
                                                          2
                                                           *   «



                                               D. B. MURRAY


that point.   The first two?   I am not talking the
second... - A. I am sure that everybody in the Control
Room heard them.   They came through clearly and it was a
question of doing whatever we were doing.   I was trying
to raise more Serials from the gymnasium.

Are you saying by that that when that request first came
through your primary reaction was to see whether one
could contain the situation by putting more manpower... -
A. I just think it was an extremely important action to
take.   It was one which would destroy the whole plan
that we had.   It was unprecedented and it was a very
serious step to take.   One always hopes in a situation
like that that it may be retrievable.

Would it be right to say that if your Commander is
standing next to you that was the sort of decision which
you would want him to take rather than you? - A. I think
that is fair, yes.

Obviously you would not expect him to take every decision
which you were dealing with? - A. Absolutely, no.

Was that the reason why you turned to him subsequently
and asked him what his decision would be? - A. Yes, I
think it was Mr. Duckenfield's decision to authorise
Mr. Marshall's request.

Having done it, and said the gates are open, what
happened next? - A. It was a question of seeing if it was
going to ease the situation.    We could not see what was
happening outside.    We could see over the tops of the
turnstiles through the monitor and the people towards the
back.   We could not see the front of the turnstiles, the
wall, and of course we could see that people were
climbing over the turnstiles at that stage.     It was just
that requests were coming in, that people were going to
be killed and injured.    It was a question of trying to
save that situation.    I had got to a stage where it was
not retrievable.   As far as I was concerned it was not
retrievable.   Something had to be done.     The gates had
got to be opened.    We were acting on information of
others.   We could not see it ourselves.    It was then a
question of seeing whether it was going to relieve those
injuries outside.

I think you did have some sort of view of the people
coming into the concourse because there were cameras? -
A. Yes.

Having opened the gates, by definition that ought to have
relieved the situation? - A. It should have relieved the
pressure outside, yes.
                                                                3
                                                                **
                                                    D. B. MURRAY


Q. What was the next thing that h a p p e n e d in the Control
   Room?   Did you turn your a t t ent io n to something else at
   that point or did you leave you r attention on the gates?
   -A. I seemed to hope and wait for the people to be
   relieved outside.     I seemed to think that the next thing
   we were overcome with a request      for Gate A to be opened.

Q. Did you know what that request came from? - A. I
   recognised Sergeant Higgins' voice, the request for
   Gate A.

Q. Did it surprise you that that req ues t came through from
   him at that point?    - A. I was a bit surprised.     I think
   I said I was a bit       surprised. I expected thegates to
   be opened on to the concourse, w h i c h I think were
   probably B and C.  I did not k n o w the lettering of the
   gates.   I knew there were three main gates at that end
   of Leppings Lane.    I didn't k no w whether there were any
   smaller ones because around the stadium there are small
   gates and large gates.     I was a bit surprised.      I
   actually asked Sergeant Goddard whi ch was Gate A and he
   said the North Stand.

Q. Who authorised the opening of that gate?    Was that you
   or... - A. Mr. Duckenfield.    Mr. Duckenfield said
   almost straight away, "Open the gate," and Sergeant
   Goddard passed a radio message to open the gate.    I was
   concerned about that gate because I knew that that led
   only to the seating area in the North Stand and I had
   this vision of people getting into the North Stand who
   did not have tickets for that area and chaos in that
   particular stand.

Q. I think you took some remedial steps with regard to that.
   Was it you... - A. It was not me, sir.   I cannot
   recall...   I have heard that Serials were sent down but
   it was not me who asked for them.

Q. You at the time did not know who did it.    You may have
   found out since.   What I am trying to find out is:   did
   you know at the time that that was happening? - A. No. I
   did not, sir.

Q. It is very difficult to keep apart what you knew at the
   time from what you and everybody else knows now.   So
   that was the second thing that happened? - A. Yes.

Q. There was another request for ano th er gate to be opened?
   - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. Your recollection is that it was authorised and you heard
   no more about it? - A. No.   The camera then moved to A
   Gate.   I think PC Bichard must have reacted immediately
   the request came in and taken the camera across from
                                               D. B. MURRAY


C Gate to A Gate and I could see Officers behi nd that
gate.

      THE CORONER;   Can I just interrupt one minute and
say something to the jury?     I know you have asked about
this.    We are trying to find the clip, if that is the
right word, of what there is of this A Gate.     If we can
find it, but hopefully we will.     There is not much on
the clip anyway.    Tha t is the problem.

What was the time interval between the request from
Sergeant Higgins and the earlier authorisation to open
the gates?   Can you recollect that? - A. I seemed to
think it came very quickly afterwards.   At the time they,
seemed to be on top of one another.    The gates were
opened and it seemed almost straight afterwards, the
request from Sergeant Higgins.

It was not logged, or tape recorded, or recorded,   that
request? - A. No, sir.

One of the problems is that these radio messages between
the Control Box and yourselves, there is no hard copy of
those? - A. None at all.

Apart from the ones that went through Snigg Hill or one
of the main police stations? - A. I think the only things
they would pick up is when we were operating on VHF.
They might have heard w hat was happening in the Control
Box in the background.




   Q. In the m ea ntime what was
                                                                 5

                                                      B. P. MURRAY

In the me an ti me w h a t was happening w it hi n the
stadium? - A. I d o n ' t recall anything particular
happening w i th in t h e stadium.    There was nothing that I
really notic ed e x c ept shortly after the request for A
Gate, I think that pro bably focussed m y attention on
the North Stand.       The next thing I b e ca me aware of was
something happen in g b e hi nd the goals on the pitch.     It
looked to me, I n o t i c e d that o ne of the Officers so far
as I can recall o p e n e d one of the gates and a handful
of people came out, not very many, and they were just
stood there.     They were just st ood on the track.      I
formed the opinion that it was a bit crow de d in there.
It must have b een crowded in there and they were taking
people out of those gates to relocate the m which seemed
to make sense b e c a u s e there was room at the front of
the wing pen.     I wa s anxious that these people walked
along the track a n d got into the p e n in front of the
Control Box.

     There was a Policewoman down b y that gate, b y Gate
2 I think, and she could not see what was happening
even though she w as stood on the track.       She seemed to
be looking along the line of the touchline towards the
South Stand.    We t r i e d calling her several times on the
radio and then re al is ed that she was not one of the
normal track Officers. She was one of the
reinforcements w h o di d not have a radio but there was
an Officer in ci vilian clothes w h o was in the Control
Roo m and he said h e wo ul d go down and tell her and help
her and he went d o w n and she d i d in fact open the gate
and those p eo pl e star te d to be relocated in that
particular pen.

Do you k now when this happened in your recollection,
never m ind about w h a t we can see on videos, was the
match in p l a y b y t h e n already or not? - A. I can't
recall, sir.     I can't recall the mat ch kicking off.   I
didn't, and d idn't notice anything on the field at all
until it was a ct ually stopped.

You are saying in fact that the first time you became
aware of the m at ch was when it was coming to an end? -
A. That was the first time.    I re alised that the match
was taking place.    I realised obvio us ly that it had
started but m y own impression w as that it had only been
playing for about two minutes w he n it stopped.    I did
not take any notice of it at all.

From what you have said it sounds, and perhaps if I
have got this wr on g correct me, wou ld you, that your
attention was first attracted after the opening of the
gates to the centre pens when you noticed people coming
                                                                  6

                                                       B. D. MURRAY

out through the little gates in the front,       is that
right? - A. Yes, sir.

When you were looking at that scene at that point in
time, whatever time that m a y ha v e been, d id you notice
anything else about the centre pen s at that stage - and
this is clearly a question w h i c h m ay tend to
incriminate you? - A. I didn't.       I didn't notice but I
knew it was not unusual at m a t c he s sometimes to
relocate people w h o might be in some discomfort.

Did you see Superintendent G ree nwood? - A. It was when
the activity was taking p l a c e b e h i n d the goal that Mr.
Duckenfield said, "Get Mr. G r e e n w o o d to go round there
and have a look".   Sergeant G o d d a r d actually called him
on the radio and when I looked he was walking from the
tunnel.   I assumed at the time that Sergeant Goddard
had got h old of him and tol d h i m to go round.

So far as you know that call w a s not acknowledged? - A.
I didn't hear it acknowledged, no, sir.

Not every acknowledgement w o u l d be reported to you, of
course, w ou ld it? - A. No, b u t I wo ul d normally hear
them.  I wo ul d normally hear the messages.

I understand.  Did you yourself then go down to have a
look at what was happening? - A. I did.  I went down
first of all to try and stop the game.

At what point was that? - A. I s a w ___

Let us just get this right.  Yo u saw the gate open and
people coming and standing around? - A. Yes, I did.

On the perimeter track? - A. On the perimeter track,
yes.

You noticed the lady Police O f f i ce r who appeared to
need some help? - A. Not to k n o w what was going on,
yes.

You sent the Officer who was de fi nitely in civilian
clothes, is that right? - A. Yes, he was.

Down to go and sort her out? - A. To give her a hand
and to draw attention to what was happening.

You then heard a m essage p a s s e d to Mr. Greenwood and in
any event saw him w alking towards the Leppings Lane
end? ~ A. Yes, I did.
                                                                         7

                                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. You were still in the Control Box at this point? - A.
   Yes, I was.

Q. How long after that did you go down?        Wh a t happened to
   make you decid e to go and stop the m at ch ? - A. By this
   time more and more people were coming on to the track,
   were cli mb in g over the fence, and the track was
   becoming quite thick w ith people.     They wer e actually
   encroaching on to the grass and up to the touchline.              I
   saw Mr. Gree nw oo d and I saw him stood h ea d and
   shoulders above the people that were there and he
   clearly w a v e d to the Control Box, a signal which to me
   meant, stop the game.      I said, "Mr. G r e e n w o o d wants the
   game stopping" and I heard Sergeant Goddard, again who
   is very reactive, pass a message over the radio saying,
   "Stop the game, stop the g a m e ” . I l ooked immediately
   towards the players' tunnel which is wh e r e there is
   always an Inspector or Sergeant standing for such a
   situation.      I could see no movement fr o m there at all.
   It was clear that whoever was there w as not receiving
   our messa ge and I w an ted the match s to ppi ng at that
   stage and I wanted the players off the fi eld and out of
   the way.

Q. At that po i n t had you already seen any casualties as
   far as you can remember? - A. No, sir.     It was just the
   number of p eople that were going on to the grass and
   actually on to the pitch.

Q. At that p o i n t the only people left in t he Control Room,
   would it be right, wo uld be you, Mr. Duckenfield,
   Sergeant Goddard, Ryan and Bichard? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. Because everybody else had been cleared out,          so to
   speak, for various reasons? - A. Yes.

Q. In any event did you go of your own v o l i t i o n to stop
   the g a t e ? ~ A. I started to put my c oat on and grab my
   hat and Mr. Duckenfield suggested "Go dow n and stop it"
   and I went down.      It is not very far from the Control
   Room to the pitch.      I went down there and the linesman
   was running towards me as I got on to the track and I
   actually got hold of him and he just ran, he sort of
   shrugged me off.      He was a big chap a nd ran straight
   pa ssed me.     I think he must have been intent on his
   duties.      He obviously didn't realise w h o h a d got hold
   of h im and as I turned round to follow h i m and did for
   a few p aces I then saw Mr. Greenwood g o i n g on to the
   pitch and he actually went up to the r e f e re e and I went
   straight b ac k to the Control Box.
                                                                   8
                                                        B. D. MURRAY


Q. So what you are saying is that you realised that your
   objective was being achieved? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. By Superintendent Greenwood and you turned round and
   decided to go back to the Control Box.  Did you mean
   anybody en route so far as you remember? - A. N o t that
   I can remember, no, sir.

Q. Back up the stairs? - A. I wen t back up the stairs.      I
   hadn't got undressed.

Q. I am sorry? - A. I didn't take m y coat off or m y hat
   off.  I wen t up.  I cannot recall whether Mr. Jackson
   came in immediately b eh i n d m e or whether he was in
   front of me but he was certainly there.       I was only
   there for a few seconds and Mr. Duckenfield said - by
   this time people were up to the edge of the pena l t y
   area and a bit further - "Go down there and see if you
   can clear the people to the wings and let us find out
   what is happening".

Q. You went? - A. I went back down.

Q. Did you on the way down pause on the steps at all? - A.
   I don't know, sir, but I wouldn't have thought so.  I
   just went straight back down and went on to the pitch.

Q. Where did you    place yourself? - A. I went on to the
   pitch and I started looking for      Officers. As I was
   walking I was    telling people to sort of go down to the
   wings.   As it   got further on to the pitch I realised
   that a lot of people were stunned and appeared dazed.
   They obviously were not out there to spoil the m a t c h or
   anything like that.   They just were standing a r o un d and
   appeared shocked.   I mad e my w a y closer towards the
   goals and as I approached the fence I could then see, I
   got the full realisation, that we had a serious
   problem.   I could see that the gate was covered in
   Police Officers around the gates but I could see that
   away from the gates that some people were trapped and
   they were jammed hard against the fence.      It appeared
   to me that it was pressure behi n d them that was holding
   them there.

      As I h a d left the Control Roo m I had heard PC
  Bichard on V H F asking for an ambulance to be p u t on
  standby and I realised that we had a very serious
  situation and possibly a lot of casualties.     I hadn't
  got m y radio.   I had taken it out of my pocket to set
  when the radio went down.    I wanted a radio.   I wanted
  to get back to the Control Room to tell them what was
  happening, to tell them that we wanted some ambulances.
  I saw a couple of PCs.    Neither of them had radios.    I
                                                         g_L P. MURRAY

then saw a Sergeant and went to him.            I don't kno w who
he was.   I took his radio off him.           I asked Control.
They acknowledged.      Sergeant G o d d a r d acknowledged my
message.    I asked him for a fleet of ambulances down to
the ground.      I could also see that the p e ople at the
back of t h e Leppings Lane terrace were just standing
looking out on to the field.       They obviously h a d no
idea of w h a t was happening.   It was my impression if we
could get them to move back it might take the pressure
off the f r o n t because I thought it was just crowd
pressure that was causing these people to be jammed
against the fence.      I asked for tannoy messages to be
passed on to Leppings Lane to ask the p e ople to move
back.

    I also asked for some b o l t croppers because the
fact that the people were h ard against the fence I
thought tha t if we had bolt croppers we m i g h t have had
a chance to cut the fence.    I think that the Sergeant
whose radio I had taken said, "We have already asked
for croppers" but I can't be sure.     I k now I asked for
bolt croppers but afterwards I found out t hat someone
else had mad e the request as well.




                                 /I sort of stood.
                                                              10

                                                 B. D. MURRAY ‘


   I stood there for a few moments and watched.    I saw
   that people were being treated on the pitch.    I gave
   what help I could to one or two, made sure that
   everyone I could see was getting some h el p from either
   Police Officers or the fans themselves who were also
   doing what they could for the people who were injured.

   I could see that there was no movement at all still at
   Leppings Lane.  I asked again on the radio, "Will you
   pass tannoy messages to the rear of Leppings Lane?
   Tell people to move back up the terrace and just
   keeping passing them".  Again, I did what I could on
   the pitch and I realised that people were not moving
   back and no one was taking any notice, so I decided
   that I would have to go round the back and see if we
   could get them to move from the back of the terrace
   itself.

Q. You have told me you asked for the tannoy messages.
   Can you recollect actually hearing them yourself? - A.
   I can't, sir.  I can't recollect that.

Q. You decided to go round the back? - A. Yes,   I did.

Q. Which way did you go round the back?  Wh i c h route did
   you use? - A. I went up the steps by the Control Box,
   on the South Stand.

Q. So you came back and then went round by the south side?
   - A. Yes, and round the south side.

Q. That takes you, of course, into the concourse area in
   the first instance? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got into the concourse area, at that point,
   anything happening in there as far as you can remember?
   - A. I don't recall seeing anything in the concourse
   area, apart from a few people.  Nothing at all stuck in
   my mind.  I made my way into the tunnel and there was
   an Inspector and one or two Officers there and a number
   of people in the tunnel, just standing there.  I spoke
   to the Inspector and he said, "We've got them all out".
   I don't know what he meant but he said, "We've got them
   all out", but together we cleared the remaining people
   who were in the tunnel out of the way and I then got to
   the terraces and I have this picture that I looked
   down, although I have been a bit confused on this
   because of the video I have seen, I looked down and I
   could see that Officers were working, a lot of Officers
   were inside the pen and were working and it was clear
   at the front.  I then realised that there was no
   pressure; if there had been pressure it had been
   removed, and there was no necessity to try and get that
   terrace to empty.
                                                                       11

                                                      B. D. MURRAY


Q. Have you been able to identify the Inspector you spoke
   to, can you remember that? - A. No, sir.

Q.    We have heard of at least two Inspectors who told us
     they were in the tunnel and if I name them to you can
     you just tell me whether you would know them, never
     mind whether these were the ones that you saw? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Do you kno w Inspector Sykes? - A. Yes,     I know Inspector
   Sykes.

Q. You would recognise him if you saw him? - A. Yes,           I
   know him very well.

Q. What about Inspector Bullas? - A. I did not know
   Inspector Bullas.  When I say I don't know which
   Inspector it was, I don't mean it was an Inspector I
   did not know, I just cannot recall which Inspector it
   was.

Q.    The purpose of my enquiry is to try and establish
     approximately what time that might have been because
     sometimes you can link it up, but you are saying there
     is no way in w h i c h you can say which Inspector it was
     that you saw? - A. I don't know which Inspector it was.

Q. Have I understood you correctly to say that by the time
   you actually got onto the terracing, whatever might
   have been happening in the tunnel, your recollection
   seems to be that there was already space in the front?
   - A. There was.

Q. Are we talking about pen 3 or pen 4? - A. I don't know
   which pen it was.  The picture I had was of people hard
   against the fence.  There was no realisation in my mind
   at that time of the terrible consequences in pen 3.  I
   had a picture of people trapped, and trapped because
   there was something behind that was holding them
   against the fence.  As soon as I saw that the fence
   itself was reasonably clear and that there were
   Officers behind it, I then ....

Q.    When you say behind it, you mean on the pitch    side?       -
     A. No, I mean on the terrace side.

Q.    This is when you were viewing it from the tunnel end,
     you are talking about? - A. Yes.

Q. So this is really the point I am trying to get at:   are
   you saying that by the time you got to the tunnel exit,
   when you were looking at the pen from the back, that
   however they had got there, and whoever had taken them
   in, there were Officers already within .... - A.
                                                                  12

                                                     B. D. MURRAY’


     Officers were already on the terrace within the pen and
     were working on the pen side of the fence.

Q. So it is right that what you are saying is that you
   were definitely not the first Officer at the back
   there? - A. No, sir.

Q. Having seen that you  then retraced your steps,       I
   believe? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you then go back to the Control Room? - A.
   Eventually I went back.   I went onto the pitch first          of
   all; I eventually went b ack to the Control Room.

Q. What did you do on the pitch? - A. I wanted to make
   some contact points for the Chief Superintendent
   upstairs and I established someone at the Kop end,the
   North Stand end, and   actually sent a serial over to the
   South Stand end.

Q. When you were standing looking at the terraces from the
   rear do you remember w h e t h er you could see the
   ambulance on the track? - A. I don't think so.

Q. When you got back onto the pitch, was it there by then
   or not? - A. I don't recall seeing the ambulance until
   I was back in the Control Room.

Q.    In fact, you then did go back to the Control Room.
     What time did you get back to the Control Room, as far
     as you know? - A. I would think it would be after half-
     past-3.

Q. After half-past-3? - A. After half-past-3, yes.

Q. So it is right then, isn't it, that from the moment
   when you left the Control Box to stop the match, apart
   from a very short interval, you were not in it at all?
   - A. No, sir.

Q.   That is right,   isn't it? -   A. Yes, it is.

Q.    Until after half-past-3? -    A. Until after I went back,
     yes.




                   Q. If you could just help ....
                                                                              13

                                                                  B. D. MURRAY


     Q‘    t L t 0U S?“ld Just heJP “e - there is one final point on
           that.      Whe n you got back at about h a l f - Dast 3 or
           stillV i^ t h« Wr S *i-aPf ri fr °m yo u r s e l f wl»o else was
                     the Control Box at that timp? - a
           operators1"     ^kV T                        « * ^ r ^ n t r ol
           immediately I got in M r . S c K S f l l V S S S t a ^ S ' f o ! , ,
           to see the Directors and I took over In there: Inf M?
           Jackson went out shortly afterwards.          I do not think "
           there was anyone else in there at that U m o              .nu      u
           people did cSme In from t i « ” o                         alth°“*h

 Q.        Can y o u just have a look at this.          Can we Dut ud th*
          Box?atT h i s 1 ?IJ 1 ^hlnk, has been Prepared of the Control
          Box?    This is not a photograph.       I will pass you nv
          copy because it will be easier for you to look at
          Can y o u just look at it.       Take your time.  I do not
          know w h e t h e r you have ever seen this, have you? - A.
          No, I have not.                                   *        *

 Q*       tii 1»«,1S supp°sed to be 18 « drawing of the Control
          or l'p«a °PP°sed to a photograph of it.  Does that more
          or less represent it? - A. Yes, it looks about right!

                T H E CORONER: We will give it a C number then.

                MR.    BEECHEY:   The C number, sir, is C532.

          rnrfrfaJJP W IT * ESS: ,The m a P is in front of Sergeant
          Goddard us u a l l y and not where it is shown there.

Q*        conv I n f C0R0NER;     W i e r e is the map?  You have got my
                     I 7 e? ® s4arewnot          enough to read the word
          elevation^*                     °n th® t0p left of the Plan

               T H E CORONER: Hand these out. We will give you a
          copy of these.                              s    7 u a
Q.        On the drawing it is shown opposite you? - A. It is
          SSS : ai i ? f f n ° f tb2 Sergeant because he actually
          about on J h f l ! t0#S for the seri®ls and pushes them
          about o n the map in front of him as he deploys them.
Q.
          they^are^slr?           ab°Te y°U' are the)r not? * A- Ye»
Q.    How m an y are there? - A. There are five monitors and
      then there are two which record.

      .. . M B C ° H ° NE R ; Mr. Payne, this is just simply so
      that we have a drawing as opposed to a photograph
      Just leave it by you in case we need it.
                                                                         14

                                                           B. D. MURRAY

                       Cross-Examined by MR. PA YN E?

 Q.       Superintendent Murray, the Jury last week asked a
          question about the de-briefing following the 1988
          semi-fin*1 , and I would like to start just by
          following up that point a little, please.          Following
          that event, which took place on 9th April 1988, did
          you liaise
               ---------wit h those who
                         -----        w w v were responsible
                                            wcic i csponsi   for the
          various aspects
          various  annpcl-a of rtf the event? - A. Yes.          uue

 Q.    Did you obtain reports       from a large number    of sources?
       *"   Y g s sir*

 Q.   You read all those reports and eventually did you
      prepare yourself a summary of the main points that
      came out of it for you to deliver to Chief
      Superintendent Mole? - A. Yes sir.  There was very
      little on the briefing sheets.  The main observations
      were my own.

 Q.   I would like you to look at the document, please, then
      in which you made that report.  (Handed)  Can vou
      identify your signature? - A. Yes“ sir.

Q*            a ,««52randum from yourself to Mr. Mole dated
      14th May 1988? - A. Yes it is, sir.

Q.    Summarising the results of the various de-briefing
      exercises? - A. Yes it is.

      a*       P^ YNE: 1 wonder if copies of this can be
      distributed, please. (H a n d e d )

      C533 M R * BEECHEY:      The c number for this document is


Q*         MR. PAYNE:  Mr. Murray, I am just going to ask
      you to go through this, so that the Jury have the
      picture, but can I just preface it by asking you these
      two questions.  Of course, this document was prepared
      before you had any idea of the disaster which was
      going to take place the following year? - A. Of
      course.

Q.    Obviously and the second obvious point is that it was
      prepared for Chief Superintendent Mole as a report
      certainly not with any v ie w to it being used in
      subsequent proceedings? - A. No sir.    I think these
      ar® Points which were relevant to other Departments
      outside the Division.

Q.    So it was not intended for publication beyond Mr.
      Mole? - A. No sir.
                                                             15
                                                   B. D. MURRAY

Q*   I think perhaps it would be more convenient if I read
     J-t. Did you say:

           I refer to the enclosed correspondence regarding
          the above event"?                         6  8

     If necessary, we have got the enclosed correspondence
     here and it consists of a batch of memoranda passing
     between various Officers, summarising   their
     observations on    the event? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is   what you   were referring to? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you   say:

          "I have liaised with the Officers concerned with
          the preparation, control and supervision of the
          above event and we have noted locally the lessons
          that were learned and the improvements that can
          be made for any similar future event"?

     Of course, at that time, interposing, you did not know
     tnat there was going to be another event next year? -
     A. No sir.

Q.        "Generally I was well satisfied with the event
          and I will confine this report to matters which
          affect the Force Operations Room and Road Traffic
          Department.

         COMMUNICATIONS

            the d a y more use than normal was made of the
         radio link between ground control at Hillsborough
         and the Operations Room in attempting to contact
         those units equipped with both ground control and
         UHF radio.    This was entirely due to difficulties
         in personal radio transmissions which were
         affected for most of the event by breakthrough
         from local radio.    The Superintendent
         (Communications) is aware of this and an
         immediate survey of the equipment was made after
         the event, but the fault could not be traced.

         TRAFFIC FLO W AND CONTROL

         Transmissions in relation to problems with
         traffic, from mobile units and the spotter plane
         were being received at Operations Room and were
         not monitored at ground control.  It seems
         sensible to me that for future 'semis' all
         matters relating to the control and movement of
                 should be supervised by Operations Room,
         with the exception of the local arrangements made
                                                        16

                                              B. D. MURRAY

      immediately outside the ground when the final
      whistle is blown.

     FOOTBALL TRAFFIC SIGNS

     Purpose made signs have been requested in the
     past, but for financial, reasons have not been
     approved.  Such signs are extremely beneficial
     and it is pleasing to note that Superintendent
     Brougham is looking into this aspect.

     SEARCHING OF COACHES FOR ALCOHOL ABUSE ETC.

     The effect of alcohol on football supporters is
     well known and I w ou l d not wish to see any
     relaxation of enforcement of the laws relating to
     the carriage of alcohol on coaches etc.     It is
     appreciated that this can cause some traffic
     congestion, but surveys are being carried out on
     the major roads a p proaching the city to establish
     where this can be carried out to cause m i n i m u m
     inconvenience to traffic flows.

     CLOSE CIRCUIT TV L INK W I T H WADSLEY BRIDGE STATION

     A TV monitor was sited in the control room giving
     pictures from Wadsley Bridge Railway Station.
     This monitor took u p valuable room in the control
     area and was of little use and I would not wish
     such a system to be implemented in the future."

That is your signature, is it, Mr. Murray, at the
bottom? - A. Yes sir.




                                /Q. Are those the
                                                             17

                                                    B.’ D.MURRAY '


Q. Are those the matters which you felt worthy of recording
   after the event and after the briefings which you had
   received from other Officers? - A. They were the matters
   that really a f f ected other departments, other than the
   sub-division.      I think I have already said there that
   apart from the local lessons, there were also these we
   should address our minds to.

Q. I want to ask you a series of questions.   First as to
   the state of mind of yourself before the disaster.   Do
   you follow?   We are going back now to put yourself in
   the frame of mind you were immediately before the
   terrible event took place.  Did you believe at that time
   that the ground was safe to be used for its full
   certified capacity? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you believe that in the event of an emergency on the
   Leppings Lane terrace, that terrace could be safely
   evacuated? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Following the 1987 semi-final and the 1988 semi-final,
   were you aware of any report having been made by anyone,
   meaning from the Officer Working Party or the ground
   safety engineer, or either of the football clubs who
   attended, or their management, were you aware of any
   report from those people to warn you of the risk of
   serious overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. Did anyone from that group of people or the Football
   Association or anyone else, make any adverse comment
   about the system of policing which was used in 1987 and
   1988? - A. Not that I am aware of, sir.

Q. Likewise, after those semi-finals or at any time before
   the disaster were you aware of any criticism being made
   by any of those people to the effect that the layout of
   the ground was not safe? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you yourself believe that the policing system which
   had been used in 1987 and 1988 had produced a successful
   result? - A. I had certainly seen it in 1988 and yes, it
   was successful*

Q.    Did you believe it was safe to follow the same system in
     1989? - A. I think itw a s obvious to follow the same
     system because of the authors of it.

Q.    Now come to the event itself please.   At the time of the
     first order of the opening of the gates, which included
     the opening of Gate C, at that time was it obvious to you
     there was a risk of injury by crushing to people in pens
     3 and 4? - A. I think what I had to do was rely on the
     experience of the Officers who were out there.   There
                                                                     18

                                                             B. D.MURRAY '


   was Superintendent Marshall.     T h e r e were also Officers
   who policed that area of L e ppings L a n e every week, every
   match.   I could not see what was happening.         I had to
   take heed of their demands, their advice and their
   requirements and that is what I did.

Q. From your position in the Control Room, wit h the view you
   had from the Control Room, and the television screens you
   had within the room, was it ob v i o u s to you there was a
   risk of injury to people  in those pens at that time? - A.
   In pens 3 and 4?

Q. Yes,   at the time of the o p e n i n g of the gates? - A. No.

Q. Here is a question which I hav e to ask you: were you
   indifferent to the risk of injury to people in pens 3 and
   4? - A. Absolutely not, sir, no.

Q. One last matter of fact, please.    W i t h i n the Control Box
   one of the screens showed you a vie w of the Leppings Lane
   approach and Leppings Lan e turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You have been asked about w h e t h e r you saw certain
   Inspectors at a later stage when, after the disaster had
   taken place, you went round to the bac k of the stand to
   try and h elp relieve the p r e s s u r e from the back.   I want
   to ask you about those Inspectors at a slightly earlier
   stage, at a time before the gates wer e ordered to be
   opened.    Did you see at that time outside the ground a
   number of Inspectors who were a t t e mp t i n g to deal with the
   congestion that had built up? -A. I do not think I saw
   any particular Officer who I co u ld identify outside the
   ground.

        MR. ISAACS:        Do you want to pause now, sir, before
   I start?

          THE CORONER:      Yes, very well.

                         (Short a d j o u r n m e n t )

                 Cross-Examined by MR.             ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Murray, I would like to ask you questions and split
   up the questions I am going to ask you into a number of
   sections in the way that Mr. Pa y n e has been doing
   throughout the course of these Inquests.      If I could
   start off w i t h your experience, please, and particularly
   your experience of controlling football games at
   Hillsborough.      You told us you started a few weeks
   before the 1988 semi-final? -A. T h a t is correct.

Q. You started there in the Control Box? - A. Yes, I did.
                                                             19

                                                    B. D.MURRAY


Q. You did not have many games before the 1988 final? - A.
   Two,

Q. Was anybody in the Control Box w i t h you on those
   occasions? - A. Ap a r t from the regular Control Room staff
   I don't think so, sir.

Q. For the semi-final itself you tell us that Mr. Calvert
   was there? - A. Yes, he was.

Q. Why was that? - A. I presume Mr. Mole had asked Inspector
   Calvert to work w i t h me because he knew the ground and
   the system and had b een there many years.

Q. So to give you some assistance, recognising that you were
   perhaps at that stage somewhat short on experience? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Was Mr. Calvert on that occasion of some assistance to
   you? - A. As far as I can recall, yes.

Q. We know that was an all-ticket game? - A. Yes.

Q. Between then and the 1989 semi-final were there other
   all-ticket games, as far as you can recall? - A. There
   were none.

Q. However, there were, I assume, a number of large capacity
   games? - A. There w e r e games, I think, with 30,000-plus.

Q. Could you help us approximately h o w many games there may
   have been with 30,000-plus that you were in the Control
   Room for? - A. It is purely a guess but I would think
   perhaps three or four.

Q. On every game that you were in the Control Room for,
   between 1988 and 1989 semi-finals, it would be unlikely
   that Mr. Mole would b e in the Control Room on those
   occasions when he was in fact overall Commander? - A. He
   did not take up a position permanently.    He always came
   up from time to time.

Q. But not in the textbook position as you have described
   Mr. D u ckenfield1s posit io n in 1989? - A. No, sir.

Q. W e kno w there were a number of games when he did not
   attend the match at all?     He left it entirely to you? -
   A. I think there were about three or four, perhaps.

Q. So far as the role you wer e playing was concerned,
   according to Mr. Mole it did not change even whe n he was
   there because you wo u l d still have the responsibility for
   making various o perational decisions? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.
                                                                    20
                                                           B. P. MURRAY

Q. As long as your decisions were within your operational
   responsibility you w o u l d not need, even if he was
   there, to go b ack to h i m to ask his p e r m ission to do
   something? - A. No.

Q. One of the things tha t you w o u l d have responsibility
   for doing and the a bility to d o without asking his
   permission was to m o v e men fro m one place to another as
   you felt fit? - A. Yes.

Q. I think Mr. Mole in his evidence, in answer to the
   Coroner, d escribed w hat he took to be your relative
   responsibilities in the context of a m a j o r decision
   which if he was there you w o u l d not be able to make
   yourself and which you w o u l d hav e to defer to him, for
   example, an evacuation on a b o m b scare? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you here when he gave that evidence? - A. I can't
   recall it.

Q. Let me try and r emind you of it.    What he said
   effectively was this? "I, Mr. Mole, would be the one to
   mak e the decision as to whether to evacuate, the major
   decision, b u t then I would leave it up to Mr. Murray or
   whoever was taking Mr. Murray's job at that time who
   would then take consequential decisions".     Do you
   follow w h a t I mean? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. Do you agree wit h that? - A. Yes,     I do.

Q. That is something t hat he w o u l d expect to be able to
   do? - A. Yes.

Q. Come 1989 you were involved in the Operational Order
   a n d the preparation of it? - A. Yes.

Q. We have seen today the mem o that was p r o d u c e d C.533? -
   A. Yes.

Q. The one that Mr. Payne has just p u t to you.       Can you
   h elp me, Mr. Murray, why was it you who p r e pa r e d this
   m e m o to Mr. Mole? - A. I don't recall preparing it
   actually b u t I did.   It has o b viously got m y signature
   on.     It was just problems that I h a d identified in this
   particular m e m o that were not addre s s e d to Officers of
   m y Subdivision working the m a t c h b u t were addressed to
   other agencies such as the R o a d Traffic Division, the
   Operations Room, the Communications Officer.

Q. I am sorry, the question was a p o o r one.   I d i d not
   really mean what was the purpose of the m emo b ut why
   was it you w h o was the Officer w h o was actually sending
   this memo?   W h y you as opposed to one of the other
                                                                .   '   21

                                                            B. D. MURRAY


     Officers, for example, Mr. Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, or
     Mr. Chapman, or w h o e v e r other Officer was on duty as a
     Superintendent on the day in 1988? - A. The ground was
     on my Subdivision.      The Liaison Officer was one of my
     Officers.  The debrief sheets and the information w ou l d
     come into our central office.

Q. So you h a d this role w h i c h was, as it were, directly
   responsible to Mr. Mole, w o u l d that be fair, for these
   matters? - A. For o r d i n a r y matches, yes. For ordinary
   matches I would look on myse l f as Mr. Mole's deputy.
   For a Semi Final I think it was somewhat different.

Q. You say I think in this m e m o that you were satisfied:

         "Generally I was well sati s f i e d w i t h the
         event."

     and you go on under traffic flo w and control:

         "It seemed sensible to me."

     Here you were giving advice to Mr. Mole as to your
     findings following the observations that had been made
     to you and your v i e w of the event? - A. Yes, that is
     fair.

Q. Superintendent, when Mr. M o l e effectively agreed to the
   carrying out of the 1989 game, he asked you to liaise
   once again with the p l anning team? - A. Yes.

Q. Why was that? - A. When I say he asked us, he saw us
   altogether.  He saw us altogether and said, "We will go
   ahead as last year".

Q.   So what part did you p l a y in the planning of the event?
     - A. I overlooked the order. I sort      of examined it
     when it h a d been prepared.

Q. You examined it in the light of your experience of
   1988, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. A n d your experience of controlling football games at
   Hillsborough from 1988 t hrough to 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. Both those where Mr. Mole h a d b e e n on the scene and
   those where you h a d been controlling the game
   completely b y yourself? - A. Yes.

Q.   You were happy with it? - A. Yes.
                                                                   22
                                                         B. D. MURRAY


Q. You w er e aware, I assume, or you beca me aware that Mr.
   D u ck en fi el d was going to take Mr. Mole's job on the
   D ivision? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. One of the consequences of that meant t hat he w o u l d be
   the Chief Superintendent in overall c ontrol on the date
   of the Semi Final? - A. Yes.

Q. It is important not to forget that, of course, being
   the Chief Superintendent for the Division it means a
   lot mo r e than m er el y being in control for a football
   game? - A. Very m u c h so, yes.

Q. You were also aware at that time that unlike Mr. Mole
   he d id not have years of experience of policing
   Hillsborough? - A. He certainly didn't have the recent
   experience that Mr. Mole had.

Q. A nd c ertainly not as an overall Commander? - A. No.

Q. You w er e aware that the expertise of yourself, Mr.
   Greenwood, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Chapman, a n d indeed the
   Inspectors under you were so far as Mr. Mol e were
   concerned, a very important par t of the operational
   plan.    That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, I am sure.
   It is v ery mu c h a team effort.

Q. Anything that Mr. Duckenfield lacked in experience
   could hopefully be made up for b y the exceptional
   experience in the team that he h a d w orking w ith him? -
   A. Yes.

Q. In 1989 you were the Control Roo m Commander,     if I can
   put it that way? - A. Yes.

Q. How w o u l d you describe your role so far as your
   relationship wit h Mr. Duckenfield was c o nc er ne d then? -
   A. I saw m y role as being sort of m on itoring the event
   as a whole, being responsible for the reception and the
   transmission of all radio communications a nd saw myself
   as adviser to Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. Because there wo u l d from time to time n o doubt be
   decisions that he might have to make w h i c h would
   require your advice bas ed on your experience? - A. I
   feel t hat is fair, yes.

Q. Just as wi t h Mr. Mole you would and could make
   decisions w hi ch were within your responsibility without
   referring them to Mr. Duckenfield, if t he r e came a
   decision that Mr. Duckenfield h ad to mak e whi ch was not
   within your responsibility you, once again, would be
   able to mak e consequential decisions.   Do you follow
                                                                   2-3

                                                          B. D. MURRAY

    what I mean b y that? - A. Yes, from time to time.
    Decisions are being made all of the time.    Some of them
    it would be necessary per ha ps to refer afterwards to
    the match Commander for his information.    Occasionally
    a decision w ou ld be necessary to refer to before it was
    made to the ma tc h Commander.

Q. Those sort of decisions, for example, wou ld be a
   decision to delay the kick-off? - A. I think so.

Q. One where you wo u l d expect to have considerable input?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You would expect your v i e w to be listened to very
   carefully indeed? - A. Yes.

Q. Similarly any other decision w hi ch went outside the
   terms of the Operational Order? - A. I think those
   decisions and those that obviously were coming fr o m a
   Sector Commander, if a Su pe rintendent on the ground,
   all of whom were senior to me and were more experienced
   than I was probably, were to ask for a particular
   course of action to be taken, I don't think it w o u l d be
   my decision to overrule th e m or to agree with them.

Q. Save for this;  let us just take the closure of
   Leppings Lane to traffic? - A. Yes.

Q. That was one that was    taken effectively by Mr.
   Marshall.  He was not    as king for permission to do that,
   as I understand it? -    A. No, he was saying, "We have
   got to close Leppings    Lane".

Q. As a result he puts the m e s s a g e through to Control and
   you take the necessary steps? - A. That is right.

Q. Because that was something that was within his sphere
   of operational responsibility? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I ask you about the event?      We have heard you tell
   us where Mr. Duckenfield was.      Fro m your recollection,
   a n d if we look at the plan that was produced, 532, the
   only sensible available space to h im wo ul d b e wh er e you
   said that you recall him b e i n g which was alongside
   Police Constable Bichard? - A. Yes, I cannot recall
   where he was for different times, I have no idea, but
   it would be reasonable for h i m to be, if I can look at
   this plan, from time to t im e where it says "bins and
   buckets", where it says "a fire extinguisher" and
   actually behind that standing next to PC Bichard.

Q. A r ou nd that area? - A. Yes.
                                                                        24

                                                               p. m t o a y


Q. At half p as t two, Mr. Murray, there was conversation
   between the two of you as to whether you w o u l d get the
   crowd in? - A. Yes.

Q.    Would it be fair to say that that was a conversation
     that was ve r y largely o ne of routine? - A. I think so.

Q.    The sort of thing that w o u l d b e said at most games,
     "Well, Bernard" - and I do not know whether he ca lled
     you Bernard - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps in front of the other men he c alled you
   Superintendent Murray, I do not know? - A. No, he would
   call me b y my Christian name.

Q. "Do you think we are going to get them in?" - A. Yes.

Q. That sort of question w o u l d not suggest to you, wo ul d
   it, that there was Mr. P u c k e n fi el d concerned at that
   time as to whether he w o u l d g et the m in but it w o u l d be
   a routine sort of matter that wo u l d be discussed? - A.
   Yes, I think I was looking at the cr ow d and I co ul d see
   the size of the crowd.    I think I said to h i m as a
   matter of course, "There is a g o o d c r o w d out there but
   we will get them in for three o'clock".

Q.   In fairness,   Mr. Murray, as be tw ee n the two of you, you
     were the m a n who h a d the experience over a year or so
     of the likelihood or the speed at wh ic h you wo ul d get a
     crowd in for three o'clock? - A. Yes.

Q. In those circumstances Mr. Puckenf ie l d wo ul d have been
   very foolish, would he not, to be saying to you,
   "Pespite you r experience I thi nk you are wrong"? - A.
   Possibly.

Q.    In any event,  you certainly d i d not see any reason to
     be concerned   at about the time that conversation took
     place? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Similarly there was a c o nv ersation about delaying the
   kick-off? - A. Yes.




                                         /Q. Again the sort of.
                                                            25

                                               B. D. MURRAY'


Q. Again, the sort of conversation as between Controller
   and overall Commander w hi c h may well be regarded as
   routine? - A. Yes.

Q. Especially in circumstances where the overall Commander
   has not been  doing the job very long? - A. Yes.

Q. "Just remind  me, Bernard, of the way we do these sort
   of things"? - A. That is right.

Q. It was not a case, was it, of there being any real
   consideration at that time towards delaying the kick-
   off at about half-past-2?  It just wasn't arising? - A.
   I don't think the question had arisen then.  I think it
   was probably a mind crossing exercise of getting it
   right in his mind as to what we had said.

Q. What you were saying was no different from what you
   understood the position wo ul d be under Mr. Mole? - A.
   It was the criteria, if you like, that I had inherited
   from Mr. Mole or asked Mr. Mole about.

Q. But there was no doubt between the two of you that if
   those criteria required safety to be taken into
   account, the safety of people either within or outwith
   the Ground, then that would play a very important part
   in any decision that was going to be made? - A. There
   were not any rules.  There was nothing written down, or
   nothing that had to be adhered to; it was just what we
   had discussed and what we had agreed.

Q. Just so that there is no misunderstanding about this,
   so that no one thinks there was any rigid rule, what
   you seemed to have been discussing at that stage was a
   situation where, forgetting any questions of safety,
   the only matter was whether people would be able to get
   in on time to see the game, and in those circumstances,
   if it was their own fault, then in a way tough luck.
   If it wasn't then other considerations may apply
   towards delaying the kick-off, but considerations of
   safety weren't entering into that particular balance,
   were they, at that stage? - A. Not at that stage.   It
   seemed sensible that if people could not get to the
   event the kick-off would be delayed.

Q. Certainly at that stage there was nothing that was
   being reported to you, and therefore to Mr.
   Duckenfield, from outside wh ic h suggested that there
   would be any risk to any fan or member of the public,
   so far as safety was concerned? - A. No.

Q. It became very clear if I may say so, Mr. Murray,
   during the course of your evidence, that the crisis
                                                             26

                                                  B. D. MURRAY'


   situation came upon the Control Box very suddenly.       Now
   would that be right? - A. I am sure it was, yes.

Q. Had Mr. Marshall, before he made the request for
   reinforcements, so to speak, made clear to you what
   difficulties he was experiencing, or did that come out
   of the blue? - A. We could see obviously from the
   Control Room that there was a large crowd of people in
   the Leppings Lane.

Q. Yes, but that is what you would expect? - A. But the
   fact that people were in great distress did come as a
   surprise.

Q. Yes.  There is all the difference in the world between,
   let us call it a public order situation where you
   expect the Commander outside to be dealing w i t h it, and
   a situation w h e r e he is telling you, "People are going
   to die out here".      Would you agree with that? - A.
   Absolutely.

Q. Between his first request for reinforcements and the
   first request that the gates be opened, there was this,
   I was going to say difficulty, more than difficulty - I
   am not sure h o w you d escribed it first of all, but the
   problem wit h the radios? - A. Yes, the p roblem with the
   radio, I think I described it as devastating, which it
   was.

Q. That was the w o r d I was looking for.  Could we just go
   through why it was devastating?     First of all, radio
   traffic was d isrupted for a period? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. That meant that people who just had normal messages to
   pass to you, nev e r mind emergency messages, could not
   get through? - A. Well, certainly we couldn't answer
   anybody.  The main one was that we could not answer
   anyone and anyone who called up would get no
   acknowledgments, and so would probably cal l again and
   again, and the air would very quickly become congested.

Q. And what was happening when the air became congested -
   so five or six Officers were sending messages through
   at the same time? - A. Yes.

Q. What sort of n oi s e would that create with i n the Control
   Room? - A. It is not so m u c h the noise, it is the
   distortion.   It is bits of a message w o u l d get through
   and bits of a nother message would get through.

Q. That is what you meant, so you are getting bits and
   pieces which make no sense at all? - A. Yes.
                                                         27

                                               B. D. MURRAY‘


Q* This, of course, is distr a ct i n g to those inside the
   Control Room, but in addition there was a disruption in
   the facility to actually send messages out once the
   thing had been halfway fixed, as I understand it? - A.
   Yes.  It was fixed, was the idea, but it wasn't.       It
   still didn't work after it had been fixed the first
   time.

Q. So we then move from being able to use the proper
   equipment.   You have got the standby equipment and then
   that has to be rejected, and you are on a hand held
   radio, the same as any of the ordinary PCs who may have
   had one? - A. That is correct.   I think one cannot
   under-estimate the actual physical effect in the
   Control Room when everyone has to move, and the radio
   operator has to get under the desk.   In fact, I think
   that Sergeant Goddard finished up in my chair and I
   finished up standing behind P.C. Ryan, as a result of
   the disruption.

Q. What is the disadvantage - it may be obvious- of the
   Control Box only being able to use the same hand held
   radio as the ordinary serial? - A. When we have the
   proper powered set, we can override, in theory, anyone
   else who is transmitting a message, so if we want to
   send an urgent message out and someone else is
   transmitting in, our signal will override their signal
   to the person that we want to receive it.  If we are in
   the situation of using the hand held radios, then
   everyone is competing for the same signal; we may lose
   out to other stations.

Q. We then, as I understand it, get a message coming
   through from Mr. Marshall, the first set, for the gates
   to be opened? - A. Yes.

Q. You told the Coroner, albeit that it was out of
   sequence, that at that time Mr. Bichard saw that the
   gate had, in fact, been opened.  Let's not worry about
   how it was opened for the moment, but just at the time
   when Mr. Marshall's message - request - was coming
   through, he saw on the video, on the screen, the gate
   opening? - A. It was after.  It must have been after.
   I can only assume, and I don't want to assume, but for
   some reason P.C. Bichard zeroed in, if you like, on
   that particular gate.  It was after the first request
   had come in and I heard him say, "The gate's gone", or
   "The gate's burst".

Q. I think that was it, "The gate's burst".  So what we
   have is this, there is a request from Mr. Marshall
   asking for the gate to open which came out of the blue?
   - A. Yes.
                                                           28

                                                 B. D. MURRAY '


Q. Because that was a request which was wholly contrary to
   the policy or the practice of policing a football game?
   - A. It was a unique request.  We had mad e tannoy
   messages and sent resources round and extra horses, but
   the request for the gate to be opened was unheard of.

Q. It had changed from a public order situation outside to
   something completely different? - A. It had changed to
   a life or d e a t h situation outside.

Q. A short time thereafter, and it would appear to be a
   matter of seconds more than anything else from what you
   are saying, P.C. Bichard sees the gates burst open? -
   A. I honestly don't know the timescale, sir, but after
   the first request had come in.

Q. Up to the time when the gate is seen to burst open no
   decision has been made, that is quite right, that is
   correct, isn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. After the gate burst open the   situation seems to be
   retrieved in that, as we have   seen on the video, a
   mounted Police Officer comes,   closes off the inflow of
   people, and the gate is shut?   - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

Q. May I ask you this, at that stage did it go through
   your mind, "Well, at least we don't have to make the
   decision as to whether to open the gate or not now,
   because it is quite clear that the gate doesn't need
   opening, otherwise the situation would not have been
   retrieved in the way it has.  Mr. Marshall wouldn't
   have organised the closure of the gate".  Did anything
   like that go through your mind? - A. I don't know, sir.

Q. Certainly that may well have appeared to be the case,
   may it not?  Request to open the gate, gate opens, but
   Officer on the spot actually causes the gate to be
   closed, suggesting that whatever had required the gate
   to be opened in the first place had passed? - A. That
   is a possibility.

Q. But then in the midst of the mayhem that you have been
   describing in the Control Room wit h the radio, Mr.
   Marshall's request comes again? - A. Yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say that on this occasion it wasn't
   so much of a request as an order? - A. To me the final
   one was a demand.

Q. And it sounded desperate? - A. There was no
   alternative.
                                                             29

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. Did you feel that you had any time to delay? - A. Not
   after that last request.  I felt we had to do something
   there and then.

Q. That was b e c a us e people, he said, were going to be
   killed unless it was done? - A. Yes.

Q. You said to the Coroner, I think on Friday, "My own
   decision was that we had no more time"? - A. Yes.

Q. But again you were aware that it was a decision which
   was unprecedented so far as policing a football game
   was concerned? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield did not make a decision immediately,
   did he?  A matter of a number of seconds passed - I say
   seconds, as opposed to minutes. - A. Yes, as far as I
   can recall.

Q. Do you recall this, that you asked him on two, perhaps
   three, occasions,  Mr. Duckenfield, are we going to
   open the gates?" - something like that? - A. I
   certainly asked him, yes.

Q. And on the third occasion, I suggest, he then agreed
   and said, "We must open the gates", or words to that
   effect? - A. I don't recall asking him several times.

Q. Are you saying only once or are you saying it could be
   two or three times? - A. I feel it was only once.




           Q. Very well.   Had he not
                                                                      30

                                                          D. B. MURRAY


       hffy        ? a<* 116 not ® at*e that decision, you would
       have made it? - A. I don't know, I can o n i y ^ p e c S l a t e .

 Q.    In a way, it was fortunate that it was not Mr. Mole
       who was in command on that day because Mr. Mole could
       have been anywhere? - A. If the match Ground Commander
       had not been in the Control Room, I would have asked
       him to attend there.

 Q.   And with the radio difficulties?         - A. It is very
       likely that we couldn't have got        hold of him.

 Q.   Superintendent Murray, I certainly am not going to be
       criticising anybody for the decision to open the
       gates.  Mr. Duckenfield was the one w h o gave the order
       and, apart from Mrs. McBrien, I have not heard anybody
       actually at this Inquest criticise the opening of the
      gates.   Had you, being there listening to the decision
      being made to open the gates, considered - and we know
      you did not consider it because you have answered Mr.
      Payne s question - that there was any serious risk to
      the fans on the Leppings Lane terrace as a result of
      the decision to open the gates, would you have done
      something about it? - A. I am sorry, I lost you half­
      way through the question.

Q.    Let me try and explain it again.      You told Mr. Payne
      that you did not consider that there was any risk of
      injury to those in the central pens as a result of
      opening the gates? - A. Yes, I d i d n ’t think about that
      at all.

Q.    You told him, and I accept it unequivocally, that you
      were not indifferent to any risk of injury to those
      people.  What I am asking you is this.  Had you
      considered that there was a risk to the people on the
      Leppings Lane terrace in Pens 3 and 4 as a result of
      the decision to open the gates, what would you have
      done? - A.  Of course I hadn't considered it.

Q.    You would have done something about it, would you n o t ’
      - A. One moment, sir.

           THE CORONER: Take your time.

           THE WITNESS:     Of course.

Q*         MR. ISAACS:  Of course you would have done
      something about it. - A. Yes.

Q.    Are you all right? - A.      Yes.
                                                                        31

                                                          D. B. MURRAY

               MR.
                ISAACS: I should have said all these
                 ? r ; Murray 18 not obliged to answer.          He
       does do and I am grateful for doing so.

 Q*        £ ° ? ld h a V ® h a d » would you n o t » ful1 authority to
       do whatever you considered nece s s ar y at that stage to
       avert any risk to anybody in the ground as a result of
       opening the gates? - A. tfes.

Q*                     aS “5* ? ole was telling us had he made
       the decision there should be an evacuation as a result
       of a bomb scare and you would have taken consequential
       decisions, in this situation y o u had the authority to
       do what you considered to be necessary? ~ A Yes     T
       would have.                                       *

Q.     You would not have needed Mr. Duckenfield to tell vou
       what to do? - A . No, I wouldn't.

Q*                P ° sl fl o n » Mr* Murray? In the crisis that
       faced the Control Room at that time, everybody was
              J ° f?r as you could s e e » the*r best to deal
       w ith it? - A. Yes sir.

Q*                 wltl* h i n d s i g h t one can put forward things
       u ? «.u°  *._or shoul<l» or ®ight have been done, but
       had those things occurred to you at the time in the
       crisis you would have done them? - A. Of course.

              MR* ISAACS: Thank you very m uch indeed. Perhaps,
       sir,   that is a convenient moment to have a break.

              THE CORONER: I think that will be a very good
      idea.     We will break for 10 minutes.

                         (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

}. Mr. Murray, you were Ground Control? - A. Yes.

      And in overall command there was Mr. Duckenfield? - A.
      IGS •

).    Can I just     for the moment deal w ith the role of
       Commanding    Officers generally, rather than
                      8 ^betWee!? the two of y°u for the moment
                iJne ° f ^uestions.      I will distinguish between
            ™ y °U  ? a m o m e n t * 1 Just want to understand
                      saying as to the function of Command
          £ 6rS      a f°otba11 game* or indeed at any event.
      iou have beneath you a number of more junior Officers
      do you not? - A. Yes.                                       ’
                                                                                  32

                                                                         D. B. MURRAY

 Q.     All the way down to people at ground level? - A. Yes.

 Q.     Would you accept that the Command has overall
        responsibility on their shoulders for an event which
        they are in charge of? - A. Yes.

 Q.    You would not expect Command, if something goes wronc
        simply to say "Well, It must   be down to t h l o f f i c e ™ ’
        at ground level and nothing to do with m e ’’? That
       would not be a correct approach in principle, would
        it. ~ A. That would not be my approach.

 Q.    I just w anted to get that out of the way. We have
       heard a lot of emphasis put, not only through your
       evidence but through other more senior Officers, on
       what they could expect of more junior Officers.  Now
       SfWh?»e ?na f^ Unl0r ° f f iCe5 know what 18 to be expected
       Of him in the overall scheme of affairs at an event
       such as this, policing this football match?        How does
       he know what is expected of him? - A. There is a
                            delegation, a certain amount of
              8      different people on their role.      As Police
       all Officers               6XPeCt * hlgh l6Vel ° f lnltlatlve fr°®

Q.     But initiative comes into play usually w hen a problem
       has already arisen, does it not, that is when
       initiative comes into play? - A. I think it comes into
       play dealing with everything as a Police Officer.

Q-    *2*          to avert problems arising, you have first
      vin nihf   i° £ lan ahead for potential problems, have
      you not? ~ A. Yes, that is right.

Q.    Then you have got to make sure in your own mind, as
                 Officers, that people on the ground know
      where they have to be and what their role is? ~ A
      Yes.                                              *

Q.    A Commanding Officer, even if he is new in the
      Command, would expect, would he not, to have to
      acquaint h imself with what his junior Officers were
      expected to be doing? He would have to acquaint
      himself in advance with what that was, would he not?
      a . i would think so.


Q*    ®TJe fin8S ln thls c°ntext of the junior Officers are
      a r e ' i m p o r t a n t ! *”   * * *   " ° t? ' A> Y e S * the

Q‘             doming specifically to the policing of the
      semi-final in 1989, so far, and you may be able to
      disabuse us, we have heard no evidence that any
      specific briefing was given to any Officer as regards
                                                       D. B. MURRAY

 a duty to monitor the crowds on the Leppings Lane
 terraces for overcrowding.  Can you confirl from your
 knowledge that is the case, is it not? - A  I do
 knowledeePe°TfiC                   Z**   glVen t0 anybody from my
 c a 7 r i t i Sl n   b elo»"n e.   a b °Ut the           that wer I

 You can only speak, as e verybody else can, of your
 knowledge? - A. Yes.                           y

       ri 8ht, is it not, that you were acquainted with
 the Operational Order? - A. Yes, I was.

 You would, therefore, know from the Operational Order
 what specifically was required of individual serials
 that is right, is it not? - A. I would have a good
 idea.  I don't know what every serial is doing
 probably without reference to the Order.

 No but you, as I understand it, were part of the
 planning team? - A. Yes, I oversaw the planning team.

 Did you read through the Operational Order? - A. Yes I
 aid.

 I have got to find somebody who did. - A. Yes I did.

Did you assess the duties of the individual serials as
you went through it, to see if they complied with what
you would expect of them? -A. I would think so, yes?

o^lL!?r*-Di!Ckfn f ield h a l e a copy of the Operational
Order. — A. As far as I am aware, yes.

Was Mr. Duckenfield at any of these pre-semi-final
meetings which we have heard of in 1989? - A. I think
he was at them all apart from the original one on the
day that the semi-final was announced.

That is 20th March? - A. The 20th and the 21st, I
cn i n R •

I think after the 20th there were            a number of meetings
               a® w *o n f ? There  * meeting on 22nd
March at Hammerton Road Police Station? - A Y e a
there was.                                   *    *

There was a meeting on 29th March? - A. Yes.

A meeting on 5th April? - A. As far as I am aware,
ye s •

I think there was a specific one you have a
recollection of on 10th April with Mr. Duckenfield in
                                                                  34

                                                      D. B. MURRAY

       particular when there was discussion as to contingency
       arrangements as regards the end of the game and
       supporters p os sibly coming together and flash p o i n t s ’
       “ a. Probably, sir, yes.

 Q.    Jhere was another meeting w i t h the Club and Mr.
             i was there n o t » on 13th April? - A. I don't
       think Mr. Duckenfield would be at that meeting.

Q*     f 1 1 * 18? * ’ y° u were at the 13th April meeting? -
       A. Myself and Inspector Sewell was.

Q.     But up to the 13th April meeting, as far as you can
       recall, Mr. Duckenfield would be at all t h o s e ’ - A
       Yes, apart from the first one.

Q*        if^ n °B f case of the Con>manding Officer here being
       in blissful ignorance of what the Operational Order
       contained? ~ A. No, I feel he knew, or I assume he
       knew what the Order contained.

Q. Very good.  You can confirm this, can you not, that as
    regards the serial concerning the West Stand serial -
    all right? - A. Yes.

Q.    They had written into their Order that they had to be
      particularly vigilant to prevent people climbing up
      into the West Stand from the terrace, did they not? -
      A. Yes, they did.

            helP s » hy all means turn to it. - A. Yes they
      did, I recall that.

Q.    Have you got it in front of you? - A. Yes,      I have it
      in front of me.

Q.    You can be helpful to me because my mind is not
      working properly, what serial is that? - A. That is
       Serial 13, Sub-Section 6.

Q.    I am obliged.   If one just looks at the Operational
       Order for a moment - this I think is page 30 to helD
       the Jury - this is the serial which would be on the
       west Stand and Inspector Bullas had overall charge of
       them as a serial? — A. That is correct.




                                      /Q. The West Stand
                                               B. D. MURRAY


The West Stand, of course, looks over down on the
Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, it does.

Now there is a specific duty directed to that Serial to
prevent, if I can put it this way, law and order problems
arising as between the terraces and the West Stand? - A.
Yes, I think that is fair.

It is preventing missiles being thrown and preventing
people climbing from the terraces to the Stand.      You can
confirm, can't you, that it was not any part of the
specific duties directly imposed upon that Serial to look
during the b u i ld-up to kick-off into the terrace down
below to see how they were filling up from the point of
view of distribution? - A. There was nothing in the
Order, no, sir.

You know of no specific briefing to that effect, do you?
-A. No, I do not.

Obviously you would expect any Officer if he happens to
see a sign of distress, as you put it the equivalent of a
fire in a crowd, to do something about it on his own
initiative.   I accept that.   However, as regards
planning ahead specific duties, there was no specific
role for that West Stand terrace, to keep an eye on the
terrace itself down below as regards the filling of it? -
A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect and
nothing in my briefings.

Indeed, we can go further?   There was no specific duty
imposed even on the track officers to look at the
Leppings Lane terrace during the build-up to kick-off as
regards the filling of it and the distribution of it? -
A. There was nothing in the Order to that effect, no,
sir.

Just to confirm that, because it is important to look at
these Orders, wh i c h you knew about. It is Serial 1
which would be the... - A. Yes, they would.

In the context of Serial 1, and we can see it.   I am
sorry I have not got the page for the jury but I hope
everyone has got it in front of them.   We can see that a
number of matters are drawn to the attention of the
perimeter track officers, but one thing is certain.
Keeping an eye on the filling and distribution of the
pens just does not appear, does it? - A. Not in the
Order, sir.

Again you can confirm that as far as you know that was
not part of any specific briefing? - A. It was not part
of my briefing, no.
                                                                  36
                                                                       %
                                                      B. D. MURRAY


Q. Therefore, you can c o n f i r m that the effect of the
   planning was that there really was no Officer, be it at
   ground level, on the p e r i m e t e r track, or up in the West
   Stand, or anywhere else, who had a specific duty to be
   concerned to keep a w a t c h on the fillings of pens 3 and
   4?   Is that right? -A. Nothing in the Order which gives
   Officers every little duty they have to carry out
   throughout the event.

Q. Is it just a little duty to be concerned with the filling
   of the terraces? - A. I am sorry - every duty.

Q. No, I can't be sorry, I want to know whether you regard
   that as a little duty? - A. I don't.   I regard it as
   something that Officers do as a matter of course.

Q. Why, as a matter of course, in the context of the penned
   terrace, should junior Officers know what they planning
   was and the system was, if any, devised by senior
   Officers to prevent overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
   terraces?   How would they be privy to that?   How would
   they know about it? - A. I think they know that is a
   large terrace which is, to me, being treated as an open
   terrace because of the fact that gates are opened and
   people can pass from pen to pen.

Q. Is that all you would expe c t them to know from your
   planning, therefore? - A. I am sorry, sir?

Q. You may not have done.   Would you expect them to be
   alive to the fact that the only way across the terraces
   was by the radial gates at the very back? - A. Well, it
   is not the only way.   It is one way.    The other way is
   going out and going in another entrance.

Q. It is the only way   for anybody who is already in a pen
   who wants to move across?

Q.        THE CORONER:   I don't want to interrupt Mr. King
     every time he asksa question because it is very
     disruptive for him   and it is very disruptive for you.
     It is essential that you should bear in mind that the
     whole series of questions wh i c h you are being asked all
     tend to incriminate you.   In respect of each and every
     one of those you are entitled to say... - A. I
     understand, sir.

          MR. MANNING:   I a p p reciate that intervention, sir.
     I am conscious that I do not want to delay the course of
     these Inquests by your stopping on almost each and every
     question that Mr. King, and, indeed, that other people
     put to Mr. Murray.  I think you can see his attitude at
     this moment in time is that he is going to do his best to
     answer the questions that are put to him.      There may be
                                                            37
                                                             * %
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


occasions when you will feel, even having said that and
even with the acknowledgement from Mr. Murray and myself
that we understand the position, that nonetheless you
will feel you want to interject, but I certainly do not
need you, and I do not think Mr. Murray needs you on each
occasion to say, "You may exercise that which the law
proves to you.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is right.   I think you
will understand, Mr. King, that notwithstanding what I
have said, if there is a particular question - and that
is the reason I intervened because I thought we were
getting to a point where I really had to remind him of
that need, and I will do it because it is only right and
proper that it should be done.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sure everyone will appreciate
that in a sense I have a difficult role because clearly
most of my questions, and not all of them, will be
incriminating in some way or another;  if not of this
Officer himself but of someone else.   It is difficult
sometimes for him to know which way.   I preface,
therefore, everything I say now by inviting you and,
indeed, the witness to take on board that particularly
the witness should think carefully about whether he wants
to answer any of my questions.

     THE CORONER:   I am glad because I think we are all
agreed on this point.   There is no problem.   It is just
that I want you to be fully aware of that and conscious
of it. - A. I fully understand, sir.

And think.   We are more than happy to hear your answers.
I am not trying to stop you, but I do not want you to
answer in error.

     MR. MANNING:   I simply want to make this point, and
again I hope we are all on common ground, that the
question may possibly be incriminating.   The answer, of
course, may only be possibly incriminating.   One must
not draw the conclusion that because the question itself
is possibly incriminating, that the answer will
necessarily be possibly incriminating.

        THE CORONER:   Indeed, I quite understand that as
well.

     MR. KING:   Let me approach the same question in a
slightly different way in view of the interruption - I am
not complaining - because it is more helpful.   Were you
give your position as, in fact, second in command,
almost, at the semi-final? - A. I do not see it as second
in command at the semi-final.
                                                B. D. MURRAY


Overall you had Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I see
Mr. Duckenfield being in command of the event and the
four Superintendents having their own individual spheres
of responsibility.

So be it.   I accept that for the moment.   Were you
aware of the existence of something called a Green Guide?
- A. Yes.

Did you have a copy of it? - A. I did not have a copy of
it, no.

Have you ever been provided with a copy of it? - A. I
have not been provided w i t h a copy of it but I have read
it.

This is nothing to do with these Inquests because I am
looking to the future for the moment, but just very
quickly, since the disaster hav e you still been involved
in policing football matches? - A. I policed three
football matches following.

You have not even been supplied with a Green Guide since
then?

     MR. MANNING:   I do not know whether that is a
question that is going to he l p us.

     MR. KING:      So be it:

Did you nonetheless consider it important before taking
part even in the planning meetings to acquaint yourself
w i t h the Green Guide? - A. I read the Green Guide about
twelve or eighteen months before that semi-final.

And not again? - A. I do not think so, sir.

Did Mr. Duckenfield, to your knowledge, have a copy of
the Green Guide? -A. I do not know.

Nonetheless let me show you a copy of the Green Guide for
the moment to see if I can jog your memory about its
contents.

     MR. BEECHEY:     That is C.382,   sir.

     MR. KING:   Just out of interest, how was it you
came into possession of the Green Guide when you did look
at it some twelve months or so before 1989? - A. I read
it when I was at Barnsley as Chief Inspector.

It was March, 1988 when you came into your senior
position, if I can put it that way, with regard to the
                                                             39

                                                 B. D. MURRAY


   footballing at Hillsborough.   Who was it who appointed
   you to that? - A. The Chief Constable.

Q. Then you would no doubt meet up with Superintendent Mole
   and others? - A. Yes.

Q. Did no-one on that occasion invite you to look at the
   Green Guide, given your important role in policing
   football matches? - A. Not that I can recall.

Q. So be it.    Let me go to a page I want to direct your
   attention to which is Chapter 8, page 31 of the Green
   Guide.    Mr. Murray, that is the chapter headed "Terraces
   and Viewing Slopes.   - A. Yes.

Q. You are not reading this page for the first time today,
   are you? -A. No.

Q. You certainly had read it before the 1989 semi-final? -A.
   Yes, certainly.

Q. You did not regard the Green Guide as something you could
   just read once and put it out of your mind after that,
   put it in a cupboard and lock it away?    It was an
   important document, wa sn't it? - A. When I read the Green
   Guide I formed the opinion that the vast majority was
   aimed at football management rather than Police Officers.

Q. Here we may have the root of the approach to this game, I
   don't know.   Are you saying that the matters as regards
   controlling crowds at a football match, and a lot of this
   is directed to the control of crowds at football matches
   in various parts of the ground, was simply a matter for
   the club management? - A. No, I am not saying that.    I
   am saying having read the Green Guide, the contents and
   the way it is set out, to me it seemed to be aimed more
   at club management and engineers than Police Officers.

Q. Isn't the history of the West Terraces, the Leppings Lane
   terraces, and there is a whole body of evidence to this
   effect, Mr. Murray, that as regards the West Terraces,
   whether it be a league game or a semi-final, it was a
   policing matter as regards the crowds going on to that
   West Terrace, not a club matter?   That is the body of
   evidence we have heard. - A. I think the club and the
   Police Officers worked together.

Q. Did you yourself, as this senior Officer, one of four
   immediately below Mr. Duckenfield, consider that the
   Police had a particular role to play in relation to the
   Leppings Lane terrace, as opposed to the other terrace,
   such as the Kop? - A. I do not feel there was a great
   deal of difference in the policing of the Kop and the
   Leppings Lane terraces.
                                             B. D. MURRAY

I don't want to take too long ov e r this cross-
examination, let me just go straight to the point.   Page
31:

    "Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
    distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
    ease of access and egress, to control and facilitate
    movement, particularly if a local emergency should
    arise during the event and to contain pressures
    before they reach dangerous proportions."

That is a piece of wisdom which I am sure you agree with?
- A. Yes.




            Q. And something you agreed
                                                                          41



 Q. Something whi ch you a g r e e d w ith before the 1989 Semi
    Final? - A. Yes.

 Q. Help us, therefore, to explain it.         What is the
    connection bet we en a r r an gi ng to encourage even
    distribution across a t e r r ac e and containing pressures
    before they reach dange ro us proportions?       E x p l ai n it to
    us.  What is that all about? - A. So far as I was
    concerned I h a d seen it operate successfully a nd known
    it operate suc ce ssfully in the past.       When the gates of
    the individual pens w ere locked in the ope n position
    the crowd w o u l d pass thr ou gh those pens al o n g from pen
    to pen and distribute.

Q. Mr. Murray, you d id not reall y understand m y question
   and I am sorry for that.        I am not going to ask you yet
   what arrangements the re were, if any, for t he 1989 Semi
   Final.  I am asking you to help us as the senior
   Officer in charge of p ol ic ing at Hillsborough in 1989
   to explain you r u nd ers ta nd ing of the w i s d o m of this
   guide line.  In oth er words, w hy is it import an t that
   arrangements b e m a d e to en courage even d i str ib ut ion in
   order to contain p r es su re s b ef or e they re a c h dangerous
   proportions? - A. B y safety.

Q. On the one hand, you h ave distribution and yo u ha v e
   pressure befor e they reach dangerous proportions.           What
   is pressure before they reach dangerous p r o p o r t i o n s all
   about? What are we talking about? - A. We a r e talking
   about crushing.

Q. Containing pressures b e f or e they reach dangerous
   crushing proportions.    Is that what it is m e a n i n g ? - A.
   That is the way.  I suppose that is my interpretation
   of it, yes, sir.

Q. You would say you k n e w in 1989 before the d i s a s t e r that
   it was important to have an arrangement on the terrace
   to contain pressures b e for e they reached danger ou s
   crushing proportions? - A. I am not saying that.            You
   took me through a series of questions b a s e d upon
   reading this here a n d n ow a nd you asked me certain
   aspects of it and I said, yes, after listening to you,
   that is the wa y I look at it.

Q. I am sorry, Mr. Murray, you agreed with me, b e f o r e I
   asked you any questions, you w ou ld in 1989 h a v e agreed
   with the w is do m of t he guide line which I h a v e r ead
   out? - A. I said I h a d r e a d the guide, yes.

Q. You would agree with the w i s d o m of that p a r t i c u l a r
   guide line? - A. Yes.
                                                                         42

                                                              B. D. MURRAY

Q. I just want you to help everybody, the Jury, the
   Coroner, myself, as to what is the link between
   encouraging even distribution of cr ow d on terraces and
   seeking to contain pressures b ef or e they reach
   dangerous pr opo rtions?  How does the one lead to the
   other? - A. I don't kn o w w h eth er it does actually,
   reading this.

        THE C O R O N E R : M r . K x n g , X can see what you are
  getting at b ut I can also r e a d the Gre en Guide and if
  you look at it, you have p i c k e d what I wo uld call the
  introduction.        The witness has said that when he looked
  at i t , it a pp eared to h i m that the Gre en Guide was more
  addressed to others than the Police.               I will just flick
  through paragraphs 89 to 109 and unless I have missed
  it, the whole thrust of the chapter is to do with
  structure.     I do not want to get into an argument about
  this but if you pick the introduction then I think, and
  he has given you a reason as to h o w he interpreted the
  Green Guide, then you need to look at the subsections
  which actually deal with the detail.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     With respect, can I agree with
  that?   It is not only obvious it is a matter of
  structure b u t if one looks at even the first three
  paragraphs, paragraph 19, wh ic h we can all read for
  ourselves, is actually talking about providing
  spectators wit h an unobstructed v i e w and is actually
  talking about h o w you get p eople on to t he terrace.  It
  may b e that the matters m y learned friend is putting
  are important but I think, sir, with respect, you are
  right.    I h a d not risen before but you are right in
  this p ar ticular chapter, that it is a m a t ter of
  structure rather than anything else.

       THE CORONER:      I am not arguing about your premise,
  Mr. King.

       MR. KING:  Sir, I am onl y interested in what this
  witness understood and I was asking hi m if he could
  help us.

        THE CORONER:     You are picking a section out of the
  Green Guide which he said he h a d r e a d X months before
  and d isc ar de d because he did not think it was relevant
  to h im and then asking h i m to draw conclusions which
  the chapter itself does not actually draw.

       MR. KING:  Sir, that may or m a y not b e right but I
  am entitled to ask the witness from his wisdom,
  knowledge and experience as a senior Officer of
  policing what the connection is in his mind, if
  anything, between encouraging distribution across a
                                                                 43

                                                        B. D. MURRAY

 terrace and seeking to contain crowd pressures before
 they reach dangerous proportions.  I am entitled to ask
 that question, sir.

     THE CORONER:  I am not sure whether you are
entitled to ask but you h av e a s k e d it and I think he
has given an answer.  What I a m concerned about is that
we should not use a document incorrectly.

     MR. KING:  So be it, sir.   Let me put the Green
Guide right away.  Let m e put it to one side.

      THE CORONER:    I think we will do better.      I agree.

      MR. KING:   I may come back to it, sir.

      THE CORONER:    Indeed.

     MR. KING:   In the light of this Officer's evidence
as to the way h e regar ded it I think it is right I
should put it to one side.

Let me be absolutely blunt then because I want to know
h o w you see the situation.  D i d you understand that the
Police in charge of policing t h e Hillsborough Semi
Final of 1989 h a d any role to p l a y as regards the
distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
Wes t terrace? - A. Yes.

What was that job or responsibility? - A. I think there
was a general responsibility to make sure it was
reasonable.

D i d any other b od y apart from t h e Police at the Semi
Final of 1989 h a v e any direct responsibility for the
filling and distribution of the Leppings Lane terraces,
to your understanding in the 1989 Semi Final? - A. My
understanding that the Police a n d the Club work
together.

W hat was, to your understanding as the senior Officer,
the role of the C lub in the 1989 Semi Final as regards
the distribution of spectators across the Leppings Lane
terrace and the filling of the p e n s ? - A. The Club
itself?

Yes, what role w e r e they p l a yi ng on 15th April? - A. I
didn't know what the role of the Club was.

Wha t did you understand? - A. I understood in different
parts of the ground, in all par ts of the ground, that
the senior Police Officer in charg e of that section of
the ground would brief his Po lice Officers and he would
                                                                    44
                                                        B. D. MURRAY


   brief the Clu b Stewards, and they would work together
   to ensure that the event went off properly.

Q. We are near the adjournment.       I do not wan t to take too
   long on this but I am now very puzzled in the light of
   this evidence a nd the light of all the oth er evidence
   we have heard.     A re you saying that you d i d not in that
   Control Box r e g ard you, the Police in the Control Box,
   as having a specific responsibility for the
   distribution a nd filling of the West terraces as
   opposed to the Kop and the other areas? - A. I am
   sorry, I d id not k n o w that was the question you asked
   me.  I thought you a s k e d m e about the Police role
   generally.

Q. I am asking about the West Terrace? - A. Yes,      sir.

        MR. KING:   Sir, that is p ro bably as good a point
   to stop.

        THE CORONER:    Do you want me to stop?

        MR. KING:   We are now almost at one o'clock,        sir.

                       LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                               B. ~D. MURRAY


     MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, as I understand your last
answer before the adjournment, you accept that there
was a responsibility upon the Police as regards the
policing at the 1989 semi-final, a responsibility in
respect of the distribution and filling of the Leppings
Lane Terrace, am I right? - A. Yes, there was a
responsibility of the Police.

Do you accept that no other body had specifically
accepted that particular responsibility, and I include
in that, for example, the Club management? - A. I think
the Club management accepted their responsibility
towards it as well.

Well, you would know because you knew the Operational
Order, that there was no stewarding by Club stewards,
was there, of the Leppings Lane Terrace as such, that
is right, isn't it? - A. On the terraces I wouldn't
have expected to see stewards.

No, I don't specifically mean on the terrace.  There
was no actual stewarding responsibility on the way it
was organised in 1989, on Club stewards in relation to
the West Terraces, was there? - A. I think the stewards
had a responsibility to show people where to go and
which direction to go but I would not have expected to
see them on the terrace itself.

Did you know what the arrangement was between the
Police and the Club as regards stewards and their
responsibilities? - A. I didn't know what the
responsibilities of the stewards in particular areas
were because they were briefed by the senior Police
Officer there.

You knew surely in your senior capacity the importance
of a pre-arranged agreement between the Police and
management as to the duties of stewards and their
distribution, you would know that? - A. There was a
schedule on the Safety Certificate which was presumably
expanded on depending on the number of supporters that
were there.

Let me take it in stages:  you would know in 1989
before the disaster, wouldn t you, of the importance of
a detailed, pre-arranged agreement between Police and
management as to the positions of stewards? - A. I knew
there was a pre-arranged schedule that was attached to
the Safety Certificate.

You would know the importance of having a pre-arranged
agreement, w o u l d n ’t you? - A. I am not sure what you
mean by the importance of having it.        I think it is
                                               B. D. MURRAY'


very much down to the Officer who is in charge of that
area to work the Police and the stewards together.

But haven't the Police in their policing and planning
got to know what their responsibilities are and what
the Club management responsibilities are? - A. We tried
to put Officers familiar with that particular part of
the Ground in that area, and they worked w ith the
stewards and decided upon who did what.

Mr. Murray, it wasn't as casual as that, was it?  There
was in fact pre-arranged agreement between Club and
management as to where stewards were going, and what
the responsibility of the Police was, wasn't there? -
A. The only one I know is the one that was attached to
the Safety Certificate.

Let's take that one if that is the only one you know.
You would know from there that no Club stewards were
responsible for the controlling or directing of fans
onto the Leppings Lane Terrace.  It is obvious by its
absence if you knew the Safety Certificate? - A. I
didn't say I knew the Safety Certificate I said there
would be a schedule on the Safety Certificate.

Had you in your capacity as the senior Officer turned
your mind at all to the stewarding responsibilities at
the Leppings Lane Terraces? -

     THE CORONER:      That is one I am going to warn you
about.

     MR. KING:      Certainly,   sir:

That is undoubtedly an incriminating question to you. -
A. So far as I was concerned the stewards, as I say,
worked with a senior Police Officer in that particular
area.  The main area of concern with me is that
stewards manned the exit gates and stayed there
throughout the event.

You may say yes or no to this:  were you aware that as
regards the Leppings Lane Terraces that the Club - you
may say no to this - that the Club had taken no
responsibility as regards the stewarding of the
Leppings Lane Terraces?  Were you aware of that in 1989
before the semi-final? - A. I didn't know what
responsibility the Club had accepted or taken.

Would you not consider it important in your capacity as
senior Officer that you should know in advance what
responsibility the Club had taken on? - A. We are
talking about a very small part of the Ground.  My
responsibility was presumably the whole Ground,
                                                             47

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


     everywhere, all the stewards.  I   did not take a
     particular interest in what each   individual steward was
     doing.  That is why I say it was   important that the
     senior Officer there briefed the   Police Officers and
     briefed the stewards.

Q. It may h ave been a small part of the Ground, Mr.
   Murray, but you would know, wouldn't you, that at
   league matches the Police had taken on a specific
   responsibility to control the filling of pens in
   sequential order? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you were responsible sometimes for carrying
   out those sequential orders? - A. Yes, at league
   matches.

Q. I think you had specific responsibility at the occasion
   of the league mat ch between Liverpool and Sheffield
   Wednesday on 14th January, 1989, which is the C515
   documents which we have already been referred to? - A.
   I was the Superintendent in control on that day, yes.

Q. I don't need to take everybody to it but we all know
   that particular order contained within it a specific
   order to serial 10 to ensure pens were filled in
   accordance with instructions from Control, all right? -
   A. Yes, I will accept that.

Q. As I understand it - tell me if I have got it right or
   wrong - whe n it came to the semi-finals there was not
   sequential filling of the pens, that is right, isn't
   it, of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. There wasn't
   sequential filling of pens at league matches.

Q. There could be sequential filling of the pens at league
   matches? - A. Occasionally, yes.

Q.   And at league matches you could have a system whereby
     you start with two then open up a third and open up a
     fourth? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.    And that was a responsibility for the filling of the
     pens which fell fairly and squarely upon the Police
     shoulders, didn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. I want to know h ow you saw it at a semi-final. At a
   semi-final we know that the whole terrace was thrown
   open to the fans? - A. Yes, that is correct, it was a
   system that was accepted.

Q. Are you saying that in view of that the Police
   abandoned, compared with league matches, all
   responsibility for monitoring the distribution and
                                               B. D. MURRAY'


filling of the pens c ompared wi t h what they did at a
league match? - A. I have never said that.

What responsibility did exactly the Police take on
board at a semi-final, according to you, as regards
monitoring the d is tr ibution and filling of the pens
across the whole terrace? - A. At a semi-final the
whole terrace was open.

I know that. - A. The Police, the Control Room, Police
Officers in general, had a responsibility for
monitoring and filling the pens.

So you accept that there was a responsibility upon the
Police at the 1989 semi-final, albeit the whole terrace
had been thrown wide open, to monitor the build-up, do
you, and the filling of the pens across the terrace
before kick-off? - A. I have just said that it is a
shared responsibility by all the Police Officers
present and also by the Club.

Do you accept that the Police had that responsibility,
yes or no?

     THE CORONER:      I think he has said it several
times, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:      I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:      He has given his reply and we must
accept it.

     MR. KING:      So be it:

The Club management were not in the Police Control Box,
were they? - A. No, they weren't.

You in the Police Control Box had access to the
following, didn't you?  First of all you were able to
look out of the windows to v i e w specifically the state
of the Leppings Lane Terraces? - A. Yes.




                 /Q. I think everybody
                                                                                         49
                                                                          B. D. MURRAY


                        7h0P  h ! S v l s l ted the ground who needs to
        visit the ground and I need not ask you questions
        about what you can see because we can observe thin
               a d d l Jlon to that y°u have access to I think'it
           five monitors, do you not? - A. Yes, that is
        correct in the Control Room.                    *      iS

 Q*                m o ? ltors allow you to see, first of all
        onto the Leppings Lane terraces if you so wish to *

        s h o w 'th e t e r r a c e s I ‘     ^         ° " e ° f th e             w iU

 Q*                     sPeclflcally controlled so as to view
        A? Yes            Parts according to that which you wish? -


 Q.     It has a zoom facility, does it not,                      so that you can
        t h e ^ ^ r a c e ? ”- 1? CA l l % h n t0 ®ny P®rtlcular ar «a of
        facility* which is limited?8meraS haVe * Z°°m

 Q.    I do not want to give evidence;                     I simply want to nut

       l e n s e s o n ^ ii  l l " ^ . 3 cameras
                                         " d° W lth
                                                  cant h ezoom
                                                            ZOOm- ' A*
                                                               in as farThe as zoo">
       hSt Jf pn                  y aZe not Pe rfect, they could be better
       t h e 'c a m e r a s ^ 8 6 *        eXPenSe U n i t S t h e “ a b i l i t y o f

Q . You could, in fact,            zoom in quite close, could you
     not, to people on the terrace? - A. I don't know which
     af?erau           am sorry» and 1 don't know how close we can
     id I n t i r l -c e rtalnly have in the past been abJe to
     identify people on the Kop.

Q.    Can I put to you simply that there is a facility there
      npnnio?  ?8    cl°se so that you can actually see
      » ; i t f?noeS           tlttlll" y0“ ChOOSe -                  -   &-        1
Q.
      throughU theeoperator^esir?m                                ’ ** D°         “ “
Q.    Yes. - A. Yes of course I have used it.


Q’    t e r r a c e s " f j r s t ^ f ^ ? ? 1* ? ° U t 0 , See th e              Lane
      A. K o . ; ^ " S n        geta frontal view^eWWedcanhgetna t? ‘
      centre S f ° K qs k X * S t £ d ? * Ca"era SltUated in the

Q-    terraces?* - r A s V s r w e ^ a "              ' j e t * 1™    ° f th e
                                                            50

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q.   But you also have a camera, do you not, wh ich enables
     you to v i e w parallel to the front of the terraces and
     parallel to the back, in other words looking along the
     terrace? - A. I think it is slightly set ba c k to the
     left, if you think of the Control Box.

Q.   But it does allow yo u to look along the terrace, as
     opposed to looking towards the front? - A. Yes, it
     does.

Q.   You also h ave access to a view of the Leppings Lane
     turnstiles? - A. Yes, the outside of the turnstiles.

Q.   And there is a view down Leppings Lane to the extent
     you have indicated? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you are in a position in the Control Box not only
     to see that which you can see with your own eyes of
     the terrace, but also, if you so choose, to have the
     cameras so operated that you can look at a particular
     part of the terrace if you want to do so? - A. Yes, I
     can identify, or the operator can identify, a
     particular part that we should look at.

Q.   Furthermore, in the Control Room you have access to,
     via your communications with the Club Control Room, at
     any time the numbers of spectators who have already
     come through any given set of turnstiles? - A. Yes, I
     do believe that is the breakdown.

Q.   It is a fact, is it not, that you do have that access?
     - A. I have the ability to go and ask how m a n y people
     are in the ground, h o w man y people have come through a
     particular turnstile, and I think groups of
     turnstiles.

Q.   You have in the Club Control Room a Police
     representative, do you not, at a semi-final? - A. Yes,
     there is a Police Officer there.

Q.   I think it was PC Guest on this occasion in 1989? - A.
     That is correct.

Q.   He has a link, does he not, is it by telephone with
     your Control Room? — A. He has, on the radio network
     and the telephone.

Q.   So at any time if you want to know numbers of those
     coming through a specific set of turnstiles, y o u can
     obtain it through that system through him? - A. Yes, I
     can get it through him.

Q.   You could, for example, at any given time find out
     exactly how many people have come through, for
                                                            51
                                                  B. D. MURRAY


     example, the bank of turnstiles A to G? - A. I think
     that facility is available, yes.

Q.   Mr. Murray, you say "I think" as if this is a facility
     you are not sure existed? - A.  I am sure it will give
     the whole of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, I am sure
     it will give the individual turnstiles, but I am not
     absolutely sure that it will give the particular banks
     of turnstiles.

Q.   It is simply the case, is it not, of keeping a running
     total of A to G and you could within moments get the
     running total, could you not? - A. What I am saying,
     sir, is we could get the individual totals from
     turnstiles A, B, C, D, E, P and G, and I think, but I
     don't know, we can get the ongoing total.  Obviously
     they can be added together to give a total, yes.

Q.   Whichever way you do it, it does not take very long to
     find out, if you w ish to know, how ma n y people have
     already come through A to G? - A. No, it does not take
     very long.

Q.   You, as having a responsibility for monitoring the
     build-up of the crowd, would want to know, would you
     not, as you view the monitoring and build-up of the
     crowd, how many people are in and h ow many people have
     still to come, for example, on the Leppings Lane
     terraces?  That would have been an important piece of
     information, would it not? - A. It could be very
     useful, yes.

Q.   It is useful, is it not, for two reasons?  It is
     useful generally so that you can assess how speedily
     people are arriving at the ground? - A. I have not
     used it for that purpose.  It would tell me how many
     people were in different sections of the ground at a
     particular time.

Q.   It would be important to you in   the Control Box, would
     it not, as far as your planning   goes, to know whether
     or not the ground is filling up   according to your
     expectations, you would want to   know that, would you
     not? - A. Yes.

Q.   One of the problems which might arise, because you
     have told us about delaying kick-off, is if there is a
     lot of people who are yet to arrive and we are getting
     very close to kick-off, that would be a problem you
     could anticipate? - A. It would be a problem that
     should be looked at, yes.

Q.   You do not simply have to look at the visual
     impression from the Control Box, although that
                                             B. D. MURRAY

 obviously helps.  You can a ct ua lly gain specific
 information from the Club Control Room? - A. Yes,     I
 can gain that information from the Control Room.

 You were, again as somebody who had been involved in
 the planning, knowledgeable, I assume, of the
 turnstile arrangements for each particular area of the
 ground? - A. What do you m e a n by "knowledgeable", sir?

 You would know, would you not, that those who were
 entering the Leppings Lane terraces, the west
 terraces, their tickets would send them through
 turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

You would know before the semi-final began in 1989
that, therefore, there were seven turnstiles for about
10,100 spectators for the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
Yes, there are only seven turnstiles.

Did you, before the game, turn your mind to whether
you were satisfied that that number of turnstiles
could cope with that number of people? - A. Before
that particular event, I do not think it was something
I had particularly considered, no.

Be careful, are you saying yo u did not consider the
turnstile arrangements with a view to ensuring that
there was a reasonable number of turnstiles for the
number of spectators expected? - A. I d o n ’t think that
was anything to do with me, sir.   I am sure that was
down to the Club and the people who organised the
event.

You yourself were in the Control Box monitoring the
numbers coming in, were you not, or you could see out
of the window looking at the build-up of the crowd? -
A. Yes, I was in the Control Box.

You would have in your mind that there might come a
time when you had to assess whether you could get all
the people who had yet to come into the ground by
kick-off?  That is easily a consideration you might
have to make, is it not, an assessment? - A. It was a
consideration I did assess about 2.30.

So in order to make that assessment sensibly you would
have to have knowledge of the number of turnstiles the
people still to come had to go through? - A. To make
it expertly, yes.

Not simply expertly, to make any assessment you would
need to know it, would you not? - A. To make it
expertly, to break it right down to figures, yes.
                                                           53

                                                  B. D. MURRAY

Q.   In order to ma k e any assessment which w oul d be worth
      anything, you would need to know, would y ou not,    the
      number of turnstiles through which the people still to
      come in a pa rt icu la r area had to go, otherwise you
      could not make an assessment whether y o u would get
      them all in? - A. Yes, that would be the ideal.

Q.   It sounds as if it is a surprising proposition.     You
     have told us - I have not come to the exact events of
     the match i t s elf but I will break into this for the
     moment - there came a time, I think it was at 2.30 on
     the day of the semi-final, that you were able to make
     a judgment as to whether or not you would get the
     people still to come through into the ground? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   In order to make that judgment sensibly you first of
     all have to ask you rself which part of the ground they
     are going to come into? - A. I would have had to look
     at all areas of the Leppings Lane end, all the areas
     of people who were still to come.




                           /Q.   I will come to
                                                                54

                                                      B. D. MURRAY


Q. I will come to the particular evidence which you have
   given later, but it is a fact that in order for seven
   turnstiles to be used for some 10,000 people, you have
   got to have a flow of people with which the turnstiles
   can cope?   That must be obvious? - A. To get the people
   through the turnstiles, yes.

Q. Had you turned your mind to the numbers of people which
   the turnstiles could reasonably be expected to cope with
   over, say, an hourly period? - A. I only know the figures
   that were given to be, either by the club or Mr. Mole.

Q. This was before the 1989 semi-final? - A. This was before
   1988.

Q. What was the number per turnstile? - A. It was 1,000 per
   turnstile per hour.

Q. I will approach it on that basis.    If it is 1,000 per
   turnstile then you would know that in the last half hour
   at 1,000 per turnstile those seven A to G   turnstiles
   could only cope wit h about 3,500 people? - A. Yes, those
   seven turnstiles could.

Q.   That's right? - A. Yes.

Q.    In order to make a sensible assessment, shall we  say, at
     2.30, as to whether or not you are going to get all the
     people expected on the Leppings Lane terraces through
     those turnstiles, a very easy way of making that
     assessment is simply to find out at 2.30 h ow many people
     have already come through A to G? -A. Yes, it is.

Q.    That is a fairly obvious way of approaching   it,isn't   it?
     - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Let me go back to the second reason why knowing numbers
   still to come is important.     You have accepted a role,
   on behalf of the Police, to monitor the build-up of the
   crowd on the Leppings L ane terraces?    You have accepted
   that? - A. Yes, the Police ha v e a role in that.

Q. If you know the numbers still to come you can look at the
   terraces, for example, and ask yourself the question:    is
   there still room on the terraces themselves for this
   number of people?    You can mak e a judgment? - A. Well, I
   can try.  I am not an expert as to h ow many people can
   get into ho w much space.

Q. No, but you can look in the terrace and see where the
   empty spaces are and where the full parts are, can't you?
   - A. I can look at the distribution, yes.
                                                               55

                                                     B. D. MURRAY


Q. It is important as far as crowd management goes, to look
   at distribution at the same time as knowing how many more
   people are still to come in a particular area? - A. Yes,
   I think you have got to look at the distribution and look
   at the people to come.

Q. If you know in advance, for example - just take a figure
   for the moment - that there are 2,000 people still to
   come shall we say on the Leppings Lane terraces and you
   can see where the full areas and where the empty areas
   are, the knowledge that there are 2,000 people still to
   come is a very important piece of information, isn't it?
   - A. I am sorry, but to look where the full areas are and
   where the empty areas are does not always follow because
   different parts of the ground do fill up first.

Q. Of course they do.    When you can see the parts you are
   expecting to be filled up have been filled up and you
   know, for example, from the figures that there are about
   2.000 people still to come, you can make an assessment,
   and a sensible assessment, of where you want those other
   2.000 people to go for their own safety, can't you? - A.
   I can try and see whether I consider there is sufficient
   space for the people there.

Q. You would not want, as someone in the Control Box, an
   entry of a large number of people into a particular area
   which was full whe n there was another area which had
   spaces in it?   You  would not want that, would you? - A.
   I would not want that, no.

Q. It would be part of the monitoring of the crowd, and the
   build-up of the crowd, that you would try to ensure that
   did not happen, would not it? - A. I don t know whether I
   can prevent that happening.   I cannot really prevent one
   part of the ground filling up before another.

Q. Were you not aware of the system operated by the Police
   in the past, that is, before 1989, if they so chose, of
   diverting fans from, shall we say, the centre pens to the
   side pens on the terrace? - A. What system was that, sir?

Q.    The system whereby in some way closing off the centre
     pens so as to ensure and direct people still to come into
     the side pens?     W e r e you not aware the Police operated
     that sort of system in the filling of the terraces? - A.
     No, I wasn't.

Q.   You weren't? - A. No.

Q.    Are you saying that before you started the 1989 semi­
     final you did not consider that there might come a time
     when you might need to divert people from the popular
     centre pens to the side pens? - A. I was there in 1988
                                                B. D. MURRAY


and I had seen the system work.   I had seen the terrace
spread.   I had seen the centre pens fill up first and
the raised area.

I accept that. ^ What I want to know is whether as part
of your monitoring, not that there would necessarily come
this time but there might come the time when you are
monitoring the terraces, that the centre pens would be
full and you would want to divert people to the side
pens? - A. I think there may well have come a time when
that was necessary, yes.
        \


That is fairly obvious from the fact that the centre pens
are the popular pens? - A. It is not obvious because it
happened before.   It would be exactly the same, the
people had spread right across.

You misunderstand me.   It is obvious that it might
happen?   Not that it did happen or was going to happen
definitely, but it might happen? - A. It may have been
necessary, depending on the amount of people there and
the way the crowd was spread, to take some action.

Do you know Mr. Lock? - A. Yes,   I know Mr. Lock.

Mr. Lock, of course, had carried on your role on an
earlier occasion some years before? - A. Yes, he had.

When you came in 1988 you were able to speak to him
because he then had a capacity wi t h the club, did he not?
- A. I saw him in his capacity as working for Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.

Do you accept, therefore, that as regards the monitoring
of the crowd at a semi-final that it was necessary to
keep an eye on the pens, and the filling of the pens, so
that if it were necessary to close off the centre pens
and feed people into the side pens, that could be
organised? - A. I think at any event it is necessary to
keep an eye on what is going on, and if one sees a
particular problem to do something about it.

I am sorry, I want to ask you whether you had turned your
mind in advance in 1989 specifically to the Leppings Lane
terraces to the possible need, before any signs of
distress, before any pressures had arisen to such
dangerous proportions there was distress, but at a time
when the centre pens were, shall I say, comfortably full
and there was plenty of space in the side pens, did you
turn your mind to the fact there might come a time, a
need, to divert people away from the centre pens to the
side pens? - A. No, I did not consider that at all.
                                                                57

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


Q. You are saying that you did not turn your mind at all to
   the control of the filling of the pens at the 1989 s e m i ­
   final, save if someone drew to your attention a
   particular problem, is that right? - A. No, I did not say
   that at all.   What I am saying is there was a system
   whereby people spread along the whole of the terrace.
   Before the 1989 semi-final I had not had any sort of
   necessity to consider giving my mind to closing the
   centre pens.

Q. That is what I am asking you.   It sounds as if in
   advance you had not even thought of the possibility of
   the need to close off the full areas in order to make
   sure people went into the empty areas? - A. What I am
   saying is that I had not seen a need to close the centre
   pens.

Q. The only ma tch you had experience of was one match,   the
   1988 match? - A. Of a capacity crowd, yes.

Q. Are you saying that you did not know of any arrangement,
   in advance, to deal w it h the situation that if the centre
   pens, for example, became full, you could speedily take
   action to divert people to the side pens? - A. Before the
   event started I did not have anything in mind as to
   closing the centre pens.     I had been there in 1988 and
   1988 was based on a previously successful event.




          Q. Did you know that in 1988.,
                                                                  56

                                                         B. D. MURRAY

Q.    Did you kno w in 1988 steps had b e e n taken to divert
     fans from the centre pens b y clos in g off the tunnel? -
     A. No, I didn't know.

Q. It does come down to this then, a nd I want to
   understand you clearly, that y o u understood that there
   was no system in advance worked out b y those policing
   the game from the Control Box to close off the centre
   pens if they became too full to divert fans to the
   empty pens? - A. I didn't know of any system in advance
   whereby to close off the centre pens.

Q.    So, in other words, people were just left to    their own
     devices unless there were signs of distress noted? - A.'
     I do not k no w whether the word 'distress' is right but
     there m ay have come a time when I or someone else would
     have noticed that the centre p ens were full and the
     crowd did not appear to b e spreading in which case then
     some action would have had to b e t a k e n .

Q. Maybe we are not as far away as I thought we were.   If
   there came a time when you noticed the centre pens were
   full and the crowd was not spreading b y which I assume
   you mean there were spaces, and obvious spaces, in the
   side pens you would take some action? - A. If it was
   brought to my attention and I s aw it myself.

Q. It would b e important, would it not, to make sure
   somebody was monitoring that situation to make sure
   that if it d id arise action could be taken? - A. I do
   not see that - I think that people are always
   monitoring the situation front the Control Box, fro m the
   West Stand, from the track, from everywhere.

Q. As far as your position in the Control Box is
   concerned, compared with everybody else, you have told
   us about the view you had from the video cameras, you
   have told us about the view you h a d from the windows,
   you have told us about your means of access to the
   figures, you in Control also ha v e the means of
   communicating with people on the ground to organise
   action, do you not? - A. Yes, we do.

Q. You in that sense   are - and by y o u I mean everybody in
   the Control Box -   in a unique p o si ti on compared with
   everybody else at   the ground b e c au se you are the c o ­
   ordinators of all   the information which I have p ut to
   you? - A. We have   more information than anyone else,
   yes.

Q. If I can then take you through the events of 1989,
   bearing in m in d what you say is the responsibility in
   the Control Box for monitoring, do you accept the
                                                          B.s p. MURRAY

    following facts;    first of all do you re mem be r the
    position round ab out two o'clock-ish, w hen Mr. J ackson
    I think visited y o u as regards the state of the b u i l d
    up at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Not particularly, no.

Q. Did you not notice r o u n d about two o'clock, perhaps
   2.15, at that stage, that in fact it was obv iou s that
   the Liverpool e n d was filling far more slowly than w hat
   you might have anti ci pa ted ? - A. I would acce pt about
   that time there w e r e m a n y more Nottingham Fores t
   supporters than Live rp oo l in the ground.

Q. There were more Live rp oo l fans than in fact, sorry,
   less Liverpool fans than you would have e xpe c t e d at
   that time? - A. I w o u l d have expected some more than
   there were, yes.

Q. At that stage if you h ad wa nted to you c o u l d have
   called for the exact numbers who had en ter ed the
   Liverpool turnstiles, c o u l d you not? - A. Yes, I could
   have.

Q. Indeed your evidence I think is that at two o'clock-
   ish, perhaps 2.15 we are talking about, the N o r t h Stand
   and the West Stand was about quarter full? - A. I think
   that is correct.

Q. As regards the terraces I suspect you w o u l d not even go
   that far, would you? - A. I cannot remember.      I cannot
   remember what I said.

Q. Certainly a quarter full wo uld be the ab solute tops,
   would it not? - A. I do not kn o w what I have said, sir.

Q. Certainly that is m y note but I may be wr ong on it? -
   A. Probably about a qua rt er full.

Q. That means there w o u l d b e some 18,000 people, Liverpool
   fans still to come on that assessment? - A. Those
   figures seem to b e about right, yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence this was an assessment at
   about 2.15? - A. I think it w ou ld be about 2.15, yes.

Q. Was it not obvious at that time, from that m o m e n t
   onwards, that given the limited number of turnstiles
   which were being used at the Liverpool e nd that from
   then onwards you h a d to be very much alive to the b u i l d
   up of the crowd and wh a t was happening? - A. I was
   watching the build up of the crowd.
                                                                   60

                                                          1. D. MURRAY

Q. You only h a d 23 turnstiles for the wh ol e 24,000
   Liverpool spectators, did you not? - A. Yes, there were
   23 turnstiles.

Q. You have a gr eed with me you onl y ha d 7 turnstiles for
   the 10,000 odd for the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
   Initially, yes.

Q. It wou ld b e obvious, would it not, that if 18,000
   people wer e still to come at 2.15 that this was a
   matter to cause you concern at that stage? - A. I think
   18,000 is just about, the turnstiles co ul d probably
   cope wi t h just about that number.

Q. I will not go any further w i t h w h e th er that be a fair
   judgment or not because I have been thr ou gh figures
   with you already and it w o u l d only wa st e time.   You
   then receive a message at 2.17 from Mr. Marshall asking
   for the clo su re of Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. This is at a time when you know, b e c au se it is only two
   minutes later, that there is a good 18,000 people still
   to come? - A. Certainly a lot of p e opl e still to come,
   yes.

Q. If we co nt in ue through w ith just looking at it
   factually, the closure of Leppings Lane itself was an
   unusual request? - A. Yes, it was unusual.

Q.   Clearly y ou would assume it was something to do with
     the large numbers of people w ho were arriving? - A.
     Yes, it was to do with the number of p eo pl e in Leppings
     Lane, yes.

Q. Then at 2.30 with only half an hour to go you could see
   clear spaces, could you not, in the w i n g pens compared
   with the ce ntre pens of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
   Yes, I could.

Q.    What assessment did you make at 2.30 in terms of
     proportion of the numbers still to come for the
     Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I didn't make any
     assessment on proportion.

Q. Did you not think it important given t hat you only had
   half an h ou r to come, given that at 2.15 you knew that
   roughly abo ut 18,000 or so p e o p l e w er e still to come
   that it was obvious you should make an assessment to
   find out h o w many people w er e still to come b y finding
   out the numbers? - A. I am sorry, I am not with you on
   that one.
                                                                    61

                                                          B. P. MURRAY

Q. At 2.30 this was the time that y ou made the assessment
   th a t you co uld get the p eo pl e in b y kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Yet this was the time w he n there was clearly space in
   the wing p ens? - A. Yes, I wo u l d have expected there to
   b e space.

Q. It was only quarter of an hour after you h a d me ntally
   m ade the note that there wo ul d be three quarters of the
   peopl e still to come? - A. Yes.

Q. It was less than quarter of an hou r after Mr. Marshall
   h a d asked for Leppings L ane to b e closed? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you not turn your m i n d at that stage to fi n d out
   the numbers w ho had come t hrough the turnstiles A to G?
   - A. I think we estimated at that stage that the ground
   was about half full at the Liverpool end, c e rt ai nly the
   Nor th Stand and the terraces and the West Stand was
   mo r e than half full.

Q. If the Leppings Lane terraces wer e only half full, how
   co u l d you legitimately expect half the expected numbers
   still to come, that is to say 5,000 people, to get
   through 7 turnstiles in half an hour?

          THE CORONER:   You do not have to answer that
     question.

         THE WITNESS:    I didn't me ntally dra w that
     particular c om parison or pro portion and I do not accept
     it was only 7 turnstiles right the way through.
     Initially it was 7 turnstiles b ut it ma y well have been
     that we could utilise ot he r turnstiles for those
     people.

Q.         MR. KING:  Mr. Murray, you were in charge, as I
     understand it, in the Control Box of monitoring the
     numbers coming into the ground.    You were the p e rso n
     gi ving the information, when asked, of your assessment
     of whether y o u could get them all in? - A. Yes, I gave
     h i m that information.

Q. A r e you saying that your information was b a s e d on an
   assumption at 2.30 that m o r e than 7 turnstiles were
   b e i n g utilised for the Leppings Lane terracing? - A.
   No, I didn't say that at all.      What I said was at that
   time 7 turnstiles were b e i n g utilised.  It m a y have
   b e e n nearer the kick-off, nearer three o'clock, that if
   the West Stand people wer e all in we could have
   u t ilised other turnstiles.
                                                                         62

                                                                     MURRAY


Q. You would h a v e to use other turnstiles to get 5,000
   plus other p e o p l e in after half past two, wou ld you
   not? - A. On t he figures, yes, I would.

Q. Not simply on the figures, just knowing - never mind
   about what t h e e xa ct figures were - that there were
   half still t o come? - A. I am saying on the figures,
   yes.

Q. Did you s t a r t p la n n i n g at 2.30, therefore, as regards
   this obvious m a t t e r that you were going to have to
   start thinking h o w you were going to get t hem all
   through an d w h i c h turnstiles to open up to them? - A.
   No, I didn't start planning on that.

Q. You were in a p o s i t i o n as indeed were all the people in
   the Control B ox at 2.30 to see the po sition outside the
   turnstiles t h r o u g h the video monitor, were you not? -
   A. On the monitor, yes, we had a view.

Q. On any view yo u co ul d see that there was a large crowd
   outside those tu rnstiles? - A. I could see that there
   was a large crowd, yes.

Q. This is a q u e s t i o n which you do not have to answer.
   Did you not, w h e n you looked ba c k at that monitor to
   the Leppings La n e terrace, ask yourself the question
   whether th er e was r oo m in the centre pens for the crowd
   outside? - A. I was looking at a cro wd outside which
   was going t o several different sections of the ground,
   the North Stand, the West Stand, the Leppings Lane
   terraces.

Q. But you w e r e in a position, specifically b e c au se no
   doubt of Mr. M a r s h a l l asking that Leppings Lane should
   be shut, to h a v e a specific look, were you not, at the
   turnstiles o u t s i d e A to G?      You could see that area? -
   A. No, I c o u l d n ' t m a k e any distinction between the
   numbers tha t w e r e outside turnstiles A to G, 1 to 8, 10
   to 16. They w e r e spread right across the enclave.

Q. Of course, y o u c ou ld not get the exact numbers b u t one
   thing you c o u l d see was that you could see it was
   thickly s pr ea d? - A. I did not consider that the crowd
   was any so r e de nse in the areas A to G than it was
   across the w h o l e enclave.

Q. I accept that.   That density was a thick density, was
   it not? - A. A t 2.30 I do not think it was, no.

Q. Is it not a fa c t that at 2.30 you could see that the
   crowd was t h i c k l y spread, and I use that expression
   advisedly, t h i c k l y spread across all the turnstile
                                                                   63

                                                          B. D. MURRAY

 enclave at the Leppings Lane end? - A. I think there
 was a good crowd outside those turnstiles.

. Wou ld you dispute the expression "thickly spread"? - A.
  I do not think it is m y expression.  It is not one I
  would use.

      MR. KING:  In the light of that, and I am trying
 to limit as much as I can the use of the transcript,
 could the witness, sir, look at page 79 of his Taylor
 evidence?

      THE CORONER:   Page 79?

      MR. KING:   Yes,   sir.

       THE CORONER:  We are go in g to show you this and I
 am going to explain again the rule about you not having
 to answer because I do not wan t you to be confused
 about this.   The fact that you have given evidence
 be fore Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry does not mean you
 have either got to agree - b e c aus e these are all
 incriminating questions - that what is stated is a
 correct record nor need you affi rm it, so to speak.
 Both those aspects m a y tend to incriminate you and so
 b y all means look at the letter.

      MR. KING:  Letter H, sir.    So that I do not waste
 time, could he just b e ha nded 79, 80 and 81 because 80
 is very short and 81 is r el atively short for my
 purposes.

      THE CORONER:   Yes.   You w a n t him to read to?




                                /MR. KING..
                                                                    64

                                                    b   . d . Mu r r a y '


             MR. KING:   Sir, if he reads to "C" on page 81.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Have you got that?      Start at the
     bottom of page 79 against "H".

          Is it "people going forward", is that the
     paragraph, Mr. King?

          MR. KING:      Yes, indeed.   Sir, just so I don't
     mislead him:

Q. If you look to letter "E" you can see that we are
   dealing with 2.30 specifically.

          MR. MANNING:   Sir, in looking at that perhaps we
     can look at the question before, because that is where
     the description of the crowd comes, and then "the
     spread of it is over the whole enclave".

Q.        THE CORONER:   Starting reading at "G" then, on
     page 79. - How far do you want me to read?

Q.           MR. KING:   Have you read to page 81C? - A. Yes, I
     have.

Q. Just go back and have a look at page 79H and then I
   will ask you a question. - A. Yes.

Q. I am asking you about your view of the crowd outside
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.30 on 15th April,
   1989, and what I suggested to you earlier was that what
   you could see was that the crowd was thickly spread
   across all the turnstile enclave? - A. Yes.

Q. And you said to me that isn't a word or expression,
   thickly spread, which you wquld use? - A. It wasn't an
   expression that I thought I would use but I did use it,
   yes.

Q. Do you therefore now accept, to save my going through
   it all, that at 2.30 you could see that there was a
   crowd thickly spread across the whole of the turnstile
   enclave outside the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

Q. So going back then to 2.30, given that at 2.30 you were
   of the view that half the people had still to come -
   that was your evidence to us already at the Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Probably, yes.

Q. Given that you could see this crowd thickly spread
   across the whole of the turnstile enclave, you also
   knew, didn't you, that the centre pens were from
   experience the most popular? - A. Yes, the centre pens
   were more popular than the wing pens.
                                                            65

                                                 B. D. MURRAY'


Q. You also knew, didn't you, that you had a
   responsibility for monitoring the build up of the crowd
   on the Leppings Lane Terrace? - A. The build up of the
   crowd?

Q.    On the terrace? - A. Yes, sir, I accepted that I   had a
     duty along w i t h others to monitor the crowd.

Q.   You would be able to see at 2.30, wouldn't you, that
     the centre pens compared w ith the side pens were
     clearly being filled, compared with the side pens?   The
     side pens were hardly being filled up, isn't that the
     position, and the centre pens were being filled up, at
     2.30? - A. There were more people in the centre pens
     than there were in the others, yes.

Q.    But itwas more obvious than that even.   Clearly the
     centre pens were being filled, and the side pens there
     were wide open spaces, weren't there, even at 2.30? -
     A. No, I have said that there were more people in the
     centre pens.   There were a lot more people in the
     centre pens than there were in the wing pens.

Q.   Right.   Did you then at 2.30 consider that there might
     come a need to divert this crowd which you could see
     outside, when they came through into the Leppings Lane
     Terrace, to divert them from the centre pens to the
     side pens? - A. I didn't consider there was a need to
     divert the crowd at all.

Q. But I am not n o w talking about diverting it when you
   open a large gate, I am talking about simply so as to
   ensure that there was a reasonable distribution across
   the terraces before dangerous pressures, crowd
   pressures built up.    Wasn't it obvious at 2.30 that you
   should have that in mind? - A. No, I have said that at
   that stage I did not consider it was necessary to
   divert the crowd and I only knew from experience, or I
   thought I knew from experience that in the past the
   crowd had found its own level on the terraces.

Q. I am sorry to press the point again, Mr. Murray, but
   you only had one experience, which was 1988? - A. Yes,
   sir, but that was based on success in the previous
   year.

          THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think you have pressed
     the point quite sufficiently.

          MR. KING:   I appreciate that.   I am trying to
     move on in time anyway:

Q. But at 2.30 at a time when you made an assessment of
   the numbers still to come, and at a time when - was it
                                                           66
                                                 B. D. MURRAY'


     at that time you told Mr. Duckenfield you thought you
     could get them all in? - A. It was about 2.30, yes.

Q. So there was clearly a discussion between you as to the
   numbers still to come at that time? - A. I don't know
   whether it was a discussion or whether it was just
   something I said to him.

Q.   And at that time coincidentally there was also a
     discussion as to when one would delay kick-off? -   A. I
     think it was coincidental, yes.

Q. It was at exactly the same time, wasn't it? - A. It was
   about the same time, it wasn't exactly, about the same
   time.

Q.    How did that come into discussion?  Remind me, please,
     Mr. Murray, as to when one would delay kick-off?    Do
     you know h ow it came about that was brought up? - A. I
     think it was just about the way that you have put it
     there, Mr. Duckenfield saying that to me.

Q. But you would not have a discussion like that, would
   you?  You would not be interested in it unless you were
   beginning to become concerned as to whether or not you
   could get everybody in? - A. That was something I could
   remember being spoken about, about 2.30.   It was my
   intention to try and put everything I could remember
   had occurred on that day into a form of statement, for
   the information of the Public Inquiry.   Everything that
   I could remember that we had talked about, everything
   that I could remember that had happened, I wanted to
   bring to the attention of the Public Inquiry, and I
   could recall that particular conversation happening.

Q. Doesn't it sound as if the reason that came up in
   conversation at 2.30 was that it was beginning to
   become obvious in the Control Box that you might not
   get everybody in still to come at 2.30? - A. I think i t
   was just a question of Mr. Duckenfield getting his mi-w
   straight on the circumstances about delaying kick-off.

Q. And the answer you gave was by reference to some
   agreement, wasn't it, because you said it was what you
   had agreed? - A. What I had spoken to him about before,
   yes.

Q. I am interested in the use of the word agreed, because
   that is the expression you have used, isn't it? - A.
   That is the expression I have used.  Okay, as far as I
   am concerned I used the word agreed.  I certainly
   discussed it with Mr. Duckenfield, I told him the
   scenario that a kick-off would normally be agreed.
                                                            67

                                                B . D . MURRAY


Q. An agreement sounds as if in advance it has been worked
   out a policy as to when you wou ld delay kick-off and
   that is fair, isn't it? - A. I wo uld say that by agreed
   I meant it was something that we had discussed before.

Q. And it is a fact, isn't it, that all you told Mr.
   Duckenfield as regards this a greement was that there
   had to be a specific reason, an identifiable problem
   for people not arriving, before you would delay kick-
   off?  That was the gist of what you were saying, wasn't
   it? - A. I told him that was the usual situation with
   delaying kick-off as far as I was aware.

Q. There was no suggestion that you would abandon the
   policy if in fact, albeit people had come too late
   through their own fault, they were in difficulties
   outside?  There was no mention of that, was there? - A.
   I don't think it was ever a rigid policy, it was the
   only circumstances, the only thing I knew about when
   kick-off would be delayed.

Q. Since we are dealing with kick-off, do you remember -
   you do remember, don't you - an invitation or
   suggestion from, I think, P.C. Buxton that kick-off be
   delayed? - A. Yes, sir, I recall that.

Q. You told us that you thought that had come after the
   gates had been opened? - A. I feel it must have.

Q. Why do you say it must have? - A. Because of the timing
   of it and the fact the players were coming onto the
   pitch.

Q. I say that because, I only put it to you, that you
   could be quite wrong about that, on the basis - and I
   don't know if you were at the Inquest when P.C. Buxton
   &ave his evidence? - A. No, I wasn't.

        MR. KING:   Sir,   I think it is important that I
   put this:

Q. P.C. Buxton's evidence was that it was several minutes
   after his request to delay kick-off that he saw that
   the crowd was being relieved outside the turnstiles by
   the opening of the   gates? - A. Ican only accept that
   when I heard that message was when Sergeant Goddard
   replied immediately, "It's too late now, the players
   are on the field".

Q. Let me accept that   for a moment. Why would it just be
   too late because the players we r e on the field? Why
   does that make it automatically too late to delay kick-
   off? - A. It was too late in those circumstances, I
                                                            B.   D. MURRAY*


 feel, that presumably P.C. Buxton wanted the kick-off
 delayed for whatever reason I don't know.

To say "for some reason I don't know", you were aware
by that time, whatever it was, that there had been a
very large problem outside the turnstile area at
Leppings Lane, weren't you? -A.There is no doubt that
if we could have communicated to  that crowd outside the
turnstiles that the kick-off had been delayed, and if
they had taken any notice of that communication, it mav
have ha d an effect.                                   y

Mr. Murray, I want to take it in stages.     I want to
know why at the time you say   it was, whene v e r it was,
that it was just too late todelay kick-off, merely
because the players were on the pitch? - A. It wasn't
merely because the players were on the pitch, it was
because the gates were open and the crowd had come in
by unauthorised means.

I understood - I may have totally misunderstood- that
you were saying, and that was the communication of
Sergeant Goddard, it was too late because the players
were on the pitch, so it is nothing to do with the
players being on the pitch then, it was too late? - A.
No.   It doesn't make any difference whether the players
were on the pitch or not, apart from the fact that once
the players come out a cheer   goes up naturally, and it
would be extremely difficult to try and convince
anybody after that stage that you had delayed the kick-
off .

But it is a fact, isn't it, Mr. Murray, that you should
not refuse to delay kick-off merely because the players
are on the pitch, if there is a crushing situation
outside? - A. I think I have already said that there
aren t any hard and fast rules at all about delaying
kick-off.  There are no limitations.   A kick-off can be
delayed whenever, for whatever reason.

Would you not agree that the statement, "It is too late
to delay kick-off, the players are already on the
pitch  sounds like just the application of a rieid
policy? - A. No, I don't.

You don't,    all right.         Let me m ove on in time ....

        MR. MANNING:        In that case,         sir. can we call
time?

        THE CORONER:        Yes - 10-past-3.

                       (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )
                                                                      69

                                                            B. D. MURRAY

 Q*    aoo   M R * KING:  M r * Murrfly» you have told us what your
       assessment was at 2.30 on 15th April as to whether or
         ot you get numbers in and your assessment of the
       terraces.     Between 2.30 and, shall we say, quarter-to
       3 did you mon i to r in any way the Leppings Lane
       terraces, have a look at it, the build-up on the
       Leppings Lane terraces between 2.30 and quarter-to 3?
       ~ A . I am sure that I would have looked at the
       Leppings Lane terraces and every part of the ground
       between that time.                                 6

 Q.    In looking at the Leppings Lane terraces, did nothing
             ^ s trike you as to the distribution of the fans
       at that tine between 2.30 and quarter-to 3? - A. There
       was nothing I saw that caused me any concern at all.

 Q.    Did you observe the m a rked disparity between the wing
       pens and the centre pens? - A. I can't recall n o t i c i m
       a marked disparity.   It wasn't something that I recall
       particularly noticing.

 Q.    So bad a disparity that it looked, for example, in Pen
       I       ~v a   k n o w what 1 m e a n by Pen 6, do you not? -
       A« YfiS| X do.

            thf t had 5 een set aside for segregation purposes
      when we know, of course, that it had not been? - A. I
      did hear that afterwards.

       .       CORONER: Mr. King, I think somebody said
      tnat.  it does not neces sa r i l y mean that that is
      correct.

           MR. KING:  I agree, sir.           He is entitled to
      disagree with it, of course.

           THE CORONER: But if you put it so           marked, then
      you are stating it as a gospel fact.

              MR. KING:       Sir,   I was not there, as you well
      know.

              THE CORONER:      Indeed,   that is why I said it.

                  ? INGi ^  a? try ln « to fit this witness's
          S « S e«Jn #.K  5ot5 ei: evidence, of course, sir.
      the end of the day I do not have to assess the
                                                              At
      evidence.      I am in that h a p p y position.

              THE CORONER:      Yes, a very happy position.

Q.         MR. KING:  But, Mr. Murray, would you regard
      yourself as the principal Officer in the Control Box
      who was monitoring the build-up of the crowd? - A. I
                                                                               70

                                                                B. D. MURRAY

      was in charge of the Control Box.             I would be loolrin*
        ‘ ? 5 V r?*d.'    1 would be P o k i n g at ISerytMng!             J *
      would be looking all around.

 Q. I cannot       press it any further than this.              It is your
      thl? Jlofh?   WS ? USt a * a e s a A t » but you are saying
      In d  Shil^L” 8       ted W i t h y °U at a11 b e tweeh 2?30
      and, shall we say, quarter-to 3 as to the distribution
         the spectators between the centre pens and the side
      pens.    A. I think what I said was that nothing caused
      H o fC ?n C er n K 1 **uld only ^ a l i f y that by saying I do
      not know what effect or h o w long the Control Room was
      disrupted when the radio went down.

Q.    The radio was out of operation from - I do not want to
      5terms
        £ .r 2 ;J
               of 8minutes,
                         yourwas
                              mouth-
                                  How long
                                 the
                                radio      would
                                       out of    y°u say,iA in
                                              operation
      the Control Box? - A. I don't know, but I think I have
      bS
      be longer,    t 5 etweenu fl ® l n u t e » two ®inutes.
                    I do not know.                                  It could
                                                                           "

Q.   May it seem a long time, but a relatively short time?
     long.  conslder l t was a short time. I don't know how


Q*          j 8 a £*ssage, 18 there not, which is logged at
     Contrftfe« e i- Blc£ ard 18 radioing, I think, to Force
     Control outside the ground at Hammerton Road and is
     melsafe!            ° ±S          ’ A * YeS* 1 have seen that


Q * f?30h ^ndP2?45!ntS U        ** 2 **2? " A * J*hi C h   18 between


Q * SrrtM i ? i L i f e r?dlu,Wa! back ln business by the time
    Mr. Marshall made his first request for the gates to
     be opened? - A. I think so, yes.                           8

Q.   I just want to return briefly to make sure I
     f«n!rStv        evldence as to the distribution of the
             n    ? DOt see a°ything unusual which caused
     you concern, but could you tell us this. It did

     fufle^e                                                    Clearly

Q.   Did it register with you - this is between 2.30 and
     full thIn°thP~s?Sat th% centre Pens were markedly more
     full than the side pens? - A. I think that the centre
     pens and the north-west terrace were fuller than the
     other parts of the terrace.  I wouldn't say that the
     centre pens were any fuller than the north-wes?
     terrace or vice-versa.
                                               B. D. HURRAY

 thAm a ^ f lly c °nsl<fering the centre pens as opposed to
 the side pens? - A. Yes, I know.

 I am not suggesting for one moment that you did a head
 count, but do you think you looked at the west
 terraces at about 2.45, something like that? - A  t
 would think I did.  I was looking all over

 Jn^ 2 ° ^ SU8geS,
                 t lnf thaJ you n e cessarily would have
 formed the conclusion that pens at that stage had a
 specific number in them, but the centre pens on any
 view were full at that stage, were they not, at 2.45?
 - A. I can t recall.    I can't recall sufficiently to
 describe them as full or nearly full.

I am not suggesting that you cannot argue with me - I
know there are arguments about whether you could see
an e m p t y space here, or an empty space there - but
d e a r l y compared with the side pens, the centre pens
were full and the side pens clearly had space, that
would be fair, would it not? - A. There were a lot
more people in the centre pens than the side pens.

I cannot take that any further.    Even at that stage,
this is before any request to open gates comes, was it
not with i n your mind, did you not turn yourself to the
question of the need to divert any people coming in
even in a regular route to the side pens as opposed to
the centre pens? - A. It hadn't crossed my mind to
take a course of action such as that, no.

As I understand your evidence earlier today, that
really was not part of the system you thought you were
operating is that right? - A. To divert?

Yes. - A. No, I had no prior planning for it and it
aid not cross my mind at that time.

At 2.40 there was a request from Inspector Hand-Davi
was there not, a mounted Officer, for mounted Officers
to go to the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, he asked for
mounted Officers from the other end of the ground.

Upon that you sent round a mounted serial, did you
not? - A. Sergeant Goddard was very quick, he straight
away asked Sergeant Salisbury to make available to
Leppings Lane all the horses that he could spare from
the Penistone Road end.  I dispatched a standby serial
   foot Officers from the gymnasium.

The foot Officers which you sent round were Inspector
Delaney s serial then? - A. Inspector Delaney, yes.
                                                                 72

                                                      B. D. MURRAY

 Q*              8? t a ®essage around that time about the
       late?7 I thinkU fhf °utsld® ^ P P i n g s Lane? - A. A little
       later I think the request came for a tannoy message.

 Q.    You were able to see on the video the condition and
                    crowd outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles, the enclave which you have described’ -       a
                i°Ut thai tlme 5hat the vldeo operator used *
       his zoom lens and zoomed in on one of the horsemen who
       was surrounded by a crowd of people.

 Q.    How was the density of the crowd at that stage, that
       is about 2.40, changing compared with what you had
       noted at about 2.30 when you were making your
       assessment as to whether you would get everybody in? -
       A. That is very difficult because at 2.30 I had an
       overview of the whole of the enclave and Leppings
       Lane. At 2.40 the video zoomed in, as I say. on a
       horseman and the people around him. But my impression
       froa that was that the crowd was more densely packed.

Q*             ?° f ^ 2 *40 we could summarise the position in
      the Control Box to your knowledge as this, could we
      not, that at about 20 minutes before, or just over 20
      minutes before, at around 2.17, there had been the
      Y A ^ t J fr?m M r * Marshall to close Leppings Lane? - A.
      Yes, that is correct.

Q*    S5S? ther® h?d been a request for further mounted
      Officers to be sent? - A. At about 2.40, yes.
Q.    There is^the sending of the reserve serial, there is a
      request for the tannoy message and you have seen the
      crowd in your perception getting a lot denser. Taking
              tufact?rs together, was it not at that stage
      obvious that there was a problem outside the turnstile
      area in terms of the numbers of people and getting
      them into the ground? - A. I think we were gettin® i: -
      a situation then where there was obviously a problem
      because of the fact of the request for mounted
      I 5 *urS* as you say» the despatching of the serial
      and the messages that were to be passed.

Q*    tt
      at
         5l!e
         the
                Sam? time you were able to see, by just looking
                monitors, the state of the west terraces? - A.
      SnAiI     could see if I looked round the ground how many
      people    were on the terrace.                           y
Q*               haTe the malfunction of the radio system for
      about two minutes or so, that is what you have told
      us. - a . I think we are possibly talking about two
      minutes being down air time. Just how long the place
      n ? L disrupted» 1 do not know. The Communications
      Officer was a large, heavily built man and, like I
                                                                 73

                                                     B. D. MURRAY

      say»    w a ® not just losing the air time;       it was
      actually the disruption to the control.

Q.   I understand that, but none the less the radio is back
     on after that period of time, that short period of
     time. ~ A. Yes, the radio comes back on.

Q.   As regard then available manpower, by which I mean
     what was available to you in the Control Box to call
     up for assistance if you so wanted, the position was
     this, was it not, that before Mr. Marshall's first
     request for opening the gates, but just before, you
     got the message from Inspector Bennett asking for
     assistance at Leppings Lane, is that not right? - A. I
     cannot say whether that mes s a g e came before or after
     but Inspector Bennett c e r t a i n l y asked for assistance*
     He was on top of the turnstiles.          Again the camera
     picked him up and I could see him.          He asked for
     assistance down at Leppings Lane.

Q.   Mr. Murray I do not want to d e l a y matters too much - I
     am conscious of time - but y o u have been able in the
     past, have you not, to suggest that it was about the
     time of Mr. Marshall's message, immediately before or
     shortly before, that Inspector Bennett asked for his
     assistance? - A. I will accept that if I have said
     that somewhere else.

Q.   I do not want to mislead you. - A. I can't remember, I
     am sorry.                                           *

Q.   If you did say it, for example, to Lord Justice
     Taylor, you would accept that, would you? - A. If I
     did say it, it was fresher in my mind than it is now.




                                 /Q.   I will move on
                                                               7.4
                                                                     «

                                                    B . D . MURRAY '


 Q. I will move on but for those w h o want to check it, it is
    page 90 of the transcript, at letter F.     We have this
    picture that Inspector Bennett asked for assistance at
    Leppings Lane and around the same time you get
    information that in fact there are a number of spare
    Serials in the gymnasium?   That is a message which comes
    through from Inspector Sewell? - A. If I can just
    explain, the radio, of course, is on talk-through so that
    everybody can hear the messages being passed.     Inspector
    Sewell picked it up from the radio message from Inspector
    Bennett to Control.

Q. Yes. - A. He came through on the telephone before we
   could ring him and said he had spare Serials of D
   Division Officers who should have taken up a standby
   position in the gym after quarter to three.

Q. How many Serials did he have available? - A. He had ten
   Serials.

Q.   Of how   many men? - A. Well, he had ten Serials; they
     were a Sergeant and eight.     I asked him to send five and
     fifty.    He actually sent, I think, six Serials, which is
     six Sergeants and forty-eight.

Q. So there were in fact available to you, if you had chosen
   to use them, up to eighty men, ten Serials with eight
   Officers? - A. Y e s ,

Q. You despatched to Inspector Bennett six Serials of eight,
   that is forty-eight? - A. Yes.

Q.    This is before any instruction was given to open the
     gates?  - A. Yes, I think it was before the gates were
     opened.

Q. Therefore, before the gates were opened, as regards
   available manpower to you in the Control Box there was
   the reserve Serial which had already been sent ahead -
   Inspector Delaney's? - A. That is correct.

Q. There was the eighty men who you were told were in the
   gymnasium, of which forty-eight were despatched? - A.
   Yes, I asked for five and fifty.

Q. Of course there were the e x isting Serials on the
   concourse? - A. Yes.   The despatching of the Officers
   down to the Leppings Lane end was to try and retrieve the
   situation which was existing outside.

Q. I want just to discover the available manpower.   You are
   helping us very fairly with it.   Let me take it in
   stages.   Had Inspector Delaney's Serial been sent to any
   particular part of Leppings Lane? - A. I did not give
                                                              Z5

                                                    B. D. MURRAY '


   them a particular part.     I sent them down to the
   Leppings Lane end.

Q» What about the one sent to Inspector Bennett?   Were they
   sent to any particular area? - A. They weren't sent to a
   particular area by me.   They were asked to go down to
   the Leppings Lane end.

Q. They would approach the end from within the ground? - A.
   I would have expected them to have gone along the
   concourse behind the North Stand.

Q. They would therefore end in a position whereby they could
   gain access to the concourse area at the Leppings Lane
   end? - A. If they had gone that way, yes, they would.

Q. Of course we still had left in the gymnasium the four
   Serials which had n e v e r been sent? - A. I retained those
   as reserves.

Q. Given that is the manpower, let me now deal with timings.
   You w o u l d accept, I am sure, there was a time gap between
   Mr. Marshall first asking for the gates to be opened and
   the instruction to open them? - A. Yes, there was a gap.

Q» The instruction to open them, of course, was the
   instruction which led to Gate C being opened for what we
   call the second time? - A. Yes, Gate C was opened when
   the instruction was sent through.

Q. We know there were two openings and the first one was not
   one you were expecting?   That is the one you saw open
   for a short period and then closed again? -A. Yes, that
   is correct, it did.

Q. What we call the second opening was at 2.52? - A. I will
   accept that time, yes.

Q. The time of Mr. Marshall's first message, the first
   message he gave, seems to be accepted to be 2.57.   Would
   you accept that? - A. I have to accept that if it can be
   proved.   It seemed only two or three minutes between the
   first request and the second request, but I will accept
   whatever times have been proved.

Q. If - I mean, it is a matter of evidence - but if it is
   evidence, and accepted, that the first message from
   Mr. Marshall is 2.47 and the order to open the gates led
   to the authorised o pening at 2.52 of Gate C, that is a
   time g a p of five minutes? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Indeed, as regards Gate A, I don't suppose you know the
   times of the opening of Gate A yourself? - A. I only seem
   to think that Gate A came soon after the other requests.
                                                        B. D . MURRAY


 Q. The request to open Gate A was after Gate C had been
    opened, wasn't it, the a u t h o r i s e d opening? - A, Yes. it
    was.

 Q. So it was after 2.52.   The req u e s t to open Gate A, and
    the order to open it, followed on very quickly? - A. Yes,
    the request came in, and the a uthority was given almost
    straight away.

 Q. If, and it is a matter of evidence, if Gate A was opened
    at 2.58, if that be the case, then there would have been
    eleven minutes between Mr. Ma r s ha l l ' s first request to
    open the gates at 2.47 and the opening of Gate A? - A. If
    the times are right it has got to be eleven minutes, yes.

Q. Dealing with the five minute p e r i o d between 2.47 and
   2.52, when Gate C was opened in the unauthorised way, how
   many people came through from you r view? - A. I think I
   estimated 150/200, but I did not see it open.        I only
   saw part of it.

Q. Within those five minutes Mr. Duckenfield was having to
   make the decision whether or not to authorise the opening
   of the gates, was he not? - A. Yes, he was having to do
   that, sir.

Q. You ultimately had to press h i m for a decision? - A. I
   did say to h i m that as far as I was concerned a stage had
   been reached when it had to be opened.

Q. You said to him, "Are we go i n g to open the gates or not?"
   - A. Yes, I did - words to that effect.

Q. That is something you remember bec a u s e it clearly sticks
   in your mind? - A. I do remember, yes.

Q. Was the impression you were g a i n i n g that Mr. Duckenfield
   was uncertain in his mind as to what to do? - A. I don't
   think I gained that impression.         I think it was just a
   question, as far as I was concerned, that the time had
   come when we had to open the gates.

Q.    During those five minutes it is right, of course, that as
     regards those five minutes no instructions were sent out
     from the Control Box as regards any sort of reception
     committee - reception Serials - for the people who would
     come in upon the opening the gates? - A. I don't think
     anyone was given specific instructions to receive the
     people coming in.

Q.    As a matter of fact, no instructions were sent out to any
     of the Serials we have talked about, saying, "The gates
     are about to be opened.    P o s i t i o n yourselves here,
     there, or what have you."?
                                                            77
                                                              * «

                                                  B . D. MURRAY


          THE CORONER:   This is another one which I am going
     to refresh your memory on.

          THE WITNESS:    Yes*   Well, no instructions were
     given to that effect, but like I have said, the radio was
     operating on the talk-through mode and every Officer with
     a radio could hea r messages going backwards and forwards
     from Control and whoever they were talking to.

Q.        MR. KING:   As a matter of fact there was no
     specific instruction sent out? - A. I didn't send an
     instruction out, no.

Q. It follows from that there was no instruction, for
   example, to direct them in any particular way for anybody
   coming through the gates? - A. I did not give any
   instructions to direct people.

Q. There were no instructions, obviously, from that to close
   off the entrance to the tunnel? - A. I gave no
   instructions to close the tunnel.

Q. As a matter of fact, in those five minutes you clearly
   had the manpower available to utilise for the purpose of
   closing off the tunnel if you had wanted to?   You had
   the manpower there, didn*t you? - A. If I could have got
   the manpower to the tunnel in time I would have thought
   it was possible.

Q. There were five minutes between the first request and the
   opening of Gate C, all right?    That is long enough, more
   than long enough, to get the Serials we have already
   described in a position, if you had want e d to, outside
   the tunnel? - A. One would have hoped so.     I heard a
   Sergeant in one of the Serials speaking her e two or three
   days ago and he obviously never got to the Leppings Lane
   end.   I heard h im say he made his way along the track
   and stop behind the goals.    I cannot say.    I would hope
   that if I had been able to identify a particular task for
   Officers at the gymnasium to do, I would have hoped that
   they may have been able to get there in time, but I
   cannot say.

Q. In any event you had already sent ahead not only the
   reserve Serial of Mr. Higgins', there had already been
   sent ahead the six times eight Serials to Inspector
   Bennett? - A. Those are the Serials I was talking about,
   just now.   One of them did not get there, obviously.

Q. Those forty-eight men, the six times eight, had already
   been despatched before the instruction to open the gates?
   - A. I would have hoped so, sir, but as I say, one of the
   Sergeants was in here saying he never got there.
                                                                   7*
                                                     B. D. MURRAY


 Q. You k n o w of nothing yourself to tell us about which gives
    you a n y reason to think you    did not have   the manpower -
    if it had been so decided -      the manpower   to utilise
    before Gate C was opened, or any of the gates were
    opened, for the purpose of closing off the tunnel,
    directing fans and so forth? - A. I think I could
    probably have got the manpower to attempt to do that task
    and got them down to the tunnel in time if it had crossed
    my mind.

 Q. Before the order for the gates to be opened, it was known
    to you in the Control Box that there was a large crowd in
    the enclave outside the turnstile area at the Leppings
    Lane end? -A. Yes, I could see there was a large crowd
    outside.

Q. You were in a position at that stage, in the five minute
   period between 2.47 and 2.52, to observe the state of the
   Wes t Terraces, weren't you?  - A. I was in  a position to
   be able to observe them, yes.

Q. To be fair to you, Mr. Duckenfield in the Control Boxwas
   in a position to look first of all at the monitor showing
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles, wasn't he? -A. He was in
   the same situation as I was.

Q. Just as you could see there was a large crowd outside,
   you h ave no reason to doubt that he also could see it,
   have you? - A. No, I have no reason to doubt it.

Q. You were in a position from the Control Box to see the
   state of the Leppings Lane terraces and Mr. Duckenfield
   was too? - A. I would think we c o u l d both have looked at
   the terraces and seen the state of them, yes.

Q * if,1 c ™ * * V st show y°u for a moment photographs 509, and
        “ 509 is probably the best we are going to do for
    about this time.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:   C.509,   sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   Mr. Murray, this is a photograph which
     shows at 2.52, all right? - A. Yes.

Q. I would have liked to have shown you one at 2.51, but
   £   ?   Jhe k®st I can do.   I need to show you C.511 and
           for the purpose of looking at the side pens.
   Just look at 511, which is two minutes later. - A. Yes.




               Q. I am sorry, I will h a v e to
                                                          B. D. MURRAY

Q. I a m sorry b ut I w ill have to come back to 509 for a
   moment.   On 509 we can see the beginnings of the wing
   pen, pen 6? - A. Yes, we can.

Q. On 509 all we can see is a corner of it b u t such corner
   as we can see clearly, it w o u l d be fair to say, it
   looks as if it is almost completely empty apart from
   two or three people? - A. It looks very sparse in that
   particular part I can see on this film.

Q. Again under the Control Box the area leading into pen 1
   and leading into pen 2, although there is c l e a r l y more
   people at the back again it looks very sparse to the
   side of pen 1 and down to the front? - A. Yes, there
   are less people there but that is the par t of the
   ground where I expect there to be less people.

Q * I accept that.  Then to 511 we get a better v iew of pen
    6 two minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. If we can move to 326A we get an even b e t t er v i e w of
   pen 6 at some five minutes later? - A. Yes.

Q. Going back to the position just before the order was
   given to order the gates to be opened, b e c a u s e we know
   gate C was opened at 2.52, if one looked at the west
   terraces it would be clear that pen 6 had m a rk e d empty
   spaces in it? - A. F r o m where that p ho t ograph is taken,
   yes.

Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the
   photograph, it must have bee n obvious, must it not,
   f rom your use of the cameras you had from the Control
   Box that pen 6 was markedly empty?     That was not
   difficult to see, was it? - A. F r o m the views that we
   were getting from the cameras, from the views that I
   could see from the Control Room, it wasn't obvious.

Q. At the end of the day that will be a matter of
   evidence.    You are saying that from the Control Box
   with your use of the videos, the cameras, a n d you had
   the ability to look along as w e have already described?
   - A. I think you have got to look at the individual
   cameras.   I think the colour camera was unfortunately
   focussed on the pro b le m area in the Kop a n d that is
   where it stayed until about three o'clock.       The camera
   on the gantry next to the Control Box was unfortunately
   not working up to its potential.     I do not k n o w h o w
   that affected it b u t I can see from the angle that that
   photograph is taken, 326A, yes, there is a lot of room
   on the front of pen 6 but I didn't have t h a t vie w and
   if I had h a d that v iew it might have affected my
   decisions.
                                                       B. D. MURRAY


 Q. If you had had that view, which decision would have
    been affected? - A. I don't know.

        THE CORONER:   I think that is hypothetical.

Q* i               Before the gates were opened, if one
                      terraces' would y°u accept this much
   or not; that there was an obvious difference between
   the state of the centre pens and the side pens, would
   you have said that much? - A. I think I have said that
   there were a lot more people in the centre pens and the
   north west terrace than there were in the other parts
   of the terrace.                                 ^

Q. You have agreed with me that there was a large crowd
   outside the gates? - A. Yes, there was a large crowd of
   people outside the gates.

Q. In respect of which the order was about to given for
   them to be opened? - A. Yes.

Q. Once in the concourse area, whichever gates were
   opened, those people had to go somewhere, did they not?
   - A. Yes, they had to get into the concourse first away
   rrom the crush.

Q * not? -hAY Yes t0 9° somewhere lnto the ground, did they

Q. This is a question you do not have to answer. Before
   the order for the gates to be opened was made did you
   ask yourself the question, "Where are these people
   going to go when we open the gates?"? - a. I can't
   recall asking myself the question. All I can recall is
   trying to relieve the injury and suffering that was
   taking place outside the gates in the concourse in the
   enclave m front of the turnstiles. That was the
   problem.

Q. It must have been obvious to anybody who turned his
            tht fu®stion of what was going to happen after
   the gates had been opened that those people had to ao
   somewhere on to the terraces? - A. What was obvious to
   me is that we had a terrible problem outside.
   Experienced Officers were letting us know that people
   were being injured, likely to be killed. We had never
   had anything like it before. There was tremendous
   pressure to take a course of action to relieve that and
   that course of action was taken. Nothing else was
   obvious.
                                                        B. D. MURRAY

Q. So your evidence is that you yourself never considered
   where these people were going to go if these gates were
   opened? - A. I did not consider they were going to go
   in any particular direction.

Q. Did you consider where they were going to go?     Did the
   question enter your head.

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, forgive me, but I think it
     is at least the third time in this particular series
     that you have asked the same question and he has given
     you the same answer.

          MR. KING: I apologise, sir, I thought he was
     saying something different.

          THE CORONER:   It is difficult for you I know.

          MR. KING: I thought he was saying something
     different and I apologise for that.

          THE CORONER:  I thought he said, and let me make
     sure I have got it right, that the question of where
     they were going to go did not cross his mind.

          MR. KING: I thought he had said that and I
     thought he was saying something different just then.      I
     apologise.

Q.        THE CORONER:   That is right, Mr. Murray, is it? -
     A. Yes, sir.

          MR- MANNING: Sir, I was about to say, I am
     writing and my learned friend obviously is not but I
     will read him out the two replies that have already
     been given in answer to that question.  I am sure the
     shorthand writer could read it back if my learned
     friend needs it.

          THE CORONER:   I am satisfied we do not need to go
     over that again.

Q.        MR. KING: I misunderstood you.    I thought you
     said in the end that you did not consider which
     particular direction they were going in but what you
     are saying is, and I accept it, that you did not
     consider where they were going to go at all? - a . They
     were going to go in through the gates.

Q. After that the question of where they were going to go
   did not cross your mind, we have established that? - A.
   It did not cross my mind that they were going to go in
   any particular direction.
                                                               82

                                                      B. D. MURRAY


          MR. KING: As long as everybody is happy that
     means the same thing, so be it.

          THE CORONER:   That is what he has said.

Q-        MR. KING: You would agree with me though that
     they would have to go somewhere? - A. Once into the
     ground they had to go somewhere else, yes.

Q. Do you know yourself, and please say yes or no, as to
   whether or not Mr. Duckenfield in the five minutes
   between the first request and the order to open the
   gate, considered the question of where the spectators
   were going to go if the gates were opened? - A. I do
   not know that, sir.

Q. Going back to the view of the terraces, and you have
   told us you did not see this which is why I have to put
   it in this way, if it was obvious - and you do not
   agree - from the Control Box before the gates were
   opened and the order was given that there was plenty of
   space in the side pens and little or no room in the
   centre pens, if that had been obvious but I accept you
   say it was not, you would not have wanted, would you,
   the people who were still outside the gates who were
   going to be let into the ground when the gates were
   opened, you would not want them to have gone into the
   centre pens?

           MR. MANNING: Sir, I have to say I do not think
     that that is a fair or proper question.  If, as my
     learned friend has already said, the witness does not
     accept the premise from which that particular question
     starts but then says, "If you did accept it then what
     would have been the position?", it seems to me that he
     must work from the situation that the witness starts
     from.

          THE CORONER:   I agree with you.

Q.        MR. KING: If you in the Control Box are
     monitoring a terrace and you know that a large number
     of people are about to enter through a large series of
     gates, do you not accept that the question you have to
     ask yourself in that situation, and the obvious
     question you have to ask yourself is, where on the
     terraces are we going    tolet this large number of
     people go to?

          THE CORONER: Mr. King, I am very sorry, I do not
     want to interrupt but wehave dealt with this four
     minutes ago. He gave a clear reply as to what he
                                                                              83

                                                                  B. D. MURRAY

     thought or did not think at the time.             There is
     absolutely no point in doing it again.

            MR. KING:   I am e n t i tl e d to ask, sir, and I do not
     accept it as a pure hypothesis, bec au s e it is important
     to k n o w what this witness in his ex p e rience can tell us
     about p o l icing at matches.        I am e nt i t l e d to ask him
     whether or not he agrees or does not agree that if the
     position is that side pens have p l e n t y of space and
     centre pens do not that in that situation he w o u l d w ant
     to take steps to p r e ve n t a large number of peop l e about
     to come in from getting into the centre pens.                 I do not
     understand why I am not e n titled to p u t that question
     to him.

          THE CORONER:   A r e you wanting to ask h i m b a s e d on
     his experience?   I suppose if you p u t it like that,
     purely hypothetically.

          MR. MANNING:   As long as it is understood, sir,
     that it is purely hypothetical because the Officer has
     used the wor d on more than one occasion that this was
     unprecedented.   That in any usage of the w ord means
     that he h ad never ever known it to h a ppen b e f o r e w h i c h
     means, therefore, if he is drawing on experience his
     experience cannot hel p him.  Therefore, h o w can he
     possibly answer the question?

Q.       MR. KING:  Mr. Murray, when the order was given
     there was no specific order given as to wh i c h gates,
     was there? - A. From w h a t I can recall, no, sir.

Q. You accept, do you, w h e n gate C was opened that the
   crowd coming through g ate C, the first thing they would
   see ahead of them as regards the d irection into the
   ground wo u l d be the tunnel?  Do you accept that? - A. I
   know that now, yes.

Q. You say you k now that n o w as if you did not k n o w it in
   1989 b ut as regards the gate which we k n o w as gate C
   and I am not now specifically worrying about the letter
   but where it was and if Mr. Griffiths c o u ld just point
   it out to us, that gate, gate C, through w h i c h on the
   instruction wh i c h was going to be opened, once that was
   opened and people came through that gate the o n l y thing
   that p e ople could see in front of them as regards
   getting into the ground would be the tunnel, w o u l d it
   not? - A. I have said that I can see that n o w b u t at
   the time I couldn't d r a w the sort of route tha t people
   coming through an u n e x pected exit gate wo u l d take when
   they got into the ground.      I don't k n o w that e n d of the
   ground that intimately.
                                                                             84

                                                                  B. D. MURRAY

Q. You h a d bee n round the g r o u n d before, had you not? - a .
    xGSf   X u&Q*


Q. You wo u l d kno w the gates to w h i c h the reference was
   being m a d e b y Mr. M a r s h a l l p r es u m a b l y ? - a . I knew
   r             three lar9e gates at that end of the ground.
   I didn t k n o w exactly what was in front of each gate or
   where t h e y opened on to.




                                 /Q. You knew.
                                                                85

                                                      B. D . MURRAY'


Q. You knew that they would open onto the concourse? - A.
   Yes, I did.

Q. Are you saying that you did not even know that one of
   them entered into the concourse immediately behind
   turnstiles A-G? - A. I kne w that one of the gates
   entered that concourse, yes.

Q. And you knew that before the beginning of the match on
   15th April, 1989, didn't you? - A. Yes, I am not trying
   to deny that.

Q. Therefore you can confirm, can't you, that anybody
   coming through that gate leading onto the concourse
   behind A-G, what is immediately in front of them is the
   tunnel, isn't it? - A. I am saying to you that now I
   know and I will accept that, but what I am saying is
   before that event I didn't know the Ground that
   intimately that I could see what was immediately in
   front of each exit gate, each turnstile.  No, I didn't
   think that that was the obvious thing that would face
   people coming through that gate.

Q. Well,   I can't pursue that any further.

        THE CORONER:   No, I don't think you can.    I want
   to stop for a few minutes because we are going to go on
   until 4.30.  Can I say we will go on until 4.30 today.
   If need be we are going to sit on the Saturday, so make
   arrangements - not the whole of the Saturday, of
   course.  That is not popular wit h me, let me tell you,
   and it is not going to be popular with anybody but if
   we have to we have got two Saturdays left before the
   end of the month, I want us to conclude this Inquest
   before the end of the month, and if need be we will do
   that, so make the necessary arrangements.   We will go
   on until 4.30 every day, as far as I can see, and
   Friday we are going to have to treat as a full working
   day this week, certainly.

        Let's have a quick break until 5-past, but we are
   stopping at around 4.30, we are not going on and on.

                     (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )

       THE CORONER:   Before we continue, Mr. King I have
  tried to give you as much latitude as possible and I
  hope you accept that, and Ihave never tried to prevent
  you asking whatever is appropriate, but if you could
  try and focus in.

       MR. KING:   I agree, sir.  The reason why we have
  gone a bit longer than normal is, of course, we are
  dealing with vital events at this stage.
                                                            86
                                                 B. D. MURRAY


         THE CORONER:   I know, I appreciate that and that
    is why I have not wanted to hinder you more than I need
    to.

         MR. KING:   I don't intend to be as detailed in
    subsequent matters.

 Q. Can I just make sure I understand, as quickly as
    possible, what your state of knowledge was on 15th
    April, Mr. Murray, as regards the layout of the Ground.
    You would know, wouldn't you, that there was a tunnel
    which was a centre tunnel leading onto the West
    Terraces? - A. Yes, I knew there was a tunnel there.

Q. And you knew where it was positioned in the Ground? -
   A. I knew it was at the Leppings Lane, yes.  I knew it
   was in the concourse.

Q. Did you also know that the centre pens tended to be the
   most popular pens? - A. I knew that the centre pens
   tended to be the most popular pens?      I knew, yes,
   the centre pens were the most popular.

Q. Had you yourself ever gone down the tunnel yourself,
   walked down it? - A. Just walked down the tunnel, yes,
   I would think I had walked down the tunnel.

Q. You would know therefore that it had a marked gradient
   near the end of it? - A. I can't recall being aware of
   that.  I don't know whether I walked down it or up it,
   I can't remember.  If you realise that I haven't
   policed the Ground, I haven't been on the Ground when
   events were taking place.  I have walke d round the
   Ground when it was empty on more than one occasion and
   taken in what I could see.

Q. Let me go on to after the decision to open the gates
   had been made and the order had been given.    You in the
   Control B o x were able to see the gate C opened and
   being in a state of openness for about five minutes,
   weren t you? - A. I could see that the gate was open
   and people were coming through, yes.    I don't know how
   long I watched it.

Q. We know that it was open from 2.52 and 6 seconds to
   2.57 and 40 seconds, so we k now it was open for about
   five minutes? - A. Yes, well I will accept that.

Q. And you would be in a position to see during those five
   minutes wha t was happening as regards seeing people
   coming through the gates, wouldn t you, gate C? - A. I
   do recall seeing people coining through the gate.
                                              B.   D . MURRAY


And you were able to see, if you were watching, a
steady stream of people coming through the gate over
that five minute period? - A. I recall seeing a lot of
people coming through the gate, yes.

At that stage, and this is a different question from
the one before, because I am now asking you as to your
considerations after gate C was opened, at that stage,
at any time during that five minutes, did it ever enter
your head at that stage where that throng of people
were going to? - A. Yes, I considered that people would
go all over, onto the terraces, into the stand, into
the concourse.

No, I am sorry, I am talking now about those people you
could see on the monitor entering gate C into the
concourse area you could see on the monitor? - A. I am
talking about people coming into the Ground, yes, that
I could see.

Those people coming in over that five minute period,
you could see on the monitor were entering the area of
the Ground which was bordered on one side by a wall
with a gap in it, you k n e w that, didn't you? - A. Yes,
I did.

And you could see from the monitor, therefore, the area
they were entering was that area which was in front of
the tunnel, you would kno w that? - A. I knew the tunnel
was in that particular part of the concourse.

What reason if any did you have to think that the
people entering through that gate in that throng would
go sideways through the gap in the wall, that is the
wall dividing the A-G concourse from the 1-16
concourse? - A. I am sorry, Mr. King, but I didn't
think they would go in any particular direction.   I
didn't have any reason to feel they were going to go
for a gap in the wall, for the tunnel.  I just saw thf~i
coming, they had been released from outside, they had
taken the pressure off the people who were being
injured and they came into the Ground.  I expected them
to disperse all over.

You would know that there was nobody on the concourse
when they came through gate C directing them sideways,
you would know that, wouldn't you? - A. I know that
there were serials on the concourse, I didn't know what
they were doing.

You weren't expecting those serials, were you, to
direct them sideways?  You had no reason to think that,
did you? - A. I wasn't expecting them to, nor was I not
expecting them to do.
                                                            88
                                                 B. D. MURRAY'


Q. You would know that it was no part, under the
   Operational Order, of any of your serials specifically
   to direct spectators sideways.  You would know that? -
   A. There was nothing in the Order to say that, no.

Q. I don't want to waste time but are you really saying
   even in the five minutes when gate C was opened that it
   wasn't obvious then that that throng were heading
   straight for the tunnel and the centre pens? - A. Do
   you think I would have done nothing about it if I had
   known that that was going to be the case, or if it had
   been obvious to me that was going to be the case?  Do
   you think I would have done nothing about it if anybody
   had brought it to my attention?

Q. If it had been obvious that they were going to the
   tunnel and the centre pens, what would you have done
   about it? - A. I don't know.   I feel I might have got
   in touch wit h the Officer in charge of that area and
   asked him to deflect.   I honestly don't know.

Q. Why would you have wanted to do something about it.

       THE CORONER:    No.

       MR. MANNING:     Are we not back really one question
  down the line to where I intervened    before?

       MR. KING:   Iam sorry,   it is a legitimate line   of
  reasoning.  If this Officer   is saying, K If I had known
  they were going towards the   tunnel I would have done
  something about it", to ask   why he would have done
  something about it?

       THE CORONER:    It is a legitimate and an
  interesting point but it does not, I think, advance the
  object of this Inquest, and that is simply, Mr. King,
  that this Officer has said that he did not do anything
  about it, that is fair enough.    You have asked him.
  and I didn't object to that, whether it wasn't obvioa^
  to him that something needed to be done.   His response
  was that if it had been obvious to him he would
  undoubtedly have done something.   Now the next
  question, which is what we are talking about, "What
  would you have done?", doesn't advance matters any
  further forward.  I did allow the first one but I am
  not going to allow a whole string of questions as to
  what could have been ....

       MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, that wasn't my
  question.  My question was if it had been obvious to
  him they were going to the tunnel why he would have
  done something about it, what ....
                                                          89

                                               B.   D. MURRAY'


        MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir, I must interrupt
   my learned friend because that is not, in fact, what
   happened.  He asked the question what he would have
   done and then the Superintendent gave an  explanation,
   he said he was not sure what he would have done, he
   might have done something, and then my learned friend
   said, "Why might you have done that", so my learned
   friend has fallen into error, no doubt because he is on
   his feet at the moment.  He actually did ask the
   question why in relation to the Superintendent's answer
   as to what, in fact, he might have done.

        THE CORONER:   That is right.

        MR. ISAACS:    It is a marvellous exercise in
   hindsight, sir, wit h respect.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I don't want to get into argument
   and I will move on.  I will have an opportunity later:

Q. At any stage before you saw or were conscious of people
   coming over the top onto the perimeter track, Mr.
   Murray, do you recall looking at the cameras, the video
   monitor, which showed the terraces, and this is after
   gate C had been opened? - A. I cannot recall
   specifically but I would have been looking all over.  I
   would have been looking at the terraces, looking at the
   monitors.

Q. Do you recall the use at all of any of the zoom
   facility at that stage on the people in the centre
   pens? - A. I don't know, sir.

Q. When you saw people were coming up over the top, people
   being let out apparently onto the perimeter track,
   because that was your first indication that something
   was wrong, wasn't it? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. At that stage did you consider zooming in with that
   facility to see what the problem was in the centre
   pens? - A. I cannot recall whether I asked P.C. Bicharc
   or whether he did it off his own initiative, but he
   certainly took the camera from the Kop and swung it
   round to the Leppings Lane end.

Q. I don't want to mislead you, including the zoom
   facility? - A. Well, of course, it is on the camera.

Q. Were you not able then to look at and see the faces of
   those in the centre pens who were in the front third of
   the pen? - A. No.

Q. No? - A. No.
                                                                 90

                                                     B.   D . MURRAY


Q. Why not? - A. I do n ' t know.    You couldn't see the faces
   of the people in the pens.

Q. Do you recall a mes s ag e going out of the Control Box to
   the effect that all available people, men, should go to
   the Leppings Lane Terraces end? - A. I cannot recall
   that message.  I don't know what time it was sent but I
   can't recall it.

Q. It is a message w h i c h we have heard from a number of
   sources which o r i g inally called serials onto the pitch,
   and people he a r d it from all parts of the Ground? - A.
   I can't recall it being sent.

Q. You can't? - A. No.

Q. Do you recall, b e fore you left the Control Box for the
   first time, do you recall any discussion with Mr.
   Duckenfield about what had happened? - A. I can't
   recall a conversation.           I am sure we had a conversation
   as to what is h a p p e n i n g and part of that conversation
   would be Mr. D u c k e nf i e l d saying, ''Get Roger Greenwood
   round to have a look at it", then there was the
   observations from Mr. Greenwood that I took as the
   match had to be stopped.




               /Q. What I want to
                                                          »*


                                                                              91

                                                               B. D. MURRAY

        S S w  Wan  t0 dlscover is whether or not you heard
        earlier on a suggestion that it was a pitch invasion?
          A. I really can't remember.  I d i d n ’t know what
        people were suggesting.                          What

 Q.    You told us that after the game had been stooped
       which we k n o w was at 6 minu t e s past the hour, you
       Yesl^Tdi^        S Sh° rt p e r l o d to the Control Box? -       A.

 Q.    Can I show you documents C 5 1 7 A and B. This is a lo*
       we are told, of messages wh i c h were being sen? o u t ’
                S? K th Yor k «hlre p o l i c e Operation C m , w£ich
       ± l ° n a t hi
           J         e 8r o u n d » but is outside the ground     I
       think it is at Hammerton Road? - A. It is the            *
       Headquarters at Snig Hall.

 Q.    It was put in in the context of calling for an
       ambulance.  I want to look at a message which
       apparently was sent out at 15.08, so that is two
       minutes after the match was stopped. - A. Yes.


 9‘    1508*14? ° Y h? e l ? C° nd P a86,    D° y ° “ 866 8 r e f « e n c e

      JJje m e ssage which ap p a r en t l y was being sent out at
      that stage between the Operations Room and the
      Ambulance Service was:

                   1" J u r e d » a p p a r en t l y one of the gates, has
                     I®" ? UShlng and Pushln8 and shoving I
            understand and one of the gates has, they've
            collapsed the gates and there's."
      A • ies •


Q ' C o n ? ^ l hr * anyJkno',led8e          your time in the
     SS          1m ? ,, ? ? L 7tS.Werf Jhere ln the Poll« Contr'
     past 3? - A. S s f                   W8S St0pped at 6 "inute,

                      S jCl1 as we k now was transmitted onwards
      being transmitted out of the Control Box to Snig Hall*
      thfAi, ,£;ie.20 sort »f recollection of that. I would'
      think that that would be in response to mv reauest fnr
      ambulances that that message was parsed. * ’            “

Q ' telp L W-nistL » n^ StlgateK' 7 °U may not be able to
    mfiStes past 5 was t S « 6 " o n / ^ S ^ 6 “ T    at 8
      they've collapsed the gate;? - A. I wlufd thiSkSthat I
      for°thihe pitch at this time because it was my request
      fn the Control
      in     r ? ? et,°f ambulanCes
                       Room at this and
                                    time.1    not h ^ b e l f
                                              B.   D. MURRAY


  Because it is r i g h t , is it not, that as regards the
' opening of the gates, apart from the one at 2.48, the
  short one, they were authorised openings, were they
  not? - A. Yes, they were.

 Can you think of any reason from your time in the
 Control Box as to h o w it may have come about that the
 message which was sent out from the ground, and then
 out to the Ambulance Service, was a suggestion that
 "they've collapsed the gates"? - A. I don't know
 whether that refers to the track gates, I really don't
 know.  The mes s a g e is a bit of jibberish, it doesn't
 make sense, but I wouldn't have been there and I
 wouldn't have known why that message was passed.

 Just in terms of timing, you yourself did not
 appreciate, as I understand it, that there were
 injuries, crushing injuries, requiring ambulances
 until the time of the stopping of the match at 6
 minutes past? - A. I didn't realise that the thing was
 so serious until I went down to the pitch the second
 time, wh i ch would have been about 7 minutes past.

When you got back into the Control Room, whatever that
was, about 9 minutes past, 10 minutes past, something
like that? - A. Immediately after the match was
stopped?

Yes. - A. I was there for only a few seconds, 30
seconds, and then I was back down on the pitch.

At that stage, wh i c h is 8 or 9 minutes past perhaps,
something like that ---

     THE CORONER: He has just said that the fleet of
ambulances was requested at his initiation, and we
have got a log which clearly shows that that was at
1507, so it cannot be 1509.

     MR. KING:  I am sorry, sir, I was not trying to
add on minutes.
What I want to know is when you were back in the
Control Box for the short period of time?   - A. Yes.

What was your understanding of what had happened at
that stage? - A. My understanding then was the same as
it had bee n all the time, that we had had some
pushing, some crushing, we had been relocating people,
that for whatever reason lots had come onto the pitch,
taken advantage of the situation.    I have seen it
happen before where once you ease a situation people
will not go back, they do stay where they are, and
apart from that I wasn't sure.
                                                                                                     93

                                                                                  B. D. MURRAY

           usedof cameras o   7nUSSthJenL
                                        theeppC ognstrol Bote
                                                           xrra
                                                             being
           at
           A. Iwouldthink so, don't know. HavinggoSeSeac’k-
                                to            i
                                              nI
                                                      Lane      c
           themonitors6* SeConds- 1wouldn,t «art lookingat
     Q.    Let me just ask one or two matters.  The
           communications, the radio system: had any checks b e e n
           carried out before the 15th April match Is to the??
                                     t h ? l r w o rk in g s ? - A. I c a n n o t s a y b u t I
           big occasion^'yes^31 "                  W °Uld ^            U    before               *

 Q.       Is there any emergency word which is known to those
          who have to operate radios, either in t i T c o n t r o J L o m
                    8r°und, when there is congested traffic
          traffic?U C?n ? £ ° Ut i n t ° u " hlch w l ll clear the
                     ”    There is a code number for an Officer <■
          is t ha S«*ian 0fflcer needs immediate assistance.       Thl
          is the only emergency code.

 Q.       What is that code?

               THE CORONER: No, we do not want to know the code
          Did you ask him what it was?


          a p o l o £ i s e ? ING;    1   m ls u n d e r s to o d “ h a t he s a i d , s i r ,   I

            THE CORONER: Perhaps I misunderstood you.  We
       would not want him to disclose the code number.

            MR. KING:  I am only interested in whether there
       was a means by which one could unscramble it, sir.

        «.u    CORONER: By all means explore the
      methodology, but not the detail.

Q * There”?*               F U n i a**          an®wer there wa«* a method? - A.
                    ?  number that an Officer who needs
      immediate assistance, and usually for his own safety
      S H - f J 88*     X a messa8e Which will usually
      receive immediate response by any units in the area.

Q*               any reason, somebody wanted to get a
      message through as an emergency and there was
      c o n g e s te d t r a f f i c , a l l t h a t p e i s o n had ” do was to
      u s e t h i s code? - A. I f i t was h e a r d , people would ?end
      n o t t o p a s s m e s s a g e s w h ile he g o t h i s message t h r o u g h .
Q.    At any stage on 15th April did you yourself ever hear
       that code being used? - A. No, I did not hear ?t.
                                                                    94

                                                         B, 'D, MURRAY


Q. Just one matter.   Do you know a Sergeant Morgan? - A.
   Yes, I know Sergeant Morgan.

Q. It is Sergeant John Morgan.          - A. Yes, I know Sergeant
   John Morgan.

Q. Do you recall meeting him at all or passing him when you
   were returning to the Control Box after the game had been
   stopped? - A. No, I cannot recall seeing Sergeant Morgan.

Q. Can I just put it to you to see if it jogs your memory.
   There was an exchange between you and him.   You were
   going up the steps and he was coming down and you said to
   him, "Do what you can"? - A. I have seen that in Sergeant
   Morgan's statement, but I cannot recall seeing him at
   all.   I can recall seeing a Sergeant Hemmingway.

        MR. KING:     Thank you.

                    Further by THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Can I just ask one question and then we are finishing?
   You mentioned that the Serials, the five and fifty, or
   six and eighty, as it turned out.   You said that one of
   them actually gave evidence here.   Was that Sergeant
   Green you are talking about? - A. Yes, it would be
   Sergeant Green.

       THE CORONER:   Very well.   We wanted to know who we
  were talking about.   Now we will pause until tomorrow
  morning at ten o'clock.   There are the usual rules of
  evidence and so on, which you know about?

       THE WITNESS:       Yes,   sir.

                      (The Jury left C o u r t )

       THE CORONER:       Can we get a few estimates of time?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   I believe I will be very short and
  should be less than five minutes.

       THE CORONER:      Mrs. McBrien, what do you say?

       MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not absolutely sure, but most
  of my questions may just require a yes or a no, so it
  could be quite a short time, really.

       MR. RUSSELL:      Very short,      a handful of questions.

       THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning, have you any idea?   The
  only reason I ask is so we can have some idea when we are
  likely to get to Mr. Duckenfield.
             SIXTY EIGHTH DAY' S .PROCEEDINGS
                TUESDAY. 12th MARCH 1991

     THE CORONER: After you left we had another chat
and we think that perhaps Saturday may not be
necessary. That is good news, isn't it? What I did
think is that if I do decide we need extra time, would
starting half an hour earlier be better for you rather
than Saturday? Yes, okay.   I am not saying we will do
that because we will be able to judge but it will
actually give us two and a half to three hours if we
need it, which is equivalent to a Saturday. Are you
happy with that? Good.

     MR. KING: Sir, there is one matter which is very
short which I should have raised with the witness
yesterday, if I might do so now.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, do that.

     MR. MANNING: Sir, perhaps before my learned
friend does that, in the interests of saving time
again, could I make reference to the caution, if one
may call it that? Periodically yesterday you did
remind Mr. Murray that he was not under an obligation
to answer a question which might tend to be
incriminating and that he had that right not to do so.
I simply come to my feet, of course, simply to remind
ourselves that that holds good overnight and the
position has not changed but also to say, sir, yet
again we acknowledge that. Whilst I know that you
might from time to time especially want to say, "This
is a potentially incriminating question" again we do
not need you to say it on each and every occasion.

     THE CORONER: That is very, very kind of you.
Thank you, Mr. Manning.

             BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Recalled

           Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Mr. Murray, it relates to my questions to you as to
whether or not you accepted that the Police had a
responsibility in relation to the distribution and
filling of the terraces. Can you confirm that at some
time between twelve and two, some time between that
time, in the Control Box, Chief Inspector Creaser
visited you and asked you what strategy was going to be
adopted by the Police for the purposes of filling the
pens? - A. Yes, sir. I find it difficult to recall
Chief Inspector Creaser coming into the Control Room.
I have given it a lot of thought. I do not want to go
back on what I said before but I am quite satisfied
that Chief Inspector Creaser did come in although I
cannot recall it myself.
                                                               2

                                                     B. D. MURRAY

Q. You would, therefore, not take issue with his evidence
   that he came and spoke to you, asked what system was
   going to be adopted, and you indicated the system of
   the fans finding their own level? - A. I wouldn't
   dispute that at all, sir, no.

Q. In other words, you were indicating to him what system
   ought to be adopted by the Police for the purposes of
   the filling and the distribution on the terraces? - A.
   Yes, I was telling him that they would find their own
   level.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I think what you are saying is that
     although you cannot remember your part of the
     conversation you do not dispute his evidence that that
     took place? - A. I wouldn't dispute it, sir, and if he
     had come in and asked me that is what I would have told
     him.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Superintendent Murray, I have only two areas which I
   would like to explore with you very briefly. The first
   is the evidence you were giving yesterday partly in
   answer to my learned friend, Mr. King, about the north­
   west terrace. You have told us your observations were
   that it was filling at about the same rate as the
   centre pens? - A. Probably. The north-west terrace is
   popular and the centre pens in the north-west terrace
   did fill first.

Q. Do you mean the whole of the elevated section over on
   the far side by the North Stand? - A. I mean the
   elevated section, yes, sir.

Q. Does that mean what we call pen 7 and the bit above it?
   - A. It means the raised area over and above pen 6.

Q. That whole corner from the pitch right the way up to
   the top? - A. Yes. Sorry, the raised section. The
   actual raised area. There is a wall.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Walk up to it and show us because
     that will be easier? - A. I mean this section here,
     sir. There is a wall that goes round here and people
     tend to find that very popular, probably because it is
     higher than the rest of the terrace.

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: Can we take it from your evidence
     that at about 2.30, when questions are being aimed at,
     that section is at roughly the same density as the
     centre pens? - A. I cannot remember the density but
                                                             3

                                                   B. D. MURRAY

  there were a lot more people in the raised section and
  the centre pens than there were on those terraces.

Q. Your evidence is that those two areas were the ones
   that were looking fuller? - A. The most popular, yes.

Q. Turning to a slightly different topic, you said in
   answer again to questions by my learned friend, Mr.
   King, that you did not know precisely where all the
   stewards were going to be around the whole ground? - A.
   No.
Q. But that you expected the stewards to be briefed by the
   Officers in charge of that particular section of the
   ground as to their proper duties on the day? - A. Yes,
   I did.
Q. If I told you that we have had evidence from Chief
   Inspector Creaser that he both himself knew where the
   stewards were going to be and also overhead and
   applauded the briefing given by Inspector White to the
   stewards on the day, would that be what you would have
   expected from an Officer in his position? - A. Yes, I
   would have expected that.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   Thank you very much.

               Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Murray, you had an input into the 1989 Operational
   Order, didn't you? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. So if improvements needed to be made you would be able
   to make suggestions? - A. I did make suggestions of
   areas where I considered we needed to pay attention to.

Q. You mentioned a number of problems but one was that the
   fans were climbing up from the West Terrace into the
   West Stand. Do you remember? - A. Yes, I had seen that
   at the 1988 Semi Final.

Q. Did you think that something should be done about that,
   that some alteration should be made in the Operational
   Order to cater for that? - A. I wanted the Officers in
   the West Stand to be very aware that people were going
   to take that course of action.  I just felt that having
   done it once it may become more prominent a second
   time.

Q. Do you think it may have been difficult for the
   Officers up in the West Stand to actually see these
   people climbing up? They may have already got to that
   point before the Officers spotted them doing it, might
                                                                   4

                                                         B. D. MURRAY

  they not? - A. I think it is difficult to see them
  climbing from the terraces into the West Stand, yes.

Q. So do you think in the way of an improvement a
   suggestion could have been made to have Officers
   positioned below on the terraces so that that could be
   prevented? - A. I am sure that now you mention it that
   that would possibly have been a better deterrent but we
   didn't have Officers on the terraces at football
   matches behind the fans.

Q. Did you find out why the fans were moving up into the
   stand? - A. I didn't find out. I could only assume
   that it was to get a better vantage point to watch the
   game.

Q. Might it have been a good idea to find out from the
   fans why they were doing that just in case there was
   overcrowding there? - A. I think it is very sad that we
   do not have a good dialogue between football supporters
   and people in charge at football matches about problems
   at football.




                                 /Q . So th a t th ey.
                                                           5

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q. So that they could be alleviated, couldn't they? - A. I
   think it would be very encouraging and very useful to
   know problems from people who attended matches, yes.

Q. You have accepted the "find your own level" for fans on
   the Leppings Lane Terrace, didn't you? - A. I had seen
   it operate and seen it operate successfully.

Q. That would work as a circuit, wouldn't it, really?
   They would come in and they had the freedom to go down
   the tunnel and round via the radial gates.  They could
   make a complete circle if they wished, couldn't they? -
   A. There were several entrances and exits from the
   terrace and also, yes, you could walk right along the
   back of the terrace.

Q.    As we know, with the circuit system it is fine as long
     as we don't overload the system? - A. I think that you
     have got to be able to get from place to place, yes.

Q. If you had blocked the tunnel off in 1989 or '88, to
   stop fans going down there, there was nothing to stop
   fans going around and then using the radial gates to
   get to the centre, was there, because the radial gates
   were open? - A. The radial gates were open and people
   could pass from pen to pen via the radial gates.

Q.    Sothat may not act as a deterrent for overcrowding in
     the centre pens, might it?   It could still happen? - A.
     I am not sure what you are saying, I am sorry.

Q. It was possible for fans to move, if the tunnel was
   blocked, go round to the left or right and make their
   way by way of the radial gates to the centre, if they
   wished to do so? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. In fact, crushing, although we know the centre pens are
   the most popular, we know that in 1981 there was a
   crushing incident in pen 1.  Were you aware of that? -
   A. I wasn't aware before 1989, before the 1989 semi­
   final.

Q. But you would agree that crushing could take place
   anywhere depending on the numbers who come into that
   area? - A. I think you can have problems anywhere in
   the Ground, yes.

Q. In 1989 you were in overall control of the Control
   Room, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. You were in control of the event itself? - A. I was
   monitoring the events.  The Officer in charge, there is
   only one Officer in charge of the whole event.
                                              B. D. MURRAY


But you were adviser to Mr. Duckenfield in the Control
Box? - A. I considered that I was there as an adviser,
yes.

You were particularly interested in communications,
weren't you? - A. Well yes, communications came under
my sphere.

You agreed with the allocation of the ends, didn't you?
Liverpool in the Leppings Lane end and Nottingham
Forest in the other end? - A. That wasn't my decision,
that was the decision that was put to the Club by Mr.
Mole and that was accepted.

 Did you think it was a good idea?   Did you have any say
in the matter.

     THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien,   I don't think


     MRS. McBRIEN:   As Mr. Duckenfield said he would
like a log kept of the events that day, you ensured
that this would be done, didn't you? - A. I discussed
it with the Sergeant in the Control Room.  I wanted an
extra person in there but because of the size of the
Control Room, and acting on his advice and in
agreement, decided that it was impractical to have
anyone else in the Control Room so I endeavoured to
keep a log, yes.

Were checks carried out that day on the radio equipment
and on individual radios before the match started? - A.
The radios are always tested.  It took a considerable
time on that day because there were so many serials,
but they were all tested after the briefing.

What time was that, please? - A. It is in the log.  I
think it would perhaps be about 11.30, maybe a little
later.  The whole thing lasted about an hour.

Was the public address system tested, as well? - A. The
public address system was tested by the Control Room
staff just before I arrived at the Control Room.  In
fact, as I went to the Control Room an engineer was
working on one of the speakers near to the Control Room
and he completed that and that was tested while I was
there.

Did you   personally go to see the referee to tell him
about a   coded message in the event of an emergency?
Did you   brief him in that way? - A. Yes, I saw the
referee   and told him about the message.
                                                           7

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. You said you got a message at 17-minutes-past-2 from
   Superintendent Marshall asking for Leppings Lane to be
   closed to traffic.  That is in the log, isn't it? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

Q. I presume you did not see a problem in Leppings Lane at
   that time? - A. I didn't consider there was a
   particular problem from what I could see on the
   monitor, but he being the man on the ground had the
   best view, and if he wanted    it closed then he had
   reasons for it.

Q. Strangely enough, Superintendent Marshall when he gave
   his evidence, he said that there was nothing unusual at
   that time happening, as the numbers arriving at that
   time were about what he expected and the behaviour of
   the fans was very satisfactory.  Did you query what he
   was asking for? - A. He was asking for Leppings Lane to
   be closed.  I think a message came through saying that
   people and vehicles were getting mixed up, words to
   that effect, and Superintendent Marshall, I know him,
   he is very experienced, he is the one that took command
   of football matches in Mr. Mole's absence, he asked for
   Leppings Lane to be closed and I arranged for it to be
   closed.

Q. So you did not query it? - A. No, I did not query it.

Q. Did you think it was an unusual request to be making at
   that time of the day, such a while before the match was
   to begin, three-quarters of an hour almost before the
   match was to start? - A. It was an unusual request in
   that we had not closed Leppings Lane before to my
   knowledge, before a football game, and it showed there
   were a lot of people in Leppings Lane, yes.

Q. As Mr. Duckenfield was a new Commander, did you tell ^
   him that that was not the usual procedure? - A. I don t
   think so.  I can't recall but I don't think so.

Q. You said you had not known of it closed before a match
   before, didn't you? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. When you were planning the Operational Order you did
   not think it might be necessary to close Leppings Lane
   at that time, did you?  It wasn't written into the
   Order? - A. It wasn't written into the Order.  Like I
   say, it was a complete one off, it was unexpected.

Q. Although the request came at 2.17 it took a little
   while before the traffic stopped completely though,
   didn't it? You saw buses going along at a later time
   on the photographs? - A. It took a little while to
   close because we could only contact one serial
                                                           8

                                               B. D. MURRAY


   initially to close the bottom end.  I had to get back
   to Mr. Marshall and ask him to send someone up to close
   the top end, or find some Officers up there to close
   it.  I think I said yesterday it would not be unusual
   for an Officer to use his own initiative and perhaps
   allow a bus or a couple of buses through.  I can't
   really say.

Q. But about 2.30 did you see that a larger than usual
   crowd had developed outside the turnstiles? - A. I
   can't say whether it was a larger than usual crowd.   It
   was a large crowd; I did notice it was a large crowd,
   yes.

Q. Did you think at that time, when you looked at the
   monitor, that all the people you could see outside the
   turnstiles would get in by 3 p.m? - A. I thought that
   all those people and more would get in by 3 p.m.

Q. So it did not appear a problem then at 2.30? - A. It
   did not appear a problem to me at 2.30, no.

Q. Would you say that the turnstiles were operating
   efficiently at that time, as far as you could tell? -
   A. I certainly did not see anything which made me
   believe that the turnstiles were not working
   efficiently at that time.

Q. But you did become concerned at just before 2.45,
   didn't you? - A. About?

Q. Just before 2.45? - A. Concerned about what?

Q. About the crowd and the happenings at the turnstiles? -
   A. Oh yes, I was getting concerned about matters at
   that time, yes.

Q. At that time did you try to contact the Club or
   Security Officer? - A. I did.  It may have been a
   couple of minutes before 2.45 but I did try and contact
   Mr. Lock on the Club's radio system.




                   /Q. Were you successful
                                                             9

                                                B. D. MURRAY


Q.   Were you successful in doing that? - A. No, I wasn't.

Q.   Did you or Mr. Duckenfield consider delaying the kick-
     off at that particular time just before 2.45? - A. I
     don't know about Mr. Duckenfield.   I did not consider
     it.   I think that so many things were happening -
     again we were in a state of turmoil in the Control
     Room - that that thought never crossed my mind at that
     time.

Q.   I believe the radio had become faulty at 2.42, that is
     right, is it not? - A. I would think it was some time
     about 2.40-ish and for several minutes the Control
     Room was in disarray and disruption.

Q.   And you threw the radio down, did you not?  I made a
     note of that. - A. I think Sergeant Goddard threw the
     handset down.  When I say threw it down, he just went
     like that (Indicating) in disgust.

Q.   This disruption that was caused then, it was only for
     a very short time, though, was it not, a minute or so?
     - A. I really can't say.  I don't know whether it was
     a minute or two minutes.  That was when the radio was
     down.  I don't know how long it took the engineer to
     sort everything out.  It wasn't the time, it was the
     disruption to the communications.  It was disruption
     to everybody in the room.  It was having to get up out
     of your seats and move around.  It was very
     disruptive.

Q.   I believe about that time you sent a reserve serial to
     Leppings Lane.  I am talking now about 2.40? - A. Yes,
     it would be slightly before the reserve serial was
     sent.

Q.   That was Sergeant Higgins, was it? - A. Yes it was.

Q.   The Crime and Vandal Squad.  You also sent extra
     mounted Officers to the area? - A. Yes, extra mounted
     Officers had been deployed from the Penistone Road
     end.

Q.   Did you consider doing anything else to enable
     Officers to manage the situation at that time? - A. I
     would be looking to see whether there were other
     serials that we could perhaps get together if the
     situation became worse.  I was hoping that the
     additional mounted Officers and the extra serial might
     be able to give the support that Mr. Marshall needed,
     together with the tannoy messages that were being sent
     from the Control Box over the public address system.
                                                                                            10
                                                                            B. D. MURRAY

Q.    Was this to try and retrieve the situation outside the
      turnstiles?  Was that the purpose of the extra mounted
      Officers and the serial being sent there, so that
      control could have been regained?  Was that the idea
      of it? - A. I am sure that was the idea.

Q.   You were getting a lot of messages at about the time
     the radio was faulty and just after, and you received
     one from Superintendent Marshall asking for the gates
     to be opened at Leppings Lane.   His initial request
     did not mention crushing at the turnstiles, did it? -
     A. I really cannot remember.   I do not know, I am
     sorry.

Q.   That request came at 2.47, did it not? - A. So I have
     been told, yes.

Q.   Did you notice on the monitor at that time that the
     number of people who were outside there did not look
     as though they were going to get in by 3 o'clock?   Did
     the numbers look too large? - A. I would not dispute
     that at that time, no.

Q.   So kick-off could have been a possibility then,
     looking at the numbers on the screen that you were
     getting? - A. I say, I don't dispute that.  I didn't
     give thought to postponing the kick-off at that time.
     I didn't give thought to it.

Q.   Was it noticeable that the turnstiles had actually
     slowed down?  Do you think this was causing a problem?
     - A. It was noticeable to me at about - I do not know,
     I think I would put it about 2.44/2.45 that there
     seemed to be a problem behind the A to G turnstiles.
     I was watching the turnstiles and I couldn't see the
     amount of people coming in that I expected.

Q.   The rate flow had altered, had it then? - A. It
     appeared to me that the rate of flow was far less than
     it should have been, and that is why I tried to get in
     touch with Mr. Lock.

Q.   You then received a further three requests from
     Superintendent Marshall to open the gates, did you
     not? - A. I think I described them as two requests
     fairly close together, and then a pause, and then a
     further two requests fairly close together, yes.

Q.   Have you ever thought of Gates A, B and C being
     entrance gates at Hillsborough? - A. I have never
     thought of the exit gates being entrance gates, no.

Q.   When S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h a l l m ad e h i s f i r s t r e q u e s t h e
     was t o l d t o s t a n d b y w h i l e t h e s i t u a t i o n was a s s e s s e d ,
                                             B. D. MURRAY

was he not, to see if it could be recovered? - A. I
think I said it was an extremely serious step to take
and, yes, he was told to stand by.  Whether it was me,
or probably the radio operator, but I did ask the
radio operator to tell him to stand by.

After the fourth request was made, which was five
minutes after the first one,, you said, "Mr.
Duckenfield are you going to open the gates?      You have
got to make a decision n o w . ” That is right, is it
not? - A. I don't think so.      I think the first part is
right.  I don't recall saying, "You've got to make a
decision n o w ” . I think I said, "Mr. Duckenfield, are
we going to open those g ates?”

I believe Mr. Duckenfield was still considering the
possibility of regaining control, was he, outside at
that time? - A. I don't know what he was considering,
but I was hoping that we might retrieve the situation
and I came to the conclusion that we couldn't, we
couldn't wait any longer, that we weren't going to
recover what was happening outside, and that the risk
to the people out there was far too great to wait any
longer.

So in your opinion you thought the gates had to be
opened? - A. Yes, I did.

Although Superintendent Marshall's initial request
came at 2.47, we know that Gate A was not opened until
2.58.

      THE CORONER: I think on that point we have got to
be a little careful.   In fact, Mr. King said that as
well.   We will be showing a video of Gate A opening,
and I think all that is on the video is it shows Gate
A open at 2.58.   It does not show the opening and so
it is very difficult actually to be certain exactly
what time it was opened.   So I do not think you can
quite put like that.   That is not your fault.  It is
just that the video of that particular gate is not as
good as some of the other videos which we have had the
advantage of seeing.   But I do not want you to put it
like that because you might get an answer which does
not actually make any sense.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  But the requests from
Superintendent Marshall did say "gates", did they not?
They did not say "gate"?  He was not referring to one
specific gate, was he? - A. He said, "Open the gates".

So it would include B and C, would it not? - A. I
thought it would include B and C gates, yes.
                                                               12

                                                   B. D. MURRAY

Q.   But we know that Sergeant Higgins made a request for
      Gate A to be opened, did he not, later on? - A. Yes.
      he did.                                              *

Q.   As far as I can make out, it wasn't opened and this is
     why he made the request for it to be opened.  That is
     how I am summing it up.

          MR. KING:  Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien on the
     evidence on timing, I think it is established, is it
     not, that it was after 2.52, whatever time it was,
     that the request to open Gate A came, because it was
     after Gate C had been opened?

          THE CORONER: I cannot quite remember when
     Sergeant Higgins made the request, but I think there
     is no doubt that Gate A was opened after 2.52.

          MR. KING:  I think the evidence of this witness,
     sir, is that the request came after Gate C had been
     opened.

          THE WITNESS:  There is no doubt in my mind, sir,
     that the request for Gate A did come after Gate C was
     opened.

             THE CORONER: Okay, fair enough.   Thank you Mr.
     King.




                                  /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:
                                                              13

                                                    B. D. MURRAY


Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Thank you.    Gate B was never
     opened, was it? - A. I don't know.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien,   h ow can you say that?

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I would like to turn to the
     transcript of Superintendent Murray's evidence at the
     Taylor Inquiry, where it says that.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, it may say that, but
     you are putting it to him.   You can put to him whether
     he knows whether Gate B was opened, but you cannot say it
     wasn't opened unless of course you say that Mr. Ridge,
     and several of the spectators like Mr. Pitt and
     Mr. Seddon and various others all were telling untruths.
     Not just untruths.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt, but I spoke
     to the gentleman who was at Gate B...

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I said you cannot put
     that question.    I was trying to be helpful but I am now
     telling you that you can ask the question as to whether
     or not he knew that Gate B was open and you cannot ask
     him anything else on that score.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Superintendent, do you know if
     Gate B was opened or not? - A. I don't know, no.

Q. The radio was on talk-through that day, wasn't it? - A.
   Yes, that was the usual state at Hillsborough for all
   matches.

Q. Would that mean that all Officers could hear what was
   said? - A. With talk-through all Officers can hear both
   incoming and outgoing messages.

Q. Did anyone in the Control Box notice anything unusual or
   alarming in pens 3 and 4 a few minutes after Gate C had
   been opened for the second time at 2.52? - A. I don t
   know whether anyone else did, but no-one said anything to
   me, no-one drew it to my attention.    I think I have
   already said that I didn't.   None of the Officers in
   there said to me there was something wrong.

Q. Did you notice anything at 2.59 happening there? - A. I
   can't go by the exact timing but I did notice that the
   gates were  opened and an Officer was helping some people
   out.   I do not know exactly what time that was.

Q. You do not  know if it was before kick-off? - A. I don't.
   It is very   difficult, but it was at an early stage.
   There were no other people on the track at that stage.
                                                               14

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q.    Did you connect those two events, the opening of Gate C
     and the people coming out on to the pitch?    Did they
     connect in any way? -A. They did not form a connection to
     me, no.

Q.    Did you go on the pitch at that stage, or was it a little
     later? - A. I went on to the pitch to try and stop the
     game and them a minute or so after that.

Q.   But you did not stop the game?   We know that
     Superintendent Greenwood did that, didn't he? - A. That
     is correct.

Q.   At that particular time did you consider using the PA
     system to announce there was an emergency in the ground
     when the Superintendent was going to stop the match?
     Was it considered necessary to make an announcement to
     the whole ground? - A. I didn't consider making a public
     address message at that time because I did not know
     exactly what the problem was at that time.

Q. Did Superintendent Greenwood speak to you at all?   Did
   you discuss anything before he went to stop the match? -
   A. No, I did not speak to Superintendent Greenwood at
   all.   I had seen him from the track side indicating to
   me to stop the match.   He actually stopped the match
   before I did, but I did not speak to Superintendent
   Greenwood after that.

Q. Did you think it must be something quite serious for the
   match to be stopped? - A. Well, people were on the pitch
   and I think that is a stage when play is normally
   stopped.   I would expect it to be stopped once people
   are actually on the field of play.

Q. However, you weren't able to assess what was happening in
   the pens, is that what you are saying? - A. At that time
   I was unable to tell exactly what was happening.

Q. I believe you did put out tannoy messages at that time,
   didn't you, telling people to move back?

          THE CORONER:   I don't think it was Superintendent
     Murray.   Let's just check that:

Q. Did you yourself authorise the tannoy messages around
   this time, PA messages, for people... - A. I was on the
   pitch and asked for them to be sent.   I asked for tannoy
   messages to be sent asking for people to move back.

Q. This was after the match had finished? - A. That was
   after the match had finished, yes.
                                                   B. D. MURRAY


     MR. KING:   I think the evidence was he asked for
it, but there is no evidence as to whether or not it was
broadcast.

     THE CORONER:   Or, to put it another way, no
evidence that anybody heard it?

        MR. KING:      Either way, sir, one can say it is the
same.

        THE CORONER:      No, it is not quite the same.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:         I remind you of the evidence of
Mr. Mackrell.

        THE CORONER:      That is why I rephrased the comment.

     MR. MANNING:    We were almost there.  I think what
the Superintendent said was that he did pass a message
through for the public address to used, but he cannot say
himself whether it was.

        THE CORONER:      That's right, yes:

That is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    I know there have been a lot of
comments.   What I have got written here is that tannoy
messages were put out saying, "Please move back and stop
pushing."   Was that ever said? - A. I don't know.    I
cannot recall hearing tannoy messages, but I don t know.

If it was that message, "Please move back and stop
pushing," do you think a message such as, "There are
people being crushed in the front of the centre pens.
Will people at the rear of those pens come out of the
tunnel immediately," that might have been a better
message?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, no.   This is a
hindsight question which really does not help us one tiny
bit.   Do not answer that question.   It is not a proper
question.




          Q. MRS. MCBRIEN:     So you
                                                               16

                                                      B. D. MURRAY

Q.        MRS. McBrien, So you were not aware of the
     messages you said? - A. I didn't hear the messages.   I
     didn't consciously hear the messages.  I do not know
     whether they were sent but I didn't hear them myself.

Q. I made a note that they were sent out at seven minutes
   past three and nine minutes past three...

          THE CORONER: He has given you an answer, Mrs.
     McBrien, and I am not letting you introduce evidence.
     I am sorry.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: When you went on the pitch were you
     just standing there? I think you did say you helped
     one or two people, is that right? - A. When I went on
     the pitch I was going to try and clear the people off
     the centre of the pitch towards the wings so that they
     could see exactly what was happening and I think I said
     that I very quickly realised that that was an
     impossible task. It was different. There was
     something different about the whole scenario. People
     appeared shocked and appeared dazed and were standing
     around. I think I said that as I approached the goal
     posts I then saw that people were actually trapped
     against the fence.  I could see their faces against the
     fence. It was then I realised we had a very serious
     incident and my first thought then was to get some
     ambulances to the ground because I had heard the
     operator saying he was putting an ambulance on standby
     as I left just half a minute or so earlier and I
     realised we wanted a lot of ambulances.

         I went   to get a radio. I think I said Iapproached
     one or two   Officers who were PCs who did nothave
     radios and then found a Sergeant and took his radio off
     him and asked for the fleet of ambulances and asked for
     the tannoy   messages and asked for the  cutting
     equipment.    Then it is very difficult  to sayexactly
     what I did then. As I looked around I saw that people
     were being got out of there. They were lying on the
     track. There were attempts to resuscitate them by
     Officers, by fans at the game. I gave what little bit
     of help I could to some. I couldn't afford to get
     involved with one individual. That wasn't my role.    I
     wanted to try and keep some control of what was
     happening.

Q. Did you decide to go round to the back, to the
   concourse area and round to the tunnel?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have tried to be as
     patient as I can but all we have done up to now is to
     recite the evidence which I elicited in chief and which
                                                                            17
                                                                 B. D. MURRAY

     everybody else, in so far as it was relevant,
     questioned.   There is no need to repeat all the
     evidence.   You know he went round the back.  You do not
     need to ask him.   He has told you.  If you have a
     question relating to that then by all means ask it but
     we are not going to go on reciting the evidence which
     is what we have been doing for 85 per cent of your
     questioning time.   All we have done is repeated what he
     has already told us and it is of no use whatsoever.
     Have you got a question about him being at the back of
     the terrace?

          MRS. McBRIEN:  When I ask a question I may be
     asking it in a different way, looking for a different
     answer.

          THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, I have given a ruling.
     You have to abide by it whether you like it or not.   I
     have not said you may not ask a question.  What I have
     said is that you are not going to recite all the
     evidence which we have already heard.  It is sometimes
     difficult and that is why I have allowed you to go on
     for three quarters of an hour but common sense has got
     to prevail as well at some point.

Q.        MRS. M c B R I E N : What were you intending to do when
     you went round to the back of the terrace? - A. I was
     hoping to get people to move back from the terraces.

Q. When you first went down the tunnel, did you see an
   Inspector, some Police Officers and some people in the
   tunnel?

          THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, were you listening,
     with great respect, to what was going on yesterday?               I
     am sorry, he does not have to answer that question.               He
     has already answered it.

          MRS. M c B R I E N :    Sir,   I wanted to investigate who
     they were.

           THE CORONER:          He has answered that as well.

          MRS. McBRIEN:  I am terribly sorry but I made a
     note when evidence was being given that it was said,
     "We have got them all out".  I wanted to establish who
     it was you were referring to and so I checked up on
     that and I found it was not the injured people who were
     got out.

          THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, the Officer has told
     us that he does not know who the name of the Inspector
                                                                  18

                                                        B. D. MURRAY

     was.  Is that right? Are you going to read it?     Will
     you help Mrs. McBrien?

           MR. MANNING: You tried very hard, sir.  You asked
     him about Inspector Sykes and Inspector Bullas and he
     said:

         "I just cannot recall which Inspector it was."

           MRS. McBRIEN:  Thank you, Mr. Manning.  I know
     Superintendent Murray said he did not recall who the
     Inspector was but what I am concerned about is the
     little bit that was said, "We have got them all out
     now".   That could mean to anybody that it could be
     referring to the injured people.

          THE CORONER:   Just a minute.

Q. You heard the remark made, "We have got them all o u t ”
   or words to that effect by one of these Police
   Officers.  You have answered this as well but I do not
   mind you repeating it.  What did you understand that
   remark meant? - A. Because of what was said I thought
   it meant people in the tunnel.

Q. People in the tunnel? - A. In the tunnel.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: I was looking at the transcript of
     your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry, Mr. Murray, and
     the 50 people or thereabouts who were in the tunnel
     were people who were noved out because, as it says in
     the transcript, they were the worse for drink.     They
     were the people who had been removed from the tunnel.
     This is why I felt it was important to establish who it
     was who had been removed, not the injured people who
     were in front, in the front of pens 3 and 4. - A. What
     the Inspector said to me w a s , "We have got them all
     out.   They were all drunk".    That is what he said and I
     assumed he meant people who were in the tunnel area.
     There were still some people there when I got there.     I
     estimated a figure of 50, I don't know.     It may be
     higher and it may be lower.     There weren't a lot of
     people i n .

Q. So they were got out safely these people, of course,
   were they not? They were in no danger, were they? - A.
   No.

Q. Not in the position they were in? - A. They were just
   standing about.

Q. I think you said in your evidence that you saw Officers
   on the terrace but once again I found in the transcript
                                                               19

                                                     B. D. MURRAY


  of your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that you were
  not able to make your way down on the terrace.       Which
  one am I to read as... - A. I don't recall saying that.
  I didn't consider that there was a need to go down.
  The need to make people move back from the front had
  gone as far as I was concerned.       You must appreciate
  that I h ad seen people trapped against the fence.      I
  wanted to get the pressure off those people because I
  thought it was pressure from behind that was trapping
  them. Whe n I looked down the pressure had come off.
  Police Officers were on the terrace side and were
  actually working there.   I d i d n ’t know, and I had no
  idea that there had been a particular problem, that a
  barrier h ad collapsed, that people had been trapped in
  those circumstances.   The people I saw were against the
  fence.

Q. That was from the trackside though that you saw that,
   wasn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Not from the tunnel side? - A. No, not from the tunnel
   side.

Q. You turned back and went back to the pitch, didn't you?
   - A. Yes, I did.

       MRS. M c B R I E N :   Thank you very much.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL

Q. I have one or two questions, the first of which is
   going to relate to something Sergeant Griffiths may
   have gone to fetch.   Perhaps I can introduce the matter
   first? Superintendent, may I touch on three matters?
   First of all, you were asked yesterday about a time
   which came when you dispatched an Officer from the
   Control R oom to assist in the relocation of supporters
   on the perimeter track following a time when you had
   seen a number of supporters coming out from the centre
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. You told us that you dispatched the Officer to assist a
   woman Police Officer who was at either gates 1 or 2? -
   A. Yes.

Q. That Police Officer, can you remember his name? - A. It
   was Chief Inspector McRobbie.

Q. He was an Officer who was in plain clothes that day? -
   A. Yes, he wasn't involved in the event.

Q. You were asked by the Coroner whether you could
   remember when that happened and when Chief Inspector
                                                                    20
                                                           B. D. MURRAY

     McRobbie went down.  First of all, can I clarify this;
     did you see Chief Inspector McRobbie do what you asked
     him to do? - A. Yes, I think he went down on to the
     track and spoke to the Policewoman, yes.

Q. I wonder if you could please look at a photograph of
   which I hope Sergeant Griffiths has prepared an acetate
   which may assist you with the time about which you said
   you were unsure yesterday.  That is from album PR1 and
   it is frame 4A.

          THE CORONER:     This is a new one I take it?

          MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, it is a new one and that is why
     I have had an acetate done.

            MR. BEECHEY:   The C number for this, sir,    is
     C . 534.

Q.        MR. RUSSELL:  First of all, Officer, you can see
     the perimeter fence running across the bottom of the
     photograph, can you not? - A. Yes, I can, sir.

Q. At the bottom left hand corner of the perimeter fence
   is an open gate which would be gate 1? - A. Yes, there
   is a gate open.

Q. Can you see in that open gateway there - unfortunately
   you can only see half her head - a woman Police
   Constable? - A. Yes, it appears to be a female Officer,
   yes.

Q. To the right of the photograph in the bottom right hand
   corner, do you see a man pointing   to the left with his
   back to the camera? - A. Yes, I can.

Q. That is Chief Inspector McRobbie,       is itnot? -    A.Yes,
   it looks very much like it.

Q. That photograph appears to illustrate a man directing a
   number of fans towards that open gate where the woman
   Police Constable is standing.  Would you agree with
   that? - A. That is what it appears, yes.

Q. That photograph has a corrected time of exactly three
   o'clock.  Does that help you in your recollection as to
   when you sent the Officer down to assist the woman
   Police Constable to relocate the fans you h ad seen come
   out of the centre pen? - A. I would think that is
   probably about right.  It was at a very early stage.

Q. The next matter concerns the radio message that you
   sent either at that or about that time to
                                                         21

                                                B. D. MURRAY

Superintendent Greenwood asking him to go from the
players' tunnel to see what was happening at the
Leppings Lane end. Do you remember that evidence? - A.
Yes, I do remember that.




                            /Q . As I understand your.
                                                               22

                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Q. As I understand your evidence you sent a radio message
   to him but you don't know whether he received it or
   not? - A. I don't know.  I have heard what Mr.
   Greenwood said but I don't know.  I don't recall an
   acknowledgment as such.

Q. But as I understand your evidence, could I just deal
   with the timing of it, there came a time when you saw
   Superintendent Greenwood going from the area of the
   players' tunnel towards the Leppings Lane end, is that
   right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. That time at which you saw him do that was very shortly
   after the radio message was sent? - A. Yes, everything
   seemed to fall into place.

Q. So either he received the message or coincidentally, as
   he told us, he was acting on his own observation?  It
   all happened at one and the same time? - A. It happened
   in perfect sequence, yes.

Q. The importance of this is there was not a delay between
   the sending of the message and any perceived reaction
   in Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Not that I am aware
   of, no.

Q. The final matter that I want to touch upon is you say
   there came a time when you saw Superintendent
   Greenwood, whom you have described as being head and
   shoulders above the crowd at gate 3, gesticulating to
   the Control Box? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q.   You were     in no doubt that    what he   was  telling you or
     advising you was that in his view the game should be
     stopped? - A. No doubt at all.

Q.    I just wonder if we could look at a photograph which he
     has identified, in which he has identified the gesture
     that he was making, and see if that rings any bells
     with you?

          MR. RUSSELL:   Sergeant Griffiths,    the original
     reference was PR133A.

          SERGEANT GRIFFITHS:   I think it is C529, sir.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you, it is.     Could you please
     put that up?

Q. Do you have that photograph, Superintendent? - A. Yes,
   I do.
                                                        23

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. In that photograph we can see Superintendent Greenwood
   gesticulating in the direction of the Control Box? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Is that, albeit a frozen image of it, but is that the
   sort of gesture that you recall him making, by which
   you understood him to be saying the game should be
   stopped? - A. It would appear so.  I saw the gesture
   quite clearly; there was no doubt in my mind as to what
   he wanted.

Q. And that, of course, was at 4-minutes-past-3, as we can
   see from the time of that photograph.  That would fit
   in with your recollection, would it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you very much.

        MR. MANNING:   Are there some questions, sir, that
   you have for the Officer?  I can promise you that what
   I have left to do would, I think, militate towards
   trying to finish the Superintendent's evidence before
   we break.

        THE CORONER:   Okay.  I have got a few from the
   Jury so let me do those first, and then if that is the
   case we might as well have our coffee break afterwards.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, before you do that I have
   just thought of another three questions, please, if I
   may ask them?  I am sorry, I thought I would have had a
   second chance.

        THE CORONER:   No, you don't normally get a second
   chance any more but ask your three questions, if they
   are relevant, of course.  Put your three questions and
   I will decide whether you can ask them.  Carry on.

          Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Murray, is it correct that no one was briefed as to
   the method of getting fans out of the pens if there was
   a crush? - A. I did not brief anyone on that particular
   method.  I don't know whether there is an authorised
   method and I don't know whether any Officers considered
   that.

Q. There was mention of a coach in Leppings Lane when you
   were giving evidence, but I believe you said there
   would be a coach there but it would have no Officers on
   it? That is the note I made. - A. The coach that I
   arranged was to contain Officers who were doing public
   order duties and would have made their way down to the
   coach after the kick-off, or after we had authorised
   Officers to go on what we call phase 2.  There should
                                                              24

                                                  B. D. MURRAY


  not have been a coach with Officers in at any time
  prior to 3 o'clock.

Q. So you are saying the Officers would be there after
   kick-off? - A. These were Officers ....

Q. Not before? - A. These were Officers who were
   performing duties on the periphery of the Ground, round
   the shopping malls, round the public houses.  Once the
   fans were all into the Ground I had arranged for two
   coaches to park in Penistone Road and Leppings Lane,
   and 50 Officers to board each coach and stay there as a
   standby in case they were needed during the event.

Q. So there were Officers then in the coach.      I am getting
   a bit muddled with this.  I was reading in
   Superintendent Greenwood's evidence at the     Taylor
   Inquiry, when it was stated that there was     a coach with
   50 Officers positioned in Leppings Lane in     order to
   deal ....

       MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, I wonder, could we have a
  reference?

       THE CORONER:    Have you got a page number then we
  can look it up.

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Unfortunately I was going through
  the whole of Superintendent Greenwood's evidence last
  night and it got to 1 o'clock and I thought ....

        THE CORONER:   Well unless we have a page number
   it is very difficult to take it up.

       MRS. McBRIEN:    It is in that transcript.      I do
  know that ....

       THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.  I don't like
  using other people's evidence anyway.  It is bad enough
  using the individual's.  You can ask him about the
  coach ....

       MR. MANNING:   I think probably Mr. Murray is only
  going to be able to say he knows what he had arranged
  and not anything else more than that, because of course
  he was static in the Control Box.

       THE CORONER:    That is right.

       MRS. McBRIEN:    All right,   thank you:

Q. Just this last question:  P.C. Buxton we know did ask
   for a delay of the game, didn't he? - A. Yes, I think
   it was P.C. Buxton.
                                                       25

                                              B. D. MURRAY


Q. And you said Sergeant Goddard said no to him? - A.
   Sergeant Goddard said, "It's too late now, the players
   are out".

Q. I am sorry, I thought he said the gates had been
   opened.  I don't know where I have got that from, but
   would you agree that it is never too late, if there is
   a risk of fans being injured in any way by the action
   that is being taken? - A. I think I have said that
   there are no rules, or there were no rules about
   delaying kick-off.  It can be done at any time for any
   reason.

Q. Thank you very much.

                  Further by THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have got a few questions.   The first question
   is, "Were any alterations made in the Operational Order
   to account for the cuts in manning level?"   I think
   what the Jury are asking you is, in fact, what cuts if
   any were made in manning levels, where and why? - A. I
   think there was one reserve serial was removed that
   would normally be    down at the Ground, that was
   reduced from three to two.   Most of the public order
   serials were reduced from a Sergeant and ten Officers
   to a Sergeant and eight.   These are the serials that
   are outside in the residential area around the Ground.
   The mobile units were cut down by one Officer into a
   Sergeant and five instead of a Sergeant and six, or a
   Sergeant and four, I can't remember.   I think one
   serial was cut out down at the Hillsborough precinct
   end.   I had been very concerned about that the year
   before but the problems that we had anticipated never
   arose.   The general reduction was right across the
   board outside the Ground, and I think that apart from
   the one reserve serial there was no alteration to the
   manpower actually in the Ground.

Q. Were these alterations made in the light of the
   experience of 1988, is that what you are saying? - A.
   Very much so. We tried to balance it by bringing in a
   number of new features.  I arranged for three prison
   vans to be utilised.  What we had found the year before
   is that if a prisoner was arrested, say at
   Hillsborough, we had to send one of our tango units,
   which was a Sergeant and six men, and they were tied up
   in just taking one prisoner away.  I introduced three
   single man prison vans that would go to wherever there
   was a necessity and the Officers making the arrest
   would go back with the prisoner, hence not tying the
   tango units up.
                                                        26

                                              B. D. MURRAY


  We have also heard about the coaches.  We found that
  there was an enormous amount of manpower last year, in
  1988, that was obliged to take its meal and its standby
  position down at our Police garages at Claywheels Lane.
  When we did have problems in the Ground they were too
  far away to deploy and everything fell upon the
  unfortunate "D Division serials that for the whole of
  the game were employed within the Ground and did not
  get a chance to get a meal.  I arranged for the two
  coach loads and Officers on standby during the match,
  who would be there and very easy to deploy, but there
  were certainly Officers that were very much under
  employed the year before, and because of the few
  problems we had I was instructed to aim for a reduction
  in manpower, which I did.

Q. Would the size of the Control Box have any effect on
   the duties of the Officers inside? - A. I think the
   Control Box is just about the right size for the amount
   of people who are intended to be in it.  On semi-finals
   we are quite disciplined.  On other matches we get a
   lot of people visiting the Control Room but we try and
   keep it tight on a big match.  Obviously, I think it
   was big enough for the normal staff but it is not big
   enough when you want more people in, or when more
   people come to it.

Q. On the day of the disaster were you able to monitor the
   different parts of the terrace at random?  I think what
   the Jury is asking is with the cameras, not with the
   eyes. - A. The camera that would be best equipped for
   that was the one that was in the centre of the South
   Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture of
   the terraces and the Kop.  Unfortunately for most of
   the event that was trained on the problems that we had
   in the Kop, particularly after some ejections and
   arrests had been made from that area.  What we normally
   use the cameras for is evidence gathering and you can
   only gather and preserve the evidence of what you are
   actually looking at, at the time.  When we foresee
   problems in a certain part of the Ground we will record
   that particular area for the whole of the event, and
   that gives us the chance to then take still photographs
   from the video and blow them up later, and utilise them
   as evidence and identify people who are wrongdoers.

Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really.
   Did you rely more on your own physical vie w from the
   Control Box or on the monitors, and I think we must be
   talking about the terracing still because you could
   not, of course, see outside, could you, without looking
   at the monitors? - A. No.  We had a good view of the
   terraces from the Control Box.  We could see the
   terraces, had a good view of the terraces.   I probably
                                                    27

                                           B. D. MURRAY


relied more on what I could see with my own eyes than
anything else.  If I had seen a particular problem I
would have tried to get the video operator to zero in
as close as he could get.  All cameras have a zoom lens
but their capabilities are only as good as the actual
lens, and the better the lens the much more expensive
they are.  They seemed to be all right for our
purposes.




              /Q. Do you think
                                            B. D. MURRAY

Do you think that concentrating on the matters outside
the turnstile areas may have distracted you from
seeing the build-up of fans on the terraces?   In other
words, were you distracted, was your attention
directed away from the terraces, because of the events
which were occurring outside? - A. It is very
difficult to say, but obviously the major problem
between 20-to 3 and whatever time the gates opened was
going on outside the Leppings Lane terraces.   I feel
that that is where the majority of my attention would
be directed.   I would still be looking at different
aspects of the ground.   I would still try and keep
abreast of everything that was happening inside and
outside, but obviously the problems that were apparent
there and that were increasing there would take my
main attention, yes.

Do you, by chance, remember what the radio technician
was wearing? - A. He would be in civilian clothes
because he is not a Police Officer, he is a civilian.
I can't remember, no sir.

One of the questions that Mr. Russell dealt with was
what Chief Inspector McRobbie was wearing.  He was in
civilian clothes, was he not? - A. He was in civilian
clothes, yes.

Do you recollect what he was wearing? - A. I have just
seen him on the photographs, but I couldn't have
recollected it.  I seem to remember him in a jacket
and trousers, but I have just seen it, it is a dark
blue jacket, but I don't know whether I would have
recalled it.

In other words, it is what you have just seen? - A.
Yes.

The final question from the Jury is could you have
used the tannoy system to stop the match rather than
the procedure which, in fact, was adopted? - A. That
is very interesting.   I would never have considered
it, and I do not think that the referee --- I don't
know.   I don't know whether they are tuned into what
is going on.   Certainly we have from time to time
tested the emergency evacuation procedure by passing
messages and the referee is briefed immediately before
the event and told the message that we would use.    On
one occasion I have known a referee say what was the
problem, he heard the message;   and on other occasions
they have never heard them.   That is why we utilise
the linesmen to try and attract the referee's
attention.   I do not think it is a recognised form of
stopping the event.
                                              B. D. MURRAY

 Can I just ask you one question for clarification.  We
 Know you had, I think, five monitors, presumably five
 cameras? - A. Yes.

You had another two screens which could record? - A.
For recording purposes, yes.

Is it right that not everything that is visible on
your screens is recorded on tape? - A. No.

Only what is selected at the time? - A. Only what is
selected by the operator.

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, before my learned friend Mr.
Manning gets to his feet, if the Jury will be
assisted, there are other photographs which are before
the Jury which show Chief Inspector McRobbie much more
clearly.

     THE CORONER: Give us the best ones.

     MR. RUSSELL:     525 show his face.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Once the Jury have seen what he
looks like, if they are still interested, he is shown
quite clearly on the video at about this time, and his
activities in that area, I can remember.

      MR. RUSSELL:   He is full length in 529.   (Shown
on s c r e e n )                                  -----

     THE CORONER:    I think we are reasonably clear
about it now.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Superintendent Murray, you are a 25-year service
Officer? “ A. Yes, I have 25 years service.

You have been proud of being a member of the Police
Service? - A. Yes, I have.

You had gone on duty in the course of your service
that morning at 8.00 a.m. to do your duty? - A. I
think that would be about right, yes.

You knew that your duty was based upon a plan which
had been devised by Chief Superintendent Mole? - A.
Yes, that is correct.

You had worked to that plan in 1988 shortly after
taking position in Control? - A. Yes, I had.
                                                              30

                                                 B. D. MURRAY

 Q.   You had found that plan and the arrangements for the
      match to be almost wholly satisfactory? - A. Very
      successful, yes.

Q.    You had considered the de-briefings, the comments made
      by people and, as a result, you had made and suggested
      refinements to the plan and with others it had been
      worked upon, ultimately being submitted through the
      hands of Mr. Duckenfield, who signed it, to Mr.
      Jackson, the Assistant Chief Constable who approved
      it? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.    You had with you in your team very experienced
       Superintendents? - A. Yes - Mr. Marshall, Mr.
       Greenwood, Mr. Chapman.

Q.    Chief Inspectors who knew their job and had worked
       there, Inspectors who had worked there and knew what
       to do, Sergeants and PCs? - A. Very experienced
       Officers right down to the PC level, yes sir.

Q.    All of them had that experience which comes from
       practise in addition to the written and spoken word? -
      A. Very much so, they were experienced Officers on the
      ground.   They had done it all before.

Q.    Although there was care in briefings and at briefings
      at various levels, in effect many of them knew what to
      do and what was expected of them as Police Officers,
      men and women who had carried out this function
      before? - A. They knew their role, they knew what they
      had to do.

Q.    In your Control Box you had with you your Commander,
      you had your ears in Sergeant Goddard, a man who had
      worked in Control since 1986, and PC Ryan, who had
      been in Control since 1985? - A. They were experienced
      Officers.  I was very pleased with the team.

Q.    You had as your eyes the camera, or video operator, PC
      Bichard, who had been in Control since 1987? - A. I
      will accept the dates, but I know that PC Bichard had
      been properly trained in the use of the equipment.

Q.    As you said a few moments ago, none of those
      experienced Officers drew your attention at any time
      to any problem or any necessary action? - A. Not on
      the terraces.  They would from time to time at all
      events let me know if there was an area of concern or
      a problem that needed attention.

Q.    That is, indeed, what they were there for and what you
      expected of them? - A. We were all part of a team, we
      worked together.
                                            B. D. MURRAY

Yet with all of that, a time arrived when a man who
was a Commander when the Chief Superintendent was not
present, namely Superintendent Marshall, asked on two
separate occasions, indeed demanded on the last of
those occasions, that gates be opened because people
were being injured and would be killed unless that
action was taken? - A. Yes, that is correct.

In reply to my learned friend Mr. King, did you say
hhi q •



     "What was obvious to me is that we had a terrible
     problem outside.  Experienced Officers were
     letting us know that people were being injured,
     likely to be killed.  We had never had anything
     like it before.  There was tremendous pressure to
     take a course of action to relieve that, and that
     course of action was taken.  Nothing else was
     obvious."
A. I think that is what I said yesterday, yes.

Superintendent, if there had been anything that was
obvious, anything that would have saved injury to one
single person, anything that would have saved the
death of one single person, you would have taken that
action, would you not? - A. Of course, yes.

     MR. MANNING:  Thank you, Superintendent.   You
have answered every single question that has been
asked of you through these difficult times.   Thank
you, sir, for your forebearance. I have nothing
further for this Officer.

     THE CORONER: Superintendent Murray, it has been a
slightly longer session, but at least we have
concluded.  Thank you very much for being here and for
giving your evidence.  It is much appreciated.  We
will break for quarter-of-an-hour and then we will
start with the next witness.

               (Short Adjournment)
