                       Sheffield Archives Ref:               I0 ||                           M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised   RA
                                                                        jS lAAA l(o
                                                                                1 - ST-                  Number
                                                 \      i

T itle L   A   /__
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No Q,                       H'/A' (tyrJ QuA't              I M ' V flMX
                                                                                                                        Receiver
                                                            LlIq        UMe^          ^ v / tS-va# ) /


                                                                                                                        Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised     A IU 3                                                                                3 502_
                                                                                                                  S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions         ^ o



                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                         S IO




                                                                                                                  f© S |
                                                                                                                        Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                              \"Merseysi de.
                                             1st May 1989.
Secretary to the Inquiry,
Room 662,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT.


           Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry Evidence.


    With reference to the above I submit -for your attention
my observations o-f the above.
    I arrived at the Stadium at approx 2.10 p.m. and my
■first impression was a strong police presence, mainly on
■foot.When I turned towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
entrance "B" I was con-fronted with a mass crowd trying to
enter the ground through -four turnstiles. I did notice one
policeman on horseback by the turnstile entrance.I joined
the crowd in order to enter the ground.There was no
resemblance o-f order, just a mass o-f people trying to
enter.
    A-fter approximately 20 minutes I was very near the
turnstile entrance when the policeman, previously mentioned
became very aggressive and proceeded to use his horse to
clear a path through the crowd.There was an angry reaction
as people were afraid o-f being trodden on by the horse.All
the time the volume o-f people was increasing and although
people were getting pulled out to escape the bedlam I
■finally got through one o-f the turnstiles.
    On entering the ground there were quite a -few supporters
wandering around waiting -for their friends to enter the
Stadium.I proceeded to purchase a programme and asked the
programme vendor "was that the way into the Stadium"
pointing at the tunnel which I now know went under the
Upper Stand and onto the terracing.He replied "yes" and I
proceeded to enter the Stadium down the tunnel.
   My first reaction was one o-f suprise with the large
amount o-f people already on the terraces. I proceeded to
take up my position approx. halfway down the terracing
behind the goal.It was then approx. 2.45 p.m. all the time
the number o-f people was increasing and by now I realised
that I had never been in such a dangerous situation,in all
the years I have watched Liverpool I had never experienced
anything like it.The build up o-f people in such a short
time was becoming unbearable.
    I was starting to realise that panic was starting to set
in with some o-f the supporters. I then became aware that the
two teams were on the pitch and about to kick o-f-f.All the
time the pressure on the crowd became intolerable.! could
see that women and children were panic stricken, people
were screaming at police and ambulance teams that they
required assistance, no notice was taken o-f their plight.
The stricken -fans at the front were climbing the -fences and
at the back o-f the terracing, -fans were being hauled into
the Upper Stands.
    I was well aware that I was involved in a very dangerous
and -frightening si tuat io n .When Liverpool hit t h e cross bar ..
there appeared to bp ^ m ^ i v p surge -forward and I was
circled with it.! could see people in tronf'-o-f me in a
terrible state of fear, people were being trampled in the
bedlam and still we were being -forced -forward. I was
terrified and still going -forward, I had to get out.
    The crush was unbelievable, impeding my arm movements,
it was then that I seemed to be ejected above peoples heads
enabling me to scramble backwards and to the le-ft o-f the
main throng were I was assisted behind a crash barrier.!
was now in a position to witness the pending d isast er.Some
police and St.Johns Sta-f-f had at last realised the gravity
o-f the situation and were assisting dozens o-f people out o-f
the terracing and onto the pitch.
    Fans, now on the pitch began assisting the police to
rescue others who were climbing the -fence and screaming -for
help, a -few -fans became caught in the spiking as they
climbed over.A hole was then made in the -fencing and police
St.Johns and -fans were trying to resuscitate people that
were pulled out, it seemed a long time before an ambulance
arrived.The Fire Brigade then arrived and further holes
were cut in the -fencing. Bodies were now strewn behind and
adjacent to the goal.Fans had torn down advertising
hoardings to use as make shift stretchers.
    It was now obvious that a major catastrophe had occured
which will lie in my memory forever.
    I verify that this is a true account of the incident.


                      Yours faithfully.
