                                              ro Q   t-f'b                     * * Q OR )7 l
    STA T E M E N T O F        STEVEN P E T E R SAPSFORD.    P . C . 2652.              ‘

    POLICE STATION:- C/2,WATH UPON DEARNE.

    DEPARTMENT:-            UNIFORM.



    I am a P olice C onstable of the South Yorkshire Police currently
stationed at Wat h Upon Dearne.
    At 0 8 . 0 0 a m on S a t u r d a y ,15th Ap r i l 1989,1 reported for duty at Rawmarsh
Police Station re the P olicing of the F.A.                  cup semi final at Hillsborough.
I was a t t a c h e d to serial 5 2,being responsible to P.S. Hodgkinson. After
attend ing      the ground,we we r e dep l o y e d along Herries R o a d ,supervising
the N o t t i n g h a m Forest supporters as they alighted from their coaches
and mad e     there w a y to the ground.
    At 3. 00pm that day the wh o l e of the serial was diverted to attend
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Once we reached the outer gates
o^^he     g ro und we lined up in serial o r d e r ,awaiting further instructions.
 ^®At    3.0 5 p m, we received an order to attend immediately inside the
ground at the Leppings Lane end.              No further instructions wer e received.
I,t ogether w i t h other m e m bers of the serial ran in through the main
gate,t o w a r d s   an entrance to a courtyard area. We were then halted at
the ent ra n c e     to the courtyard by a supervisory officer. Onc e we had
regrouped we were instructed to go inside the courtyard area. Once inside
the the c our tyard          I was confronted by a hostile crowd,shouting,"You
m u r d e r i n g b a s t a r d s ,this is you r fault". As I pushed through the crowd,
heading towards a tunnel entrance situated in the stand,I saw several
p e o p l e laid on the concrete floor.          Some appeared only slightly injured
and we r e sittin g up,leani ng against a wall. Other people,I recall at
least o n e , w e r e receiving heart m a s sage and mouth to mo u t h resuscitation.
Or^j^of the p e r s o n s appeared to be dead.
    The crowd of p e o p l e at the tunnel entrance were compact and hostile.
Before e n t e r i n g the tunnel we were told by another officer to form a
'V' shape cordon and funnel the supporters coming out of the tunnel
into the c o u r t y a r d ,away from the casualties.          This p o s i t i o n ,jjowever,
was only hel d for a p p r o ximate ly 20-30 seconds,as it became clear that
there was m o r e         trouble at the other side of the tunnel.            In attempting
to reach the terracing area at the other side of the tunnel,it took
every effort         to p u s h through the crowd. The crowd in the tunnel were
very h o s t i l e and wer e p u s h i n g and shoving Police Officers as they went
past    them.   I still did not know at this time what                 the incident was.
I presumed that it was fighting.
   On p u s h i n g m y w a y through the tunnel and on entering              the terracing
Continuation Statement of:- Steven Peter Sapsford



there was still a considerable crowd inside the area.       On pushing past
these towards the playing area, I saw the first of many persons laying
on the floor.    These persons appeared to be dead.     I was assisted by other
P.C.'s and supporters to carry the first of the bodies out, back through
the tunnel, leaving the bodies to be attended to in the courtyard area.
I then immediately returned to the terracing where I then saw dozens
of bodies piled on top of each other, near the fencing.       Myself, colleagues
and supporters assisted in removing the bodies.       This was with great
difficulty as the bodies were tightly compacted and hard to dislodge.
All persons in the pile appeared to me to be dead.
    As the bodies were being removed, the supporters were screaming and
shouting hysterically.    Their anger was directed at the Police Officers.
They appeared to be out to cause harm to a Police Officer.       I was struck
twice, as I remember, by unknown assailants as I was carrying bodies out
of the terracing and returning to collect more.       I was not bruised or
injured as a result, however, they were definitely deliberate blows.          As
attempts were made to remove the bodies on the terracing, other officers
on the pitch side of the fencing, ripped the fencing off the securing
posts.   The majority of the bodies were then passed through the holes made
to officers on the pitch.     I am unable to say how many bodies I handled,
or the identity of the Police Officers I handed them to.       It is also
unclear how long it took to clear the bodies away from the terracing.
    As the bodies were cleared, the supporters in the west stand started
ripping advertising headings from the stand.      My immediate reaction was
that these were going to be thrown at the Police.       However, they were
passed down to Police and supporters, to be handed to officers on the
pitch.   These   were then used as make shift stretchers.    All the bodies
I assisted   in removing were situated in pen number three of the centre
south (C.S.) stand.    The crowd during this period were very aggressive
and hostile towards Police.     I can recall that some of the bodies removed
had been sick and the smell of intoxicants on them was strong.
    Once the bodies had been removed from the terracing area, an attempt
was made to form a Police cordon in pen number three, however, the supporters
in the west stand were very hostile and coins started to be thrown from
that stand   to Police Officers in the cordon.    It was then decided to
vacate the   terracing and go onto the pitch.    It was at this time I saw
a Police cordon at the other end of the ground.       No cordon was formed
by officers nearest the Leppings Lane end.       There were several hundred
supporters on the pitch walking around, Police Officers were intermingled
with them
                                                                                 1
Continuation statement of:- Steven Peter Sapsford. P.C.2652.


On facing the crowd in the Leppings Lane end, they were
very hostile and shouting obscenities at the Police.    The crowd had taken
on the manner and action of a lynch mob.    At this time I found myself
in company with P.C.270 Innes.   This was the first Police Officer I became
aware of and I requested him to stay with me in order to provide cover
for each other.   The crowd were extremely agitated and there were several
incidents on the pitch.   One, when a Police Officer was set on by a
supporter and the other was when a camera crew were attacked by supporters,
as they were near the Leppings Lane end.    Each incident further incited
the crowd and several supporters began climbing over the balcony of
the west stand, jumping down into the terracing area.     (Pen three and four)
They appeared to be preparing to storm the pitch.     It was at this time
I was at my most frightened and fully expected to be attacked.     I can
remember stating to my colleague, P.C. Innes, that I did not expect to
be going home that night in one piece.     It was during this time that
the Liverpool manager, Kenny Dalglish, made an announcement over the P.A.
system, calling for calm and for supporters to co-operate with Police.
The supporters seemed to respond and the tension relaxed, only slightly
however.   Following another announcement that the match was cancelled,
and for supporters to retain their tickets and remain where they were,
the crowd started to dissipate and leave the stand.     This was to my
enormous relief, as I honestly believed that there was going to be a
riot.   Once the ground was clear of most of the supporters, myself and
P.C. Innes mingled with the remainder of the crowd on the pitch.     These
were directed to leave the ground via the stands.     This was met with

full co-operation.
    We then assembled in make shift serial order and I was instructed
to collect some property bags from the gymnasium in order to gather
together the belongings of the dead and injured.     On entering the gymnasium
it was only then that I became aware of the full horror of the incident.
Once the property had been collected and returned to the gymnasium, I
was then instructed to gather in the North stand, to await further

instructions.
    The serial was then requested to attend at Barnsley Hospital re process
of the bodies transported there.   However, on our arrival we were cancelled
and returned to Claywheels Lane, from where we returned to Rawmarsh

Police Station to go off duty.
