                                                          *• •..*

           Document Form                Date and time raised                                              Number



 Title_______                                                            C&       "7r~*e/io t    *'^£>,•0 * 7~v^Wk*.    sS ?y*c              kJ
  (Include source and any document number H relevant)


  Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/Jfcr.      A    .........   .^zmmL«-

                                                                                                                         Receiver


                                                                                                                                 *~ypp‘
 Document registered/indpxtffas indicated                                                                                Indexer

  No(s) of actions raised

 Statement readers instructions                                                                                         Statement
                                                                                                                        Reader


  Indexed as indicated                                                                                                       Indexer

  No(s) of actions raised

^Pamined - further action to be taken                                                                                  0/M             SIO




  Further action no(s)                                                                                                       Indexer


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

  MIR 15
    Chief Constable
I   DCC
    'ACC (Ops)
    ACC (SS)



                                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY - PHASE I

                            WRITTEN SUBMISSION OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

                                                          RESUME

    A cautious a p p roach w h i c h seeks to make suggestions as to general interim
    recomm e n d a t i o n s for c o n s i d e r a t i o n by the Inquiry.

    This submis s i o n is s u b - d i v i d e d as follows    :

    (i)      A bri ef d i s c u s s i o n of the p r i n cipal cause of the disaster
             (paragraphs 5 to 14)

    (ii)     The F . A . ’s proposals to the Inquir y on r e c o m mendations prior to
             the new season (paragraphs 15 to 26)

    (iii)    Matters given in ev idence w h i c h d i r e c t l y involve the F.A.
             (paragraphs 27 to 30)

    There are also two a p p e n d i c e s .

    Ap p e n d i x 1 provides a list of Barclays League fixtures up to and including 1
    Ja n u a r y 1990, w here crowd attenda nce at s t adium exceeding 30,000 capacity is
    likely to reach 75$-       S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Footba ll Clu b does not figure in these
    fo r w a r d projections.

    A p p e n d i x 2 is a r e f e ren ce point of evidence purp or t e d l y supportive of matters
    conta ined in the main body of the submission.

    The prin c i p a l cause     of the d i s a s t e r   (paragraphs 5 to 14)

    The F.A. adopts the u n s u p p o r t e d stance that a failure to close the tunnel in
    proper time lead, to gross overcrowding, crushing and deaths.           It also fails to
    address the q u e stion of w hen the bar rier co llapsed or indeed what caused the
    colla pse (ie was the b a rri er defective?)

    This submission comes down firmly on p o o r crowd d i s t r i b u t i o n as being the main
    causal factor and is dismiss ive of the non-t i c k e t h older factor as being
    c o n t r i b u t o r y (C.F. West Midl a n d s A n a l y s i s of L i v e rpool Supp or t e r s Questionnaires
    where statistica l analysis suggests 2088 attended)

    It w r o n g l y asserts that "the evidence is o v e r w h e l m i n g that the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
    for p r e v e n t i n g o v e r c r o w d i n g of the central pens had been under t a k e n by the
    Police, and that the cause of the d i s aster was acc ord i n g l y a failure in
    policing."          This confuses the P olice practice at league games of ensuring
    s p e c i f i e d pens are u s e d to ensure segreg a t i o n and p roper crowd control.            The club
    cannot be a b s o l v e d from its s t a t utory duty.

    The d e c ision taken by S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r shall to open the gates is not criticised
    and the decisions as to action to be taken inside the g round once the gates have
    been opened is p l a c e d squarely on the P o l i c e C o m m a n d e r (Chief Superi n t e n d e n t
    D u c k e n f i e l d ).
The question of d e l a y i n g the k i c k - o f f is fudged in that the P olice C o m m ander is
attri b u t e d a "preconcepti on that the kick off s hould not be d e l a y e d if fans had
no excuse for late arrival."                     This is not r e f l e c t e d in the c o n versatio n between
C hief S uperi n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d and S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M u r r a y at about 2 . 30pm as
alleged.       A t that time it was felt that those outside Leppi ngs Lane turnstiles
could enter the s t a d i u m in the time remaining.

P a r a g r a p h 10 confuses the issue of pen filling and w r o n g l y states that
operat i o n a l orders for league m a tches prov ide for checki ng the levels in pens 3
and 4, d i r e cting the cro wd away f rom them, closing the tunnel if n e c e ssary and
for commun i c a t i o n betwee n officers charged w i t h these duties.                In support club
bundle (EX 67) page 98 is cited.              This is a total m i s i n t e r p r e t a t i o n of a Leppings
Lane terraces S e rial I n s t r u c t i o n for a league game w h i c h has a r equire ment to
"ensure pens are filled in accordance w i t h instructions from C o n trol" at Phase I
of the operation.          Th is relates to o c c u pancy of pens in terms of s egregation and
not packing.

This s ubmission suggests that o perational orders should, in future, cover the
above points.   However, it fails to consi der or ma ke suggestions as to the role
of the club and their stewards                    in such matters.

The point made at p a r a g r a p h 12 that it is for the Police C o ntrol Box or other
offic ers to ensure that the o f f i c e r in charge of the area at the rear of the West
Stand is informed wh en the tunnel requir es c l osing is accepted.

 W hilst paragraph 13 refers to Inspe c t o r B u l l a s 1 evidence of a "river of people ,
 no r e f e rence is made to evidence to the contr a r y on v i d e o and in statements from
 other Police O f f i cers and the s upporte rs themselves.

 A r e d u c tion in the n u m b e r of casualties being a chieva ble by larger perimeter
 gates, an absence of r adial fences or gates/gaps at the b ott om of such fences is
 s u p e rficially addressed.

 I n t erim R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s   (paragraphs   15 to 26)


 Ter races

 An invita tion is made to consider t w o " i n t e r i m r e c o m mendations               to the Certifying
 Authority:

 (i)        self c o n t a i n e d pehs or those w i t h r e s t r i c t e d exits to have own
             crowd capacity s tated in S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e ;
 (ii)       where there is p e r i m e t e r fen cing of a pen or terrace and no
            mechanica l c o u nti ng system, p r e - H i l l s b o r o u g h capacities for pens
             and terraces to be r e d u c e d by 2 0 %.

 T h e r e is a p r oviso that these s houl d be "subject to local conditions           as there
 are m a n y terraces w h i c h can s afely be m o n i t o r e d by eye a nd where the permitted
 capacities are already cautious.

 Pe r i meter Fencing

 Argues for r e t e n t i o n but that their design s h ould be an important feature of Part
 II of the Inquiry.            A n u n d e r t a k i n g is given to clarify w i t h all clubs that no
 discip l i n a r y action will be taken for a b r e a c h of Rule 24 (i)(b) and 2 4 (ii) if
 spectator s are tempo r a r i l y a l l o w e d on to the pitch bec ause of a fear of
 overcrowding.        A d d i tionally, c o n si deration will be given to formally amending the
 rules .
National Membership Scheme

For c o n s ideration in Phase II of the Inquiry.

S pecific Recomm e n d a t i o n s

(i)         A 20$ reduc t i o n in pen/te r r a c e    capacities      (see earlier)

(ii)       Where a pen    or terrace is e x p ected to be full and the perimeter fence
            in front of it has n a r r o w gates it may be appro p r i a t e for the gates to
            r emain open w i t h Stewards a n d Police in attendance.

(i i i )    (a) Clubs to ensure d e marcations of r e s p o n s i b i l i t y between
                themselves and the P o l i c e has been clearly a g r e e d in advance.
            (b) Police o p e r a t i o n orders to stress n e c e ssity for awareness of
                possible crowd distress, response and p r o v isio n of sufficient
                numbers of P o l i c e or S t e wards to deal.
            (c) One or more spe cific P o li ce Office rs a n d/or Stewards assigne d
                to m o n i t o r crowding of terraces or pens.

(iv)        Lists four areas         for i mprovement of m e dical care available to
            spectators.

(v)        Attempts      to state a p olicy for d e l ay ing kick off.

(vi)       Mentions but    makes no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s r e g a r d i n g signs and ticket
            colour coding.

(v i i )   Defers the q u e stion of n o n - t i c k e t holders to Phase II of the
           Inquiry.

P aragraphs 27 to 30

Here the F.A. defends the selection of H i l l s b o r o u g h as the venue for the 1989
Semi-Final, states that steps will be taken to improve the information available
to the S e l e ction C o m m ittee and regrets its failure to i nfo rm Sheff i e l d We dnesday
F o o t b a l l Club of the c a n c e l l a t i o n of p r e - m a t c h entertainment.
                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY



                            PHASE I



        WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




Introduction



1   .      The FA is concerned to assist the Inquiry on

interim general recommendations about the needs of crowd

control and safety at sports grounds, pending completion of

the Final Report of the Inquiry.      Other parties will no

doubt be making detailed submissions to the Inquiry as to

the events on 15 April 1989 and recommendations specific to

the particular topography or organisation of Hillsborough

football ground, and the FA's submissions on such matters

are limited to those relevant to general interim

recommendations.



2   .      It is obviously important that the public can be

reassured that ^during the next football season (which begins

on 19 August 1989) spectators can attend football matches in

reasonable safety following the serious breakdown in crowd

control and safety which occurred at Hillsborough both

inside, and to a lesser extent outside, the ground on the             -

day of the tragedy    It is assumed that the Inquiry will         ;

wish to make interim recommendations necessary for that       ■
purpose.   As the disaster occurred at one of the big

football everts of the year and involved a failure to

control a large and eager crowd, it may be of assistance ta

the Inquiry to know the high profile matches which are

likely to occur prior to 1 January 1990♦    A list of matches,
at grounds wi th a capacity   of more than 30,000 spectators,
where the att endance is expected to reach 75% of the

capacity appears at Appendix 1.



There are how ever many important general issues such as

the retention or appropriate design of perimeter fencing,

the appropriate design or division of terracing, the
desirability and practicability of all-seater stadia, the

relevance of identity cards under a national membership

Scheme and di fficulties caused by alcohol abuse and late

arrival of spectators, on which evidence will only be
available to the Inquiry in Phase II from clubs or other

organisations not represented in Phase I,



3.         The FA have therefore taken the liberty of

assuming that the Inquiry will only make general interim

recommendatio ns if (a) it considers them necessary for crowd

safety pending completion of the Final Report or (b) it

considers the a of such obvious general application as not to

be influenced by evidence to be taken in Phase II.




                              >2-
              The FA will deal in this submission withs-



       (i)    A brief discussion of tha principal cause of the

              dig aster [paragraphs 5 to 14]



      (ii)   The FA's proposals to the Inguiry on

             rac ammendations prior to the new season

              [pa ::agraphs 15 to 26]



     (iii)   Mat
                   ;ars given in evidence which directly involve
             the FA [paragraphs 27 to 30]



 Appendix 2 set
                   s out relevant references to the evidence
 supporting th«i
                       propositions in each paragraph below.


 The Principal cause of the Disast&y



5*           The
                   principal cause of the disaster was the
failure to clo
                   se off the mouth of the tunnel by about
2.4 5 pm when p
                   sns 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane terraces were
jp to or near
                   safe capacity.     Had that been done, fans could
iot have crowds
                       d down the tunnel causing gross overcrowding
of Pens 3 and
                       and the deaths of many of those already in
:he pens and so
                         of those crowding down.   If the tunnel had
been closed of
                       in proper time, the many other events which
liave given riso
                       to criticism would have taken place without




                                    -3-



                   !
disaster and indeed without significant overcrowding, since

 he evidence i]hdicates that the numbers of spectators which

entered the Le^>;pings Lane End, including those who entered

■through the ga es or got in illicitly without tickets, did

not or did not significantly exceed the capacity of the west

and north side4 of the ground.   Put another way, the tragedy
occurred becaus; e of crowd distribution within the west end

of the ground, not because of excessive numbers entering the

c round.



           The evidence is overwhelming that the

i esponsibility for preventing overcrowding of the central

 ens had been undertaken by the police, and that the cause

cf the disaster was accordingly a failure in policing.     The

 olice, including the South Yorkshire Police, in general do

  magnificent job in managing football crowds week in and

 eek out throughout the season at a very considerable

 ommitment of officers' time and police resources in

general.   Everyone concerned with football must be grateful

to them for their willingness (and, despite Hillsborough,
tieir continued willingness) to police football matches and

allow spectators to enjoy themselves in passionate support
of their team   Most of the officers of all ranks of the
Ssuth Yorkshire Police who have given evidence have shown

impressive char acter and professionalism.
               There is general agreement that the decision of

 ;>upt. Marshall          o demand the opening of the gates at the
    eppings Lane fend was correct in view of the risk of injury

 <|>utside the gr ound.         Only Supt Marshall appeared (wrongly)
 t o blame hitnse"
                          f for that decision.   The actions to be taken
    nside the groatnd if the gates were to be opened were not

    upt Marshall'          responsibility, but that of the Police
 Cjommander.



             The      i
                          olice Commander did not consider delaying the
    ick off (until far too late) because of a police

 preconception t hat the kick off should not be delayed if

    ans had no ex qu se for late arrival.        The conversation
 batween the Pol ice Commander and Supt Murray at about 2 ,30

 reflected this,           A decision to delay the kick off for
 f Lfteen minutes announced at 2.3 0 would probably have

 relieved the fr istration of the crowd which was building up,

p revented the hy steria to get in which developed, and

  :iabled the turiistiles to work faster,          it is in fact likely
 hat the kick o f would have had to be delayed by up to half

m    hour to alio1!/ the whole crowd in.



            The d ■vision of the Leppings Lane Terrace by

    dial fences    w <l
                          s a system appropriate for use by opposing
    ns of differe rit parts of the terrace or convenient
: i e nagement of a
                          limited crowd by filling one or more pens on
 1-e terrace,      ir
                          such situations it promoted the safety of




                                      - 5-
   the spectate
                     rs by preventing groups of fans having excessive
   space to run
                       in or possibly preventing horizontal surges in
   the crowd
                     It almost certainly enabled the poliM        to reduce
   their manpow
                           commitment at the Leppings Lana End f w
  league match es



                Foj the three semi-final* of 1987_9 howev

        ^ n   ^ advance to be all ticket sen-outs at .last at
        end of the grouna, tha police t e r M d the view that ^

   ans would find their own level on the terraces.            IB

  contrast to league games they made no provision in their
  operations oriers fnr
                                 specific responsibility in checking
 the
 r H R level
       IaTrnl of
              *. j
                 *   i %   -                            ”

                       he known favourite pens (3 and 4 ) , for
 directing the
                      crowd away from them or closing the tunnel
 entrance befor
                      e they became too full, or for the
 communication
                      between officers charged with these duties.
 Instead they r
                     ® U e d on general monitoring by officers in the
 vicinity inclu
                     aing the Police control Box.     in retrospect it
 =an be seen th
                           it was essential to have express provision
 - the operation orders to cover these matters.             Fans were

     in fact able to find a comfortable level i„ all arsas of
l>ens 3 and 4 b«>c*nco       ,
              because the lack of gates in the radial fences
 save at the tip) prevented lateral escape    Th    ■„
                                     escape.  The situation
in local areas
                   the terraces appears (on the evidence now
available) to
               have been uncomfortable in 1987 and 1988
 although the 1988 black and white photographs of the

terrace during the match (Exhibit 68, shows a tight but not




                                     -6“
obviously unc imfortable crowd).     There may have been
overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4 in 1989 before Gate C was

 opened for th£ first time at 2.47 pm:     at any rate they
would have be<pome gradually overcrowded even without the two

mass entries     ■f fans through Gate c, whilst Pens 5 and 6
remained compinratively empty.



11.         The configuration of the West Stand and Terrace

presents an obvious problem of crowd management.      Crowding
on,a terrace cannot be observed from the top or back of that

terrace, let clone through a concrete stand:     Pens 3 and 4
could only be observed from the West Stand, the perimeter

track or the Sjolice Control Box (or indeed, as the

photograph ext ibited late in the Inquiry shows, the top of

the North Stan d).    Closure of entrances could only be
achieved from behind the West Stand, where obviously

officers were out of sight of the observers.     Despite the
views expresse d in evidence by the Police Commander, it was

lazardous to 1eave such a matter to the initiative of local

officers.



tl2.        The methods by which Chief Inspector Creaser, who

■?as in charge     the concourse behind the West Stand and the
:urnstiles, ex pected to be informed that the pens were full

m d that the t innel needed to be closed were haphazard,       it
.s submitted t       it was for the Police Control Box or other
officers to enL ure that Chief Insp Creaser was informed when




                               -7-
the tunnel re quired to be closed, not his responsibility to

seek such inf<binflation, particularly when he had taken care

to enquire as to the method to be used,



13 .      It will be recalled that Insp Bullas gave evidence
that from his position in the West Stand above Pens 3 and 4

at about 3 pm he saw a "river of people" flowing down Pen 3.

it is submitted that this evidence assists in assessing the

results of the opening of Gate c for the second time at 2.53

with the entrance to the tunnel uncontrolled.    The entry en

masse from above of a large number of eager spectators would

obviously haves created intolerable crushing in that Pen,

While-the absence of perimeter fencing would have allowed

the crowd to spill out into the pitch and not remain crushed

in the pens, it is suggested that even in the absence of

perimeter f enc ing there would very probably have been some
serious crushi ng casualties and even deaths against crush

barriers or f1 om spectators spilling over those in front.



14.       In t he event, as everyone knows, the spectators

were crushed together and against the perimeter wire for a

considerable time.   Casualties must have been very greatly

reduced had the perimeter gates been larger or the radial
fences been ab sent or broken by gates or gaps at the bottom

orner of the pens.




                             -8-
Interim Recoimendations



             In proposing interim recommendations the FA has

examined in p srticular the problems associated with

terracing and perimeter fencing,     it is also concerned about
the problems essociated with the National Membership Scheme.

These three sObjects are briefly discussed below and the

interim measui: es are suggested in paragraph 26 below.



Terraces



16•          There is obviously increased danger of crushing in

a narrow pen such as Leppings Lane Pens 3 and 4 which has

its sole or main entrance at the top with lateral fences
with no bottoir gates, and with spectators walking down to

the entrance at the top of the terrace rather than having to
slimb (as for instance they do at the Kop end).     Terraces of
 ourse vary in their configuration and the position of their

entrances.     Re commendations appropriate for a terrace such

as Leppings La ne may for instance be different to those

appropriate fo r the Kop.



17.          Tha evidence has shown that monitoring spectator

iensity by eye may have allowed at least local over-crowding

3n the Lepping 3 Lane terraces.    It must be remembered that
or many years police officers or stewards have monitored

:he crowding ih a terrace by eye or by walking through the
• •



      terrace and have acted accordingly to control overcrowding.

      Granted that spectators may have accepted a level of

      crowding which an outsider would consider uncomfortable

      (probably a tighter level of crowding thirty years ago than

      they do today), this system seems to have been generally

      successful in preventing crushing.



      18.         However, the density expected to be seen by police

      or stewards monitoring the terrace may have been too great.

      In the light of the disaster, it seems advisable, pending

      full consideration of the problem in Phase II of the Inquiry

      to reduce the density expected in terraces and'pens with

      perimeter fencing in order to assist the safe monitoring of

      the crowd in those areas.    The FA believe that the density

      allowed for in the safety certificates at many grounds (at

      least before the disaster) has been based on the maximum of

      5.4 spectators per square metre set out in the Green Guida.



      19.         The FA therefore invite the Inquiry to made two

      interim recommendations to—Certifying Authorities:



            (i)   where a terrace is divided into pens which are

                  self-contained or at least have restricted exits

                  at the bottom of the pen, each pen should have its

                  own crowd capacity stated in the Safety

                  Certificate;




                                    -10-
      (ii)   where there is perimeter fencing of the pen or

             terrace and no mechanical counting system to

             establish the numbers admitted to each pen, there

             should subject to local conditions be a 2 0%

             reduction from pre-Hillsborough levels in the

             number of spectators permitted on the terrace or

             pen (where no individual pen capacity is being

             allotted it will be necessary to divide the

             capacity of the terrace appropriately in order to

             establish the appropriate reduced capacity for

             each pen on the terrace).



20.          The FA suggests that this overall recommended

reduction should be "subject to local conditions" because

there will be many terraces at league grounds which can

safely be monitored by eye and where the permitted

capacities are already cautious.     There are probably many

Licensing Authorities who have proceeded in a different way

to the Licensing Authority for Hillsborough.      For instance,

where lower densities have been applied to a terrace in the

safety certificate, or very wide gates have been required in

any perimeter fencing (and there has been a good deal of

such safety work over the summer since the disaster) it

seems likely that the Licensing Authority has already

applied its mind to particular problems of that terrace an ;

that no further reduction (or l.ess than the standard
recommended 2 0%) is necessary to reassure spectators of

their reasonable safety.



21.          The FA expressly suggest a reduction from

pre-Hillsborough levels because within days of the disaster

it asked all league clubs to review safety at their grounds

and it is aware that many Certifying Authorities have

actively considered safety on terraces and have imposed

^.eductions in the numbers permitted on particular terraces.

It should be made clear that 2 0% is not meant to apply

indiscriminately.where a reduction in response to the

disaster has already been made.



Perimeter Fencing



22.          There have been moments during the course of the

Inquiry when one or other party appears to have treated

crowd safety and crowd control as two separate matters and

has suggested that perimeter fencing is concerned with

control and not safety,     In fact safety and control of

spectators are 'not divisible in the context of football

matches.     Perimeter fences have not been erected (and often

insisted upon by the FA) in order to keep the pitch

beautiful.     They are there to prevent overexcited or

malevolent fans from proceeding onto the pitch to challenge

rival fans (an 'invitation to battle which is likely to be

accepted) or to attack players or .officials or to stop the
game.   Experience has shown that if fans get onto the wide

expanse of the pitch in order to indulge in violence it is

very difficult for the police to control them and that (as
                                                        f
with any crowd) the violence can be- contagious.      In extreme

cases this can lead to very serious incidents such as the

pitch battle at Birmingham (Popplewell Final report) or at

the Luton-Millwall match, both of which occurred in 1985 and

'involved serious casualties.     There has been crowd violence

since the Hillsborough disaster.       Even a "benign” crowd

invasion, such as that which occurred at the Cup Final in

1989, may only require one or two fights to be picked for

general violence to develop, particularly when drink has

been taken.   It will be recalled that the requirement for a

barrier to protect the playing area from invasion is not

just a requirement of the FA, but is stressed by UEFA.



23.       For these reasons the FA believes that perimeter

fencing will continue to be necessary at many grounds.         The

appropriate design for such fencing will be an important

matter' for Phase II of the Inquiry and the FA has already

inspected a collapsible system in France.



24.       FA Rule 24 (i) (b) makes clubs responsible for

ensuring inter alia that no spectator is permitted to

encroach onto the pitch and Rule 24 (ii) makes any failure to

discharge its responsibility misconduct subject to the

defence of no control and.all due diligence.      Clause D2 of




                                -13-
the 1985 Memorandum (Common Bundle page 296) is an extension

of this.        The FA will make clear to all clubs that no

disciplinary action will be taken if spectators are

temporarily allowed onto the pitch because of fear of

overcrowding (which might taken literally be a breach of
                     «



Rule 24 (i) (b)) and will consider whether the Rule should

formally be amended.         This will of course leave open the

possibility of disciplinary proceedings for having allowed

any overcrowding to develop in the first place.         There is

evidence that in spite of the wording of clause II of the

1985 Memorandum no club has in fact been disciplined merely

for failure to implement a precaution in the Memorandum and

the 'FA will fake the opportunity of clarifying this to

clubs.                                                          .



National Membership Scheme



25.             The Inquiry wiH.'be aware in general terms of the
                         ^             •                -   -
National Membership Scheme provided in the Football
           *■
Spectators Bill 1989.         It is generally assumed that any such

scheme will have to involve the presentation at the

turnstile by a spectator to a computerised machine of an

identification card.         Such a procedure is bound to increase

delay at turnstiles and arguments have been- raised that such

a scheme would have increased the problems at Hillsborough.

In view of the political issues involved, it is respectfully

suggested that it should be ^nade clear in the Interim Report
     ■9




m.


          (if it is the Inquiry's intention) that these matters will

          be considered in Phase II and that none of the interim

          recommendations are to be read as favouring (or dismissing)

          the scheme.



          Specific Recommendations



          26   .          In providing for crowd safety pending the Final

          Report of the Inquiry the FA submits that the following

          interim recommendations be made:



                   (i)    a general recommendation for a 20% reduction from

                          pre-Hillsborough levels (subject to local

                          conditions) in numbers of spectators permitted

                          under safety certificates in pens or on terraces

                          with perimeter fencing (see paragraph 19 above).



                   (ii)   where a pen or terrace is expected to be full and

                          the perimeter fence in front of it has narrow

                          gates, it may be appropriate for the gates to be

                          kept, open throughout the match with stewards and

                          police in attendance.     This expedient was employed

                          by Manchester United FC at the Liverpool v

                          Nottingham Forest FA Cup Semi-final replay on 7

                          May at Old Trafford (which has similar fencing to

                          Hillsborough all round the perimeter)     in order to

                          allay fears of spectators in the aftermath of the




                                             -15-
        ¥




                    disaster.   It has in fact been used at various

                    grounds on previous occasions.



            (iii)   clubs must ensure that demarcation of

                    responsibility between themselves and the police

                    for crowd control and safety within the ground has

                    been d e a r l y agreed in advance.   Where, as appears

                    to be usual, the police undertake responsibilities

                    within the ground they must clearly stress in

^                   their operation orders for matches the necessity

                    for awareness of possible crowd distress and

                    response in opening perimeter gates if

                    overcrowding is anticipated.      It is essential that

                    there is a sufficient police or steward presence

                    on the perimeter track for this purpose.       It is

                    further recommended    that one or more specific

                    police officers and/or stewards be expressly

                    assigned to monitor the crowding of terraces or

                    pens from suitable vantage points.      We have

                    already commented (paragraph 10 above) on the need

    ■               for specific provision in operations orders to

                    ensure proper communication between those

                    monitoring crowding and those in position to close

                    the relevant entrances.



            (iv)    it is apparent that improvements are needed in the

                    medical care available to spectators.      While the




                                       -16-
 FA are net experts in the detail of equipment

 needed, it is submitted that the following would,
 in general terms, be appropriate:



 (a)     every club should have a designated first aid

         room with a sink, a work top, preferably two

        beds with curtains, a stocked cabinet, power,

        light, water, a direct telephone line and

        reasonably close access for emergency

        vehicles.   Stretchers, a carrying chair and

        oxygen should be available during matches.

        One person at the club should expressly be

        made responsible for upkeep of the first aid
        room and facilities.



(b)    a doctor should be present from a reasonable

       time before all matches.   There is no reason

       why the doctor should not, at typical League

       matches with small crowds, be there as cover

       for both spectators and players, since

       players are far more likely to be injured

       than spectators,   He should however be

       located so as to be available for both.    At

      matches with larger attendances, it may be

      appropriate to have increased medical cover,

      although it is suggested that paramedical

      ambulance cover may be of greater importance.
           (c)   for all matches with an anticipated

                 attendance of over 5,000 spectators, at least

                 one fully equipped ambulance with paramedical

                 staff should be in attendance.   For big

                 matches two ambulances and a foot team of

                 ambulance men should be available.



           (d)   the above is intended to be in addition to,

                 and not to be in substitution for, the

^                services presently supplied by the St. John's

                 Ambulance Brigade or the like at matches.



    (v)                    One may have sympathy with the general poli

          approach and apparent prior agreement of

          Supt Murray and the Police Commander, evidenced in

          their conversation at about 2.30 pm, to the effect

          that if fans choose to drink in pubs and turn up

          late at the ground in large numbers they should

|         expect to miss part of the match and not to have

          the kick off deTayed for their benefit to the

          inconvenience of those fans who have taken the

          “trouble to turn up early.    It may well be that

          that principle could have been applied at the

          Penistone Road end without causing a crush

          situation, since there is no bottleneck at that

          end of the ground.     Nevertheless, as Chief Supt.

          Mole observed, a decision on delaying kick-offs




                               -18-
♦




           should not depend on why spectators are late, and

           it is regrettable that the Police Commander never

           considered this option until it was too late.       It

           is submitted that the kick off should be delayed

           if the police anticipate a considerable

           accumulation of fans at turnstiles shortly before

           kick off for whatever cause, if the police

           consider that there may be consequent difficulty

           in crowd control.    The addition of the proviso is

           necessary to prevent late fans having any

           confidence that the match will be delayed for

           their convenience.



    (Vi)   the marking or sign posting of turnstiles and

           entrances or exits inside and outside the Leppings

           Lane End left much to be desired.    (The Inquiry

           may however, feel that the spectators admitted

           through gate C would have proceeded down the

           tunnel to see what was happening whatever the

           state of the signs above the tunnel and therefore

           the lack of signs to the flank entrances was not a

           cause of the disaster).    It also seems clear that

           spectators would have been assisted by clearer

           colour matching of turnstiles to the colour of

           their tickets.   The Inquiry will no doubt wish to

           make appropriate recommendations-, on these matters.




                               -19-
   (vii)    the FA remain of the view, mentioned in evidence

            by Mr Kelly that the attendance of non-ticket

            holders at all ticket matches will persist unless

            and until they experience regular disappointment

            in seeking to gain entrance to the ground, and

            that all possible measures must be taken to

            prevent such entrance.     It is hoped that this will

            be a matter for more detailed discussion in

            Phase II of the Inquiry.



The Choice of Hillsborough for the Semi-final in 1989



27. •       It is obvious that it would have been more

appropriate from the supporters' point of view if Liverpool

had been    allocated the Spion Kop end of the ground both in

1988 and    in 1989, since the club   has a much larger home

support than Nottingham Forest.       The allocation of ends was

a matter    for the police, who made it clear that Liverpool

must on crowd management grounds be allocated the Leppings

Land End.    The correctness- of the police decision has not

been challenged, nor has it been suggested that the FA could
                                               :■   •


have reversed it.    The FA accept, as Mr Kelly acknowledged

in evidence that there was an element of unfairness in the

choice of Hillsborough for the second year running.      The FA

understand it to be generally accepted that the choice of

ground, while unfair in that way, was not .causative of the

disaster.
28.       It was natural and understandable to stage a

semi-final between the same teams as last year at the same

venue as last year when the staging club and the local

police force had unrivalled experience in staging

semi-finals and the 1988 match had apparently gone well.

The police appear to have regarded it as helpful to them

that they were staging a repeat.fixture.       While the

telephone call from Liverpool prior to the Meeting of the

Cup Committee should have been disclosed to the Committee as

a- whole and not merely to the Chairman of the Matches and

Grounds Committee, Mr Kelly is almost certainly right in

saying that the Committee would still have accepted that

Chairman's recommendation.



29.       Selection of semi-final venues is always

difficult.   The FA will be taking steps to improve the

information available to it on the suitability of venues for

particular ties, including information from supporters.     For

example, it appears that one of the grounds offered to the

FA as a venue had not, unknown to the FA, been issued with a

safety certificate, although it should be said in fairness

to the club that there is no indication that the ground was
unsafe.



30.       The internal misunderstanding at the FA and

consequent failure to notify Sheffield Wednesday ten days
                                           t


before the match that there would be no pre-match




                             -21-
entertainment is regretted, but the Inquiry will have noted

that the tie was advertised in Liverpool as having pre—match

entertainment.   The lack of the pre-match entertainment

cannot therefore have influenced the time of arrival of

Liverpool fans, although some fans who arrived early may

have been disappointed.   No significant evidence of

disappointment has been given and the view at Watford FC

that pre-match entertainment does not materially influence

time of arrival may well be correct.
I       ---------




                                                 APPENDIX 1



                                   BARCLAYS LEAGUE FIXTURES 19 89/9 0



                    A LIST OF MATCHES AT STADIA WITH A CAPACITY OF OVER 30,000

                    WHERE THE ATTENDANCE IS EXPECTED TO REACH 75% OF THE STADIUM

                    CAPACITY (UP TO AND INCLUDING 1 JANUARY, 199 0)



                    Saturday, 19 August 19 8 9



                    Liverpool v Manchester City

                    Manchester United v Arsenal

                    Middlesbrough v Wolverhampton Wanderers

                    Newcastle United v Leeds United



                    Tuesday, 22 August 1989



                    Crystal Palace v Manchester United

                    Everton v Tottenham Hotispur



    —               Wednesday, 23 August 1989
                                   <•

                    Aston Villa v Liverpool

                    Leeds United v Middlesbrough



                    Saturday; 26 August 1989



                    Sunderland v Middlesbrough            _


                                                    -1-
Wednesday, 30 August, 1989



Liverpool v Crystal Palace

Manchester United v Norwich City



Saturday, 9 September 19 89



Everton v Manchester United



Saturday, 16 September 1989



Liverpool v Norwich City

Manchester United v Millwall

Tottenham Hotspur v Chelsea



Saturday, 23 September 1989



Everton v Liverpool

Manchester city v Manchester United

Sunderland v Newcastle United



Saturday, 30 September 1989



Chelsea v Arsenal

Liverpool v Manchester United

Tottenham Hotspur v Queen's Park Rangers
Saturday, 14 October 1989



Leeds United v Sunderland



Wednesday, 18 October 1989

                 »•

Tottenham Hotspur v Arsenal



Saturday, 21 October 19 89



Everton v Arsenal

Leeds United v Wolverhampton Wanderers



Saturday, 28 October 1989



Liverpool v Tottenham Hotspur



Saturday, 4 November 1989



Liverpool v Coventry City

Newcastle United v Middlesbrough



Saturday, 18 November 1989



Crystal Palace v Tottenham Hotspur
Saturday, 25 November 1989



Liverpool v Arsenal

Manchester United v.Chelsea

Newcastle United v Sheffield United



Saturday, 2 December 1989



Arsenal v Manchester United

Manchester City v Liverpool

Leeds United v Newcastle United



Saturday, 9 December 1989



Liverpool v Aston Villa

Tottenham Hotspur v Everton

Middlesbrough v Leeds United



Saturday, 16 December 1989



Chelsea v Liverpool

Everton v -Manchester City

Manchester United v Tottenham Hotspur
  Tuesday, 2 6 December 1989



  Aston Villa v Manchester United

  Crystal Palace v Chelsea

  Liverpool v Sheffield United

  Tottenham Hotspur v Millwall

  Ipswich Town v West Ham United

  Sheffield United v Leeds United



 Saturday, 3 0 December 19 8 9



 Liverpool v Charlton Athletic



 Monday, l January   1990




 Arsenal v Crystal Palace

 Nottingham Forest v Liverpool

Leeds United v Oldham Athletic

Newcastle United v Wolverhampton Wanderers




(32022L)
                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY



       WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                          APPENDIX 2
                    REFERENCES TO EVIDENCE




Paragraph 5



     (i)   "up to or near safe capacity". -- see Photos

           Composite Album II Nos DLB 16/29 - 31 showing the

           pens full at the back at 2.46.



    (ii)   "deaths ... of some of those crowding down" —      see

           Schedule of Deceased entering through Gate C

           (Exhibit No not supplied).



   (iii)   Excess of capacity by entry of non ticket holders.

           The general impression is of no great excess

           although no accurate estimates can be made.

           HSE Report at para 9.7 gives a maximum estimate of

           10,124 people entering through Gate C and

           Turnstiles A-G.   Some of those will have been

           ticket holders for the West or even the North

           Stand, so should be deducted:     equally ticket
41




                holders for the terraces and some non ticket

                holders will have come through Turnstiles 1-16

                 (see eg evidence of Sgt Burns, D17 eg 49 E-F),

                although the actual numbers of non ticket holders

                coming in would not have been great.



     Not all non ticket holders outside gained entry.     Some were
                      ■%


     left outside looking dejected.



     Paragraph 6



     "the responsibility for preventing overcrowding"—       police

     evidence passim, only exception Duckenfield D8/76F, 78B-E,

     87F-G.



     Paragraph 8



          (i)   Delaying kick off:    Duckenfield D8/1, 20H, 25C-F,

                33D-E, 35C-G,' Murray D11/82C-83C, Sgt Goddard D18,

                101D-102D.      ^



         (n)    Time necessary to admit the crowd:   HSE Report

                suggests to 3.40pm (para 4.17-18) but is based on

                flow rates through the turnstiles over the time of

                the crush.   On the basis argued, the crush would

                have been relieved earlier with consequent

                increase in flow.




                                     -2-
Paragraph 9



Cf Evans D2 6 6C-D



Paragraph 10



It is suggested that Creaser was honestly mistaken in his

recollection re packing the pens in the 1987 semi-final.

D14/48E-F.



For an operations order giving responsibility to a specific

serial in a League Game for filling pens in accordance with

instructions, see club bundle (EX67) page 98.   Contrast

serial orders for 1988 and 1989 semi-finals.



Overcrowding in 1988:   the evidence is against there being

any more than "local" overcrowding:   see the black and white

photograph referred to in text and Evans D26 p5F.



Possible overcrowding in p~ens 3 and 4 before 2.47pm:   there

is a conflict between the evidence of various supporters in

the pens and the evidence of police officers outside,

especially Insp. Bullas (D14) in the West Stand.



Pens 5 and 6:   even allowing for shadow the photograph from

the top of the North Stand (exhibit number; not supplied)

shows pen 5 to be strikingly empty at 2.59.
paragraph 11



Views of the Police Commander on initiative of local

officers:        Duckenfield D8/pl5 A-G, 93H.



Paragraph 12


Haphazard sources of information : see Creaser D14 29A-C,

36H-37C.



Paragraph 13



The "river of people" is described in Xnsp. Bullas*

statement and at D14/p99E-F:         reference to pen 3 is deduced

from answer at 99H.


The probability of casualties even without perimeter fencing

is supported by evidence of Greenwood D12/42D-43B, 62D—63E

and by Nesbit describing the incident at Millmoor

ground:         D12/106B-E, 108GW110A.

    -   -   -        ^                   '   "


Paragraph -16



Variety of terraces is obvious but confirmed by Lock D31 p78

E-G, Evans D26 p28H.
Paragraph 17



Police officers walking through a terrace to monitor

density:   see Evans D26 p44 A-C.



Paragraph 22



See Kelly D25 p98A, and UEFA requirements at D25 p35.



Paragraph 2 6 (v)



Mole evidence on decisions to delay kick off at D7 p51E-H



Paragraph 2 6(vii)



On non ticket holders and the policy generally see Kelly D25

p90-1 and Evans D26 10E-12E.



Paragraph 27



Allocation of ends a matter for police: Mole D6 100 C-H,
    ~~'       ^        ■*
D7 1D-E. Choice unfair to Liverpool: Kelly D25 p49D, 53E,

93C-D.




                               -5-
Paragraph 28



Exceptional experience of Sheffield Wednesday and South

Yorkshire Police:    Hole D7 p93C-94A.   Kelly D25 91D—92B.    FA

(Kelly) exhibit bundle page 12.



1988 match went well:     evidence generally, eg Hole D7 p94B.



Repeat fixture helpful:    Mole D7 94C, Murray Dll 121D-E.



Committee accepting Chairman's recommendation:     Kelly D25

p53A, 53G, 71A-C.



paragraph 3 0



Advertisement in Liverpool programmes of pre-match

entertainment at 1989 semi-final:    Mackrell, D3 0 107H-108B.



The Watford view on whether pre-match entertainment causes

earlier arrival:    Kelly quoting Plomley D25 96E-97A.
