                                                                                          M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised           'ID '      s& cyz?         Number



                     >-                                            Q(^Q(c> ->kj                                       NL
T itle
(Include source and a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y es/N o   -------
                                                                                                                               Receiver




                                                                                                                               Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                               Indexer
 Indexed as indicated                                                                       2 ^ i
No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                      SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken

                                                                                                       f r
                                                                                                       fj
                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                   T «       T

                                                                                                                               Indexer
 Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                      *             V?A 70
                                                   (S.O. G22)
                                                   ( am en d ed 9.81)

FOR COURT USE ONLY
Regina - v - ...................................



Exhibit N o ....................................

Signed       .........................................
Justices o f the Peace/Clerk to



Date



FOR POLICE USE O N L X
Police Force            . . ...                    .....................
                                   iH *
Division        .................. T * . ' ........................
Description o f Item                                            >
      s               r ftu i C ny Cow/vuc
                                                                           I*
      1/lTlj-                                                       Ffiowt
      ^ rr/e /rtT '                                            /frnife.
Identifying Mark                  .                                  ....



LAB. REF.
       CJ. Act 1967 *.9
      MC Act 1980,^.102,
      MC Rules 1981, r.70

I identify the exhibit described
overleaf as that referred to in the
statement made and signed by me.



       Signature              Date
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD

                         METROPOLITAN DISTRICT




                        COUNCIL SUMMONS



    Notice is hereby given that a Monthly Meeting o f the Council o f the City of
    Sheffield will be held in the Council Chamber within the Town Hall,
    Sheffield, on Wednesday, 4th June, 1986, at 2.00 p.m.



            THE FOLLOWING BUSINESS IS PROPOSED TO BE TRANSACTED—




1-— To receive the record of the proceedings of the annua] meeting of the Council held on the 21st May,
       1986 and to approve the accuracy thereof.


2.— To move a Vote of Thanks to former Councillors for the valuable services rendered by them as
      members of the Council.


3-— To receive any communications submitted by the Lord Mayor or the Chief Executive and to pass
      such Resolutions thereon as the Standing Orders permit and as may be deemed expedient.

4.— Questions—
       (a) Supplementary questions on Written Questions submitted at this meeting— Standing Order
           No. 10(1).
      (b) Questions relating to urgent business— Standing Order No. 10(2).
      (c) Questions on the discharge of the functions of the South Yorkshire Joint Authorities for Fire
          and Civil Defence, Passenger Transport and Police— Section 41 of the Local Government
          Act, 1985.
30           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                          Meeting held 19th May, 1986

Present— Councillors Ms. Clarke (Chairman), Baker, J. A. Butler, Griffiths, Hobson, Howson, Moore,
Moscrop, Mrs. Mulhearn, Reginald E. Munn, Mrs. E. Smith and White.

1 General Purposes Panel
resolv ed: That the following minutes, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General
Purposes Panel, be approved—
       Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 17th April, 1986. Present— Councillors J. A. Butler
     (Chairman), Ms. Clarke, Howson, Mills, Moscrop and White.
     (1 )   TOWN HALL BASEMENT CAR PARK— TEMPORARY EVENING PUBLIC USE
        The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on a proposal for the basement car park in
     the Town Hall extension to be made available to the public in the evening during the period of the
     Embassy World Professional Snooker Championship.
       Resolved: That (a) the basement car park in the Town Hall extension be made available to the
     public for evening parking from 19th April to 5th May, 1986, inclusive, on the following basis—
             (i) the car park be available from 6.15 p.m. until a reasonable time after evening snooker sessions
             finish, subject to such terms and arrangements as the Estate and Valuation Officer may consider
             necessary and to consultation with the appropriate trade unions; and
             (u) the parking fee be fixed at 50p per car; and
      (b)    the officers concerned be authorised to act on this resolution prior to its confirmation by the
     Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee and the City Council.
★     (2) CINEMA LICENSING
        The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report giving (a) proposed licence
     conditions for attachment to cinema licences to be issued in respect of incidental or subsidiary
     exhibitions such as those given by means of video juke boxes and (b) new maximum fees brought into
     effect on 1st April, 1986 by the Fees for Cinema Licences (Variations) Order, 1986.
        Resolved: That (i) the proposed licence conditions contained in the report now submitted be
     approved; and (ii) the fees to be charged in connection with the issue or transfer of cinema licences be
     fixed at the maximum rate permitted by the Order, as follows—
                                                        Old        New
     Type of Fee                                        Fee        Fee
                                                         £          £
     Annual Rate                                       82.00      173.50
     Monthly Rate                                      27.50       58.00
       Up to a maximum in any one year                 82.00      173.50
     Transfer of Licence                               16.50       35.00

     (3) SHEFFIELD COAT OF ARMS
        The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on a proposal to review the
     administrative charge, currently £5 made in connection with the issue of consents to display the Sheffield
     Coat of Arms, reminding the Panel that it was the Council’s practice to waive the charge in
     appropriate cases.
       Resolved: That the standard charge made in respect of the processing of applications to display the
     Sheffield Coat of Arms be increased to £10.
★     (4) SEX ESTABLISHMENT
        The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that the Sheffield Magistrates Court had
     allowed an appeal lodged against the refusal by the Panel at its meeting held on 6 th January, 1986 to
     grant a licence to operate a sex establishment at 551 Attercliffe Road, Sheffield.
        Resolved: That the City Council lodge an appeal in the Crown Court against the Sheffield Magistrates
      Court’s decision now reported.

       Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 28th April, 1986. Present— Councillors J. A. Butler
     (Chairman), Ms. Clarke, Howson, Moscrop, Mrs. E. Smith and White.
                         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                  31

               ★   (1 ) STREET COLLECTIONS
                      Resolved: That the applications now submitted for the issue of street collection permits be approved
Moore,             as follows—
                   Applicant          Organisation                Location                     Date
                   L. Mitchell        Sheffield Asthma Society    Broomhill, Banner Cross,     16.8.86
jeneral                                                           Totley, Bradway, Hunters
                                                                  Bar
 Butler            M. Alcock          Wheels Sheffield Assessment Hillsborough, Broomhill      9.8.86
                                      Centre for the Disabled
                   C. Neil            The Talking Map for        The Moor                      18th October to 1st
 park in                              the Blind                                                November, 1986 inclusive
d of the
                   R. L. Smith        The Sheffield Junior       City Centre, Endcliffe        24th to 31st May, 1986
                                      Chamber of Commerce        Park
le to the                             Benevolent Fund
                   M. E. Smith        Darnall and District       High Hazels Park and the      28.6.86
sessions                              Medical Aid Society        following route:
consider                                                         Damall Main Road,
                                                                 Darnall Road, Eleanor
                                                                 Street, Fitzmaurice Road,
n by the                                                         Calvert Road, Greenland
                                                                 Road, Greenland Way,
                                                                 Fisher Lane
sd licence         (2) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
ubsidiary             Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before the discussion takes place
iught into         on the remaining item of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
                   transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
                   information described in paragraph 12 of Schedule 12A of the Local Government (Access to
mitted be
                   Information) Act, 1985 relating to legal matters and advice.
cences be
               ★ (3) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENCE
                    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for an
                 occasional public entertainment licence in respect of the Broomspring Community Centre,
                 Broomspring Lane, Sheffield 10 on 2nd May, 1986 between 8.00 p.m. and 1.00 a.m. the following day.
                     Representatives of the Broomspring Community Centre attended the meeting to support the
                   application. Letters from two objectors were read at the meeting and one of the objectors attended the
                   (Meting in support of his objection.

                     Having considered the application and the objections, the Panel
                      Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted be granted subject to the following condition—
■eview the         “the licensees shall take all reasonable precautions to ensure that members of the public who have
le Sheffield       Mended the entertainment disperse from the area as quickly as possible after the entertainment has
 charge in         finished"; and

                     (b) the Acting Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services be requested to arrange for
display the
                   Boise levels in the vicinity of the Broomspring Community Centre to be monitored on this occasion.


5Court had           Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 6th May, 1986. Present-        Councillors J. A. Butler
ry, 1986 to        (Cbainnan), Jamison, Moscrop, Mrs. E. Smith and White.
                   (J ) MtfMtENTATION ON VARIOUS BODIES
Magistrates
                   a k & k u Community Health Council
                       llw h » d . That the following persons be re-appointed to serve on the Sheffield Community Health
                              M ( f ^ear P ^ o d commencing 1st September, 1986, when their existing appointments will
J. A. Butler                 Hyatt.   R DiCk’ ° r‘ Patricia Lyne’ Mrs- 1 M Ward>Mr- F- Woodbine, Mr. C. L. Frost and
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

        There is a vacancy on the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st
 (n o t e :
 August, 1986 and one for the period ending 31st August, 1988.)
 Sheffield Councilfo r Racial Equality
    Resolved: That 4 persons to be nominated by the Chairman be appointed to serve on the Executive
 Committee of the Sheffield Council for Racial Equality for the year commencing 1st July, 1986, when
 the appointments of Councillors Ms. Clarke, Morgan, Savani and Thompson expire.
 Yorkshire and Humberside Territorial, Auxiliary and Volunteer Reserve Association
   Resolved: That Councillor P. H. Jackson be re-appointed to serve on the Yorkshire and
 Humberside Territorial, Auxiliary and Volunteer Reserve Association for the 3 year period
 commencing 1st April, 1986, when his existing appointment expired.
 Public Arts Programme Panel
    The Panel deferred for consideration by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme
 Committee at its meeting to be held on 19th May, 1986, a proposal for the appointment of two
 representatives to serve on the Public Arts Programme Panel.
 (2) TOWN HALL AND ANNEXES
 Use o f Reception Suite
    Resolved: That, in accordance with the details contained in the report of the Director of Land and
 Planning now submitted, authority be given for the use, free of charge, of the Town Hall Reception
 Suite for the following functions—
   (a) a seminar on Thursday, 12th June, 1986, organised by the Office of Arts and Libraries;
   (b) a public meeting on Friday, 16th May, 1986 organised by Sheffield War on Want; and
 (c) displays, singing and a video programme in connection with the United Independence Day of
North and South Somalia.
Financial Regulation 25(a)
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Director of Land and Planning, issued in pursuance of
Financial Regulation 25(a) in respect of the project for the provision of an Area Housing Office at 18/22
Union Street.
Council Chamber Sound System
   Resolved: That, subject to the approval of the Policy Committee, orders be placed (a) with Audix
Limited for the supply of equipment at an estimated cost of £6,907 in connection with the renewal of
the sound system in the Council Chamber and (b) with the Sheffield Works Department and Audix
Limited for the carrying out of the associated under-floor installation at a total estimated cost of
£5,423, in accordance with the details contained in the report of the Director of Land and Planning
now submitted.
(3) CINEMA LICENSING
   The Panel considered a request of the Director of Arts for the granting of local certificates for the
public exhibition of films to be shown at the Anvil Cinema later this year in connection with the
marking of the 50th Anniversary of the Spanish Civil War and the Sheffield Festival.
   Resolved: That approval in principle be given to the public exhibition of the undermentioned films
under the conditions applicable to Category ‘P G \ subject to the satisfactory outcome of further
investigations to be made by the Head of Administration and Legal Department in consultation with
the Chairman of this Panel—
  The Spanish Civil War
  Spanish Earth
  Spanish ABC
  The Defence of Madrid
  Behind Spanish Lines
  The Government of Spain
  Here is Fascism at Work
  Threads
(4) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 197J
   With reference to the decisions made by the Panel at its meeting held on 3rd March, 1986 (page
1203 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a further
                           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                      33

ng 31st              report on the implications for the City Council of the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
                     1975, formerly administered by the South Yorkshire County Council.
                        Resolved: That (a) the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by the former South
xecutive             Yorkshire County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 be noted and authority be
16, when             given for the continuation of such system for the time being;
                        (b) the position of the Health and Safety Executive in the matter be noted and the Head of
                     Administration and Legal Department be requested (i) to keep the Executive informed of all matters
lire and             relating to sports ground safety (ii) to consult the Association of Metropolitan Authorities on the
r period             involvement of the Health and Safety Executive and (iii) to maintain consultation on the safety of
                     sports grounds policy with the other District Councils in South Yorkshire;
                       (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to draft new safety certificate
jgramme              conditions in consultation with other appropriate authorities for approval by the Council; and
it of two
                        (d) approval in principle be given to the charging of fees under the legislation and, in this connection,
                     the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back on the Council’s
                     estimated costs in the matter.

Land and             (4) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
deception               Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before the discussion takes place
                     on the remaining item of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
                     transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
                     information described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12a to the Local Government Act, 1972 as
                     amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985 relating to the financial or
                     business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
;e Day of
                 ★    (5) APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT TO OPERATE AN AMUSEMENT CENTRE
                        The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on applications for permits (a)
                     under Section 16 of the Lotteries and Amusements Act, 1976 to operate prize bingo and (b) under
rsuance of           Section 34 of the Gaming Act, 1968 to offer amusements with prizes, at a proposed amusement centre
:e at 18/22
                     at 19 Charles Street, Sheffield, 1.
                        The applicant and his solicitor attended the meeting to support the applications and a representative
                     of the South Yorkshire Police attended to report on a Police objection to the applications.
vith Audix
 renewal of             Resolved: That the applications now submitted be granted.
and Audix
ted cost of      2 Markets Panel
d Planning       aESOLVED: That (a) the following minutes be approved and

                    (b)     this Committee’s appreciation be conveyed to the employees concerned of the Markets Department
                 for their achievement in opening the extension to the Setts Market and the new Market at Waterthorpe,
ates for the     both in the week commencing 12th May, 1986.
jn with the
                       Meeting of the Markets Panel held 23rd April, 1986. Present-            Councillors White (Chairman),
                     Hobson and Moore.
tioned films
; of further         (1 ) LEASE OF 12 WAINGATE
iltation with           The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report containing details of two offers received for
                     the lease of premises at 12 Waingate.
                        Resolved: That (a) the highest offer on the terms contained in the report now submitted for the lease
                     of premises at 12 Waingate, be accepted, subject to the receipt of satisfactory references; and
                       lb) in the event of a lease not being granted to the prospective lessee, authority be given for the
                     pferrutes to be re-advertised.

                     (2) MARKET RENTAL COLLECTIONS
                        The Panel received and noted a progress report of the General Manager, Markets, on the collection
                     Iftttfn of market rentals following the transfer of the collection system from the City Treasury to the
                     Markets Department.
, 1986 (page
tted a further               A copy of the report will be sent with the printed minutes to each member of the City Council.)
