O-t-
'REPORT Re HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND 15th APRIL 1y89




I am Police Constable No'3011 Julie Clifton, stationed at Doncaster

Police Station.



At 8.30am Saturday 1 5 th April 1 9 8 9 I reported for duty at Doncaster

Police Station from where I was transported to Hillsborough Football

Ground, Sheffield.     At 9»3(Jam I attended at Hillsborough Football

Ground where a briefing was held following which a packed meal was

served and taken at the ground.



At 10.00am I commenced foot patrol duties with PS Dolan, Serial 2h

on Middlewood Road, Hillsborough. Once on Middlewood Road I joined

company with PC 2508 Mitchell to cover Middlewood Kcfcd between Mintoe

Road and Bradfield Road.



By 1.00pm on this date I saw several groups of youths gathering

to the front of the Co-Op store drinking cans of beer and lager

bought from inside the shop and many more groups coming from the

shop carrying alcoholic beverages, these youths obviously being

football supporters.     Around this time I was approached by many

more supporters, at least on 6 occasions asking where the nearest

open public house was.



At 2.00pn I was on duty outside Threshers, Middlewood Road, an Off-

licence which was extremely busy with football supporters. Thio shop

became so full, a member of staff in the shop had to control the flow

of people entering and leaving the shop by locking the door and

allowing only a few people in as others left.
 At 2.20 pm I spoke to a small group of youths carrying cans of lager

 and a bottle of Cider.   They informed me that the drink wao for

 consumption in Hillsborough Park before the match with some friends.

 At 2.5opm I was still being approached by youths asking the direction

 of the football ground, the majority of these youths smelt of

 intoxicating liquor.



 At 3.1upm I attended at Hillsborough Football Ground, Leppins Lane

where I saw several ambulances and large groups 01 people leaving

the ground in an extremely distressed condition.   Many of these

people were leaving the ground shouting violently at police officers

standing around this location. As I went to the aid 01 a man who was

aione and crying two men walked past and one shouted "nurdering

Bastard" to me. I assisted the man who appeared injured, holding his

chest, to the side of an ambulance where I aoked his to stay and wait

for some medical assistance, he was unable to speak as he was crying

uncontrollably. I thai assisted another man who said his chest hurt

ana asked him to stay with the first man until he too could be treated.



At this time I saw   several bodies at the side of an ambulance lying

with their heads ajia faces covered.



I was then ordered by a senior officer to keep the route clear for

emergency vehicles ana I went immediately to the opening between

the West stand and the North stand ana directed any persons leaving

the ground by this exit to leave via the exit between the South stand

and the Spion Kop. Once at this location I was again confronted by

many youths who aggresive and abusive.



At 6.00p* I returned to the North Stand to rejoin the serial and

then stood down.   At 6.15pm I returned To Clay Wheels Lan* and at
                                                                                ■"2pr
                                                                               3-
        1

*   4




            7.00p® I was transported to Doncaster Police Station where, upon

            arrival at 7.4ppm I went off duty.
