                                  CHARGE No 1

 Being a member of the South Yorkshire Police, you did between
                                         -5o -p f f CC-~*^0'C~-
 22 March 1989 and 15 April 1989yyneglect or omit to carry out

 with due promptitude and diligence         that which it was you

 duty to attend to and carry out vis:

 That having accepted      the role of overall operational

 commander for the policing of the Football Association Cup

 Semi Final,    to be played between the Liverpool and Nottingham

 Forrest football      clubs at Hillsborough on 15 April        1989, you

 subsequently failed to aquaint yourself with those aspects

 of the planning and personal p r e p a r a t i o n w h i c h were required

by your role to ensure the safety of persons attending d p & t                y

event in that you:
                                    " --/



 1.    Failed to personally take into account the advice and

       instructions     contained in the the three documents:

       a.   The Guide    to the safety at Sports Grounds

      b.    The SYP:    Standing Instructions for the Policing

             of football matches and

      c.     The ACPO Sub Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting

            Events,    Guide   to Policing Fjaotball.
                                            /
2.    You failed to aquaint yoursel/ with the layout and
                                  //
      geography of the Leppings $ a n e aspect of the ground.
                               /
3.    You failed to visit the^/ground before approving the

      operational order.

4.    You failed to aquaint yourself with sufficient details of

      the planning which would have led you to have forseen

      and deal with the problems associated with the event.

5.    You failed to aquaint yourself with the resourses available

      to you and provided by the SWFC ie its control             room and

      the distribution of stewards.

6.    You failed to make contact with the club officils prior

      to the match.
7.   You failed   to aquaint yourself with the duties and responsibilities

     of the SWFC stewards on the dfiy.
                                   /
                        CHARGE 1



The basis of this charge is the fact that

Chief Superintendent DUGKENFIELD assumed the

role of overall operational commander at the

said football match and having accepted that

duty he failed to prepare himself for the

command responsibilities that 1~ir l-nrw he had

accepted.



As the commander it was his duty with due

promtitude and diligence to carry out the

following tasks:



1.   To aquaint himself with all the immediately

     available documentation in relation to

     his command responsibilities.

                                       ,y*

2.   To aquaint himself with the history of the

     event and any previous problem areas.

                   s'



3.   To aquaint himself with the geography and

     the layout of the location and of the

     football ground itself including the methods

     of entry and exit.



4.   To approve the planning of the event and

     in particular the Operational Order for

     the day, only after having satisfied himself

     that contingencies existed for any forseeable
                         M   .
     problems which worffaa endanger the safety of

     those attending.
                                                             2


                 5.   To aquaint himself with those resourses

                      available to him which were to be provided

                      by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.



                 6.   To aquaint himself with the division of

                      responsibilities between the Police and

                      Fo otball Cl ub management in order that the

                      va rious res ourses could be co-ordinated to

                      en sure the safety of those attending the

                      ev e n t .



                 The f ac t that Ch ief Superintend ent DUCKENFIELD

                 had acc epted the role of operat ional commander

                 on the day in qu estion cannot b e disputed.

                 Giv ing eviden ce on oath at the inquest proceedings

                 he admi ts :



Day 1   P47'C'   'No the operational commander was myself and

                  Mr. Jackson was the Assistant Chief Constable

                  on duty weekend.'



Day 1   P67'G'   'You were the officer in overall command ?'

                 'Yes, sir.'



Day 2   P84'F'   'I was the overall Police Commander.'



                 Clearly then we know that 14HV DUCKENFIELD had

                 accepted that he had ,fcfte duties and responsibilities

                 of that role.



                 He was made aware that he would    take over command
                                                                   3
                  of the Division responsible for policing the

                  said football match in a South Yorkshire Police

                  General order 11/1989 Part 2           dated 6 March 1989

                  which stated that his command responsibilities

                  would be effective from 27 March 1989-



                  The draw for the Semi-Final         tie took place live

                  on television on the morning of Monday 20 March

                  1989 and after negotiations on that day between

                  the police and club management,          the police accepted

                  responsibility for the policing of the event.



                  In his evidence to the TAYLOR enquiry the knowledge

                  of that day was admitted by him in answer to the

                  following question       :

LJT Day 1 P115'H' Q.   'You learned then and you realised immediately

                        this was going to land on your plate very

                        shortly after you had taken over ?'

                  A.   'Yes s i r . '



                  We know therefore that Mr.DUCKENFIELD had from

                  Monday 20 March 1989 until Saturday 15 April 1989,

                  some 27 days in which to prepare himself for the

                  command responsibilites        that he knew he was to

                  accept on that day.



                  It is however acknowledged by the presentation that

                  during that time he would be required to cast off

                  the responsibilities of his old command and take

                  on the reins of the many other r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s

                  associated with his new command.
                      From the evidence available to us at this time

                      we know that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

                      attended several meetings and visited the ground

                      within that period of time.



                      On the 22 March 1989 he attended a preliminary

                      planning meeting instigated by the then resident

                      Chief Superintendent Mr. Mole.      In his evidence

                      to the Inquest he says:

Inq D .1 P34'B'       'Mr. Mole, as you have previously heard, already

Also                  knew of the arrangements and called a planning

Inq D .1 P35'C-E'     meeting on the 22nd, which he chaired,    and I

                      attended as an observer.'



Inq D. 1 P36'C'       0n 29 March 1989 Mr. Duckenfield held a meeting

LJT D. 1 P116'C/D' with his planning team i.e. Superintendent MURRAY
                      Chief Inspector BEAL and Inspector SEWELL.



Inq D .1   P37'F/G'   On Saturday 1 April 1989 he attended the stadium

           P38'G'     where a league match was taking place between the

LJT D. 1   P117'G'    Sheffield Wednesday and Millwall football clubs

                      and took that opportunity to walk the area.



Inq D .1   P38'B'     On the evening of 5 April 1989,   he attended a further

                      league match when Sheffield Wednesday played

                      Wi m b l e d o n .



                      On 10 April 1989 he instigated a further planning

                      meeting with his sector Superintendents,

                      representatives from the other Police Divisions

                      and the British Transport Police,   all of whom had

                      direct concernes with the operation.
In addition to the information he aquired from

these meetings and visits,      he also knew of and

had available to him the following documents

a knowledge of which the presentation believes*

w^eessential     to the planning of a police

operation of this scale:



1.    The Guide to the safety at Sports Grounds.

      (Known generally and herinafter referred to

      as the   'Green Guide')



2.    The Association of Chief Police Officers

      Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting

      Events, Guide to Policing Football.



3.    The South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions

      for the Policing of Football Matches.



4.    The Divisional Football Intelligence report.



5.    The De-briefing notes for the 1988 Semi-Final



6.    The operational Order for the 1988 Semi-Final



It is accepted     that other documentation existed

which would have been available to the Chief

Superintendent should he have chosen to research

it.    In relation to this charge however,     the

presentation are prepared xo-"a'ccept that these

were the documents which were readily available

to him and which he could have been expected to

rely on as his source of information in the limited
                                                                    6
                time he had in which to prepare his planning and

                and himself for his role as operational commander

                at this e v e n t .



                Throughout      Mr Duckenfield has admi-                             his

                knowledge o f                existence and to having read

                them albiet in relation to the ACPO Document and

                the South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions

LJT D.2 P2'F'   he has admitted to not having read those two

                documents subsequent to his promotion. The ,
                                           l^yv iMof" A          So
                presentation submit that i-fc— i-s— n& te-ttnre-   a                       —

                trtrTTav'e~'*eTtp^c-ted— hi-m to. have done so .and that in

                -froi              h&’ was    f a i 1 i n g— bis— d u ty fee—   —
                                                        r

                equip himself adequately for his command

                responsibility.



                It is the responsibility of a Police Commandef

                to aquaint himself with the history of an event

                he is to command.             It is also a matter                    common

                sense that by doing so any previous problems

                encountered could then be catered for.                          In

                the inquiries to date much has been made of the

                injuries caused to Supporters in 1981                     at a similar

                match held at the ground.                   In fairness to the

                Chief Superintendent the presentation accept that

                whatever problems occurred then were dealt with

                by those concerned at the time and that a knowledge

                of those problems would not have greatly assisted

                him.     If we were to pursue this line of enquiry

                he would be supported in his ignorance of the facts
                               /
                by C h i e f ^ d p e r i n t e n d e n t Mole who states that he

                specifically did not pass this information to him.
                   In 1988,   at the same Semi-final
                                                    7   there is evidence

                   to the effect that Police officers closed

                   off the central tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4.

                   In relation to this charge,     the presentation

                   accept that that evidence was not available to

                   Mr Duckenfield and again he would be fully

                   supported by Mr Mole who also was not aware

                   of the action taken as it did not appear in

                   any de-briefing notes.



                   The presentation submit that it is the

                   responsibility of any commander to make himself

                   aware of the geography of his command,      its
X>!   A~!   '
                   physical peculiarities and in this case the

                   layout of the football stadium in order to,

                   as far as he is able,    content himself that it

                   safe to be used by the public for that particular
                   mront                 C £K--   t/&   !       ^     1




                   His visit to the ground which he has admitted

                   to on the 1 April 1989 gave him the opportunity

                   to make himself aware of the geography and to

                   obtain knowledge of the layout and conditions

                   of the stadium and the area which he was to command.



                   The presentation are of course primarily concerned

                   with his knowledge of the Leppings Lane area,      the

                   turnstiles,   concourse and terraces on that Western

                   side of the ground.



                   He was certainly aware that the game itself was to

        Di 4 I P   attract a capacity crowd and that inorder to obtain
                    -    j         \)V ^                                                                      ft
                    sT       < /   k   y°       \o
                                        W            total segregation,                     Liverpool supporters would                        * i

                                                     all use the Leppings Lane turnstiles^                                       11

                                                     was a matter of common sense that there* would                                         Hp
                                   y                                                                                                        t^S ‘*6*^.
                                                     need to be some form of control within Leppings

                     > \° V             "            Lane to accombdate the passage of those supporters.

              >V ' / ^

tvt®”'* /      \                                     The fact that it should have occurred to him
V S fJ *       vy ’
      &       v\                                     is corroborated by the undisputed fact that                                      the

  i       y                                          problem did actually occur in that sometime                                      between

              Inq D.1              P48'B’            2.17 p.m.            and 2.30 p.m.             on the day,      he was

                                   P 4 7 'F / G 'asked by Superintendent Marshall to close Leppings

                        D.2 P64'D'                   Lane to vehicular traffic.                          (See also note 1

                                                     a t t a c h e d ).



                                                       Clearly he had a duty to manage the arrival of

                                                     fans in the Leppings Lane area and his responsibility

                                                     was to plan for it within the operational order

                                                     or briefings.                       This he did not do, which resulted

                                                     in the hurried and not too efficient closing of

                                                     Leppings Lane to vehicular traffic.



                                                     Mr Duckenfield has admitted that on his visit to

              LJT D.1              P117'G'           the ground on 1 April 1989 he went to look at the

                                                     turnstiles and how they worked.



              LJT D.1              P118'D' He had observed                               the pens    and radial fencing at the

              Inq D.1              P44'B'            Leppings Lane terrace.                          He 36es h6wever go on

              Inq D.1              P72'D'            to adroit that he did not                       see a problem with the

                                                     crowd being able to spread laterally across the

              LJT D.1.P118'F'                        terrace.                                         by Lora""Justice Taylor
              t '                           ,        f r   s   v   J   — e ~ j\   f" o                   tSaAC>-—   c L * s tt
                        C/p   he*stated ’44*eHb~he a-e-ee crfc-e-d that fans would fi nda ^—_
                         ?                           ^                        &_ f r - v— •
              LJT D.2 PIOS'C' their own level on the terrace.            The presentation
                                   maintain that he should have seen the terracing

                                   in relation to the pens as a problem and that

                                   it should have been common sense to anyone that

                                   the      'Find your own'              level theory.was              totally i

                                   lmpractical^in relation to the physical l a y o u t .

                                                                                       i s              i                    *

                                    lie .      C ^& 4jdLa&        & L .*tu ts -e .
  n                                He has admitted that he s h e                                central     tunnel
•'T's »          f                                                                   v»—       "Of                O
ci^'1       /    ^                 and also saw that the turnstiles A-G lead via 7
                .. -     a.       4?^                                   ir-e-e^, ^ *3— 'j (
                                   the concourse' to that tunnel.               / . ,       .
i)    I    C iO 'D "&                                      f tJ      i>V<u>4®L€.           <s-wwvi                    p ,* u »
                                               t'KA'T'C-                                    »<- -        &UCAsi^X&£-Cf- .

                                   He has a l s o t h a t                            the signs giving

          LJT D.1    P119'B' directions              to the terrace were less than adequate.
          \
                              ■   ■■(N o to h&w-e-v-e-^-fe-toa-^-his -answers-- to UJT appear                      to be

                                                                           -t-eri'S'e' •mrd~~g±VBTr'W‘lrttr-- -tire—

                                               -•o#-^4-R4s4gh.
                                                             t                   -




                                   This is corroborated somewhat in his answers

          Inq   D.1 P44'B'        given at the Inquest:



                                   Q.        'Would it be fair to say that                           you did    not

                                             on the day have detailed knowledge of the

                                             signing,        directing people which way to go

                                             at the Leppings Lafte end ?'

                                   A.       'No sir, I had only had that one visit.'



                                   He did not appreciate the relationship between

          Inq   D.1 P58'B'        Gate C and the central                      tunnel:



                                   Q.       'Did you appreciate at that time the

                                             geography of the ground and in particular

                                             the relationship of the gate to the tunnel ?'

                                   A.       'No s i r . '
                                                            10

                     He was aware however of the dividing wall on the

                     concourse:

Inq D.1 P 7 3 'C '

                     Q.   'One can see the block of turnstiles and there

                            is a dividing wall on the concourse behind

                            the two sets of turnstiles ?

                     A.   'Yes s i r . '

                     Q.   'You would have been aware from your walk

                            round the ground that that was the position

                            would you not ?'

                     A.   'That the dividing wall was in that area ?'

                     Q.   'Yes'

                     A.    'I knew of the dividing wall, yes.'



                     He was unware however on the day that the concertina

                     gates were referred to alphabetically:



Inq D.2 P23'G'       Q.   'You did not know actually the numbers of the

                            gates at that time, did you ?'

                     A.   'Noi that is perfectly co r r e c t . '



                     The fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

                     visited the ground on 1 April 198<)and on 5 April

                     1989 is not disputed by the presentation.
                                                                7
                     What he failed to do and what it was his duty to
                                                                    *
                     have taken the opportunity to do was to:

                     a)    aquaint himself with which turnstiles gave

                            access to which particular parts of the     ground

                     b)    Aquaint himself with the layout and the

                           signing on the concourse which would have

                           directed fans to the terracing other than
                                                           11

                       by means of the central     tunnel i.e.    through the

                       dividing wall,   and

                       c)   Aquaint himself with the general layout of

                            the Leppings Lane area.



                       Had he done so he would have realised that fans

                       coming onto the concourse through the turns tiles
                                                               to .
                       A - G would unless properly stewarded^make for

                       the central tunnel and present those responsible

                       for filling and monitoring the pens with a
       n>) ,
  I,       /           possible problem of overcrowding         which would have
       "7 7    7% a
              /'      1 required
                          quired within the planning some form of formalised

                       stewarding and monitoring of the terrace by either

                       the Police or club s te war ds .                     ~
                                          o h u b ' s             cm     -o —
                       C>f            -  %            A?

                       Mr Duckenfield clearly failed to recognise or

                       consider this problem in relation to the geography

                       and layout of the ground.



                       Mr Duckenfield had had no contact with the Sheffield

                       Wednesday Football ground for some tens years:

LJT D.1 P115'D'

                       Q.    'But your last contact with Hillsborough,          if

                             I Have correctly followed what you told us

                             was some ten years ago ?'

                       A.   'In terms of a Police Commander, yes sir.'

                       Q.   'In terms of any sort of policing ?'

                       A.   'Yes it w a s .'



                       In view of this admission it was all the more

                       important that he should have taken his opportunities

                       to thoroughly prepare himself in his knowledge of
                   the geography of the ground.



                   So far as the planning is concerned it must be

                   accepted that he had assumed a duty and a responsibility

                   for the safety of the supporters attending the event.

                   In his own words on oath to the Inquest:

Inq D .1 P79'F'             but truthfully Police Officers are trained

                       officers,   their primary aim is the protection

                       of life and p r o p e r t y ...... '



                   On Page 2 of the Operational order of the day

                   which he approved it states:



                      '      to ensure public order and safety both

                       inside and outside the football ground....'

                   as the intention for the day.



                   He has accepted that his pre match briefing to

                   officers of Inspector rank and above includes:



Inq D ,1 P41'E'      'We must ensure the safety of the public inside

                       and outside the ground.'



Inq D ,1 P41'F'      'I cannot stress too highly the word Safety.'



Inq D 1   P41'G'      'Our job is to ensure the safety of spectators.'



Inq D 1   P43'B'      'Safety of supporters in this ground is paramount.'



                   In his evidence on oath to the inquest he was asked:
                                                    ! 5

Inq D .1 P71'D'       Q.    'You have told us that you were particularly

                             concerned for the safety of the public at

                             the Hillsborough Semi-final.            That is what

                             you have told us ?'

                      A.    'Yes s i r .'



                      The presentation maintain that that paramount
                                                                o s ft       '   ^
                      concern should have but was not^ incorporated

                      the planning          this event.



                      We have already been through the planning

                      operations and our concern begins at the meeting

                      held on the 29 March 1989 with his planning team.



LJT D .1 P116'D'      In his evidence to the Taylor enquiry Mr Duckenfield

                      describes how he went through the order page by

                      page and at that meeting the plan as such was

                      effectively given the       'Go-ahead'.



LJT D .1 P116'E'      The most disturbing aspect of this decision is his

                      admittance that he had not visited the ground

                      before approving the plan.          He could not therefore

                      have incorporated into that plan at that stage

                      any potential problems he may have forseen on his

                      subsequent visits to the ground and was totally

                      relying on the advice and judgement of others.



Inq D ,1..P35'A'      This reliance on the fact that the plan had            > .
         P 3 7 'A '                                             '        *****
         P38'C'       previously been operat.ed             w«« a -g-r-a-v-e - >-
    D ,2 P59 'E '                                                 "wvo- f o
         P92'E'       -errof-tif jcmJ^enrenlr.   o        /    (
                                                           If

                 We accept that Mr. Duckenfield had been appraised

                 of the Crime intelligence information,                          but we

                 are not aware at what stage of the planning that

LJT D.2 P4'C'    was.       We also accept that apart from information

Inq D.2 P39'D'   regarding travelling criminals it told him in

                 his own words:

                      '        very little else.'



                 It is beyond doubt that had the information been

                 s o ug ht ^ 0 ^ ir-t1 w as—             feh^-.--eALe4j-^--tey--^^tBtrtTve

                 Ifrsp e.c-toc.. .KING aad—                       it was available

                 from other forces.               c^ -                                 ^
                                                         N?    *sm^* O C                      f*           ,

                 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield should have been

                 aware of this and caused further enquiries                                to be

                 made.     (See note 2 attached)



                 He did not do so and again this can only be
                                                                            L&*j^L‘ts^rC    fx> mxx-faui
                 described in terms of planning as a                                               r

                 of 'Judjgeffiiprit.       Had he sought that information he

                 would have known of the propensity of the Liverpool

                 fans during that season to arrive at away games,

                 late and ticketless.



                 We know that Mr. Duckenfield had considered                                the

                 possible problems of late arrivals and fans

                 arriving without              tickets.         It is fully accepted

                 by the presentation that appeals had been made via

                 the media and by contacting the visiting clubs

                 in particular Liverpool who did infact insert

                 an item in their club programme of 8 April 1989
                                             ( y

                  encouraging fans to arrive between 10.30 a.m.

                  and 2 p.m.



                  In his policy decision regarding the delay of

                  kick off,     he considers the possibility of late

                  arrivals due to traffic hold ups,       roadworks

                  weather etc..       What he had not considered and

                  what was his responsibility to consider was put

                  to him at the Taylor enquiry:



LJT D ,2 P1'E'    Q.       'What about if, For no ascertainable reason,

                           there were a large number of late arrivals ?

                           Had that been taken into account at all ?'

                  A.       'No sir not at that stage.'



                  The possibility of fans arriving without tickets

                  also featured in the Chief superintendents planning.

                  At the end of his briefing notes he includes         the

                  line :

                       'Nobody gets in without a t ic ke t. '



                  However he has admitted that he did not see tickeless

                  fans as a problem because:

LJT D 1 P135'E'        'the intelligence report that I received gave

                       no indication whatsoever s i r . '



                   — know- o.£-caa^&e- -fe-feeffe the intelligence report was

                  far from adequate and that contingencies were not

                  provided in either the operational order or the

                  briefings    to take care of either of these two

                  forseeable problems.       They should have been.
                  A knowledge of the turnstiles available to accomodate

                  fans was of great importance in the planning of

                  this operation.            The Chief Superintendent knew

                  that all the Liverpool supporters were to be

                  accomodated via the 23 Leppings Lane turnstiles.
                                                     — --—       .
                  In his evidence to the Taylor enquiry he    a s fr& a .t

LJT D.1   P118'G' Q     'You knew A-G turnstiles which gave onto the

                         part of the concourse leading to that central

                         tunnel were turnstiles that were to be used

                         for the terraces ?'

                  A.    'Yes'

                  Q.    'I assume you knew that ?'

                  A.    'Yes. We are talking about the Semi-Final

                         tie ?'

                  Q.    'Yes in d e e d .'

                  A.    'Yes.'



                  Mr Duckenfield was aware of the safety certificate

                  issued to the club because he has said:



                       *I re^c^l asking



                  In his evidence to the inquest:



Inq D.1 P44'A'    Q.     'You have mentioned that you knew about the

                          safety Certificate and the allocation of

                          specific numbers ?'
                                                                         7

                      Inq D.1       P66'E'       Q.   'Right, be accurate.       Were you aware that

                                                       the safety certificate did include figures

                                                       for the safe capacity of various parts of

                                                       the ground ?

                                                 A.   ’Yes,   sir.*




                                                 had a capacity on the terrace of 10,100 and that

                                                 those 10,100 fans had to enter the ground through

                                                 turnstiles A-G.

                      LJT D.2 P 7 6 ,D f         Mr Duckenfield has proffessed a knowledge of the

                                                 Green Guide and he ipast therefore have known that

                                                 the minitffum
                                                     nrLrp     accepted flow rate for turnstiles was

         Y    ^                                  750 supporters per hour which would have     ;iven

                                                 him 1hr 56mins at full flow to accomodate the
 'if ,       S '/ff                o/
                       ^       »        - _ el   0,100 ticket holders.       (See note 3)
     $o*          A m s.                           ’
d?o ih> -                I—
                   b'ci^o <s~V      s^ c f
                                        ^        This at the very least should have caused him to
                      !(P/oG
                                                 ask questions about the allocation of turnstiles

                                                 and tickets and the flow rates should have told him

                                                 that there was going to be congestion at these

                                                 particular turnstiles.       However in his evidence

                                                 to the inquest he says:

                      Inq D.2 P70'G'

                                                 Q.   'You would no doubt have some idea of the rate

                                                       of flow through the turnstiles at that time ?'

                                                 A.   'I didn't have specific knowledge of the rate

                                                       of flow of people through the turnstiles at

                                                       that t i m e .'



                                                 This is a damning admission by a Police officer

                                                 who had taken on the command responsibilities for
                                   i f


                  this match.



                  Whilst looking at this problem he again should

                  have realised that fans entering through

                  turnstiles A-G and wishing to take up a position

                  on the North or elevated terracing would have to

                  pass through the gate in the concourse wall.

                  If they did not know that through lack of signs

                  or stewarding then there was the obvious possibility

                  that they would make for the central        tunnel

                  which a a a ^          have registered the possibility

                  of overcrowding and the need for monitoring and

                  stewarding by either the Police or the club.



Inq D.1   PTVC'   He has been asked if he had aquainted himself with

                  the arrangements for the ticketing and the turnstiles

                  to be used by spectators.        Whilst he gives

                  no specific answer,      he implies   that he was not

                  aware pointing out once again that such arrangements

                  had been made before he took over command.



                  That may be so and the presentation accept the

                  evidence of Mr Mole that it was so.          Mr. Duckenfield

                  should however have aquainted himself with those

                  facts and he quite clearly did not.



                  A knowledge of all these potential problems affecting

                  the safety of those attending this event was

                  available   to him simply by his visits and consulting

                  the documentation and expertice of those readily

                  available   to be consulted around him.        He had a

                  duty to plan and equip himself for this command
                   and the presentation submit that he did not do so.



                   In order to take effective command of such an

                   event a commander must have a knowledge of the

                   resourses readily available to him which in

                   this case includes the facilities of the Sheffield

                   Wednesday Control Room and the manpower resourse

                   of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club stewards.



                   Section 17.1 of the South Yorkshire Police

                   Standing Instructions state:



                   'There are considerable benefits to be gained

                    from a close personal liason with the directors

                    and management of football clubs.       The

                    establishing of such working relationship by

                    Divisional commanders is essential to the

                    success of Police Operations.'



Inq D.1   P38'F'   Mr. Duckenfield has stated     that arrangements had

                   been made with Mr. Mole for him to visit the

                   club and be introduced   to the Secretary MACKRELL

                   and the   Chief Security officer LOCK.     That meeting

                   did not   take place but of course the   Chief

                   Superintendent had the opportunity to introduce

                   himself   on his two visits   to the ground and   clearly

                   it was his duty to have done so.



                   As we have said the facili tie s available     to a

                   commander are of pr ime import ance in the planning

                   of an operation and his knowl edge of them mus t

                   be available   to him in order that he can prepare
                                                                                                   o


                                                                    himself for the command role.                      Mr. Duckenfield

                                                                    has howler frankly admitted:

                           Inq D.1             P50'B'                    'No sir,            I think it fair to say that the

                                                                          knowledge of the capability of the equipment

                                                                          that Sheffield Wednesday had was not something

                                                                          that I had aquired at that stage.'



                                                                    In a further question asked of him at the Taylorr

                                                                    enquiry in relation to his knowledge of the

                                                                    capability of the monitors in the control room he

                                                                    says:



                       LJT D.3 P37'A'                                    'I don't know the fine technical details sir.'



                                                                In his evidence to the inquest he states                         that
                                                                                    q
              / ' * - ? , ■                     ,        //     he was unware that there was a telephone in the
             t&uf r&f . . My&C Oftou,'
                       cbuO -            e / / < ? rf'X ^ e^ irect°rs box which could have been used had he

                                                            ^^arfted to contact the ACC Mr. Jackson.
4                                                         TV   is—-,,
                                                                            C'f&~

                                /                   i ~       l c       — soucae no one expects him to have known the
a.       o < n ^P ^-             _        ,- / /
              tsu~c ’                           ^     '        fine technical details,                   but the presentation
jj -         f/^ U c /
Tiaas’       !        ,y */.                        «j    submit that it was not unreasonable for him to
                      c'        L ^s                                               r-oew
    -/ ,                                              / - have visited the control box and at the very least

 “f f* - *                                           »         bre^fly aqQftinted himself with the CCTV system
■jL ,                                  % . A
/ rn                             /„/ #,€ *;• ' the Computerised monitoring system and the clubs

                                                              ) telephone and radiora' communications system.                           In

                                                                    f ail ing to do so he was f ail ing substantially

     <- y./r'Ow                                                     ln his duty to equip himself for his command role

     />>          ^                         ^ ' ^ Pf ' t o n            the 15 April 1989-


     ^ W r^ /< z r
             y,
                            ^       of
                                           i        l# i
                                                    : ' 7 The Chief Superintendents lack of knowledge and


     /                                                              !                   //         ' i   P
                                           ^                                        (aA 's-e                 C 4U ^teJ q & f ’
                    2   ~   f

enquiry regarding the duties and responsibilites

of the Sheffield Wednesday football club stewards

is however one of the most serious of his omissions.



The Green Guide,    Section 13 paragraph 197:

    'Where a ground such as one used by an

     association football league club has a high

     police presence, duties and responsibilites

     of stewards should be agreed with the police.'



The responsibili ty for obtai ning this requirement

is placed upon the club and in Ju ne 1988 such

a schedule was sent to the Police for approval

whi ch was given.           That document whic h can be

pro duced by Insp ector Sewell does no t however

set out the duti es of stewar ds in rel ation to

raon itoring or fi llin^ pens.                   -



The Chief Superi ntendent has prof f ess ed a knowledge

of the   'Green Gu i d e ' and sho uld have known of its

exi stance.     A knowledge of it wo uld have begged

Kirn to ask the qu estion       'what were   the duties of

the s te wa rd s.



Hav ing read the South Yorksh ire Polic e Standing

Ins tructions on Policing of Footb all Matches he

would know that they were ammended by the Assistant

Chief Constable on 20 March 1986 and that included

at Appendix    'L', page 40 para 3:



    'Stewards should be distributed throughout the

     ground in accordance with a detailed
                                                                2 2-'

                                             pre arranged schedule agreed between the

                                             Police and management.'



                                     This instruction is repeated in the form of advice

                                     at para. 3.4 of the ACPO Document.



                                     In relation to the schedule Mr. Duckenfield has

                                     a c frrtt-t-ted :
  c.


 -inq- D.1   P6 9 *£ «                     'There may have been one but I do not recall

                                        — h avi s g ~se e n i t . '—



                                 In his evidence to the Taryl or» ..±xupi4-v>y Hr';DucttenfXfeld

                                 is asked about the duties of the stewards and his

                                 knowledge of their responsibilities in relation

                                 to the supervision and control of the crowd within

                                 the Leppings Lane pens:

   LJT D.1   P J J f f i 7 'A /G '
(-'wo    .                  o
                   /      _ / A.               'That arrangement was made betwen Mr Mole
        c Q ! ■           D t.
                                                and Mr. M u r r a y . '
                             <
                                 Q.            'And you did not take it upon yourself to

                                                find out what it was ?'

                                 A.            'No s i r .'



                                 This is yet another damning admission that the

                                 Chief Superintendent did not prepare himself

                                 for his role as the overall operational commander

                                 on the day.                  Had he made that enquiry he would have

                                 undoubtably been aware that at this capacity event

                                 there would have been no control over the crowds

                                 enetering the Leppings Lane terrace and that no

                                 monitoring system existed within the club stewarding.
                                        -2   3

                   That w a s ; in the eyes of the presentation a real

                   and forseeable problem which required action to

                   be taken at the planning stage of more substance

                   than an unbriefed reliance on Police Officers

                   reacting to a situation which he describes in his

                   evidence to the inquest:

Inq D.1   P76'A/B' Q.   'Would there be any provision made with a view

                        to preventing overcrowding in that situation ?'

                   A.   'Sir, with regard to overcrowding,         officers

                        were positioned in the West Stand, officers

                        positioned on the perimeter track, and as a

                        result of that they had an excellent view

                        of the West Te r r a c e . ’




                   To summarise,   the presentation maintain that as

                    a member of a Police Force Chief Superintendent
                                                        <pix/6-&c-
                   Duckenfield had a duty for the protection of life.

                   That is something which he himself acknowledges as

                   one of the prime responsibilities of a Police

                   Officer.



                   Knowing that he was to accept the role of

                   Overall Operational Police Commander he was duty

                   bound to give that responsibility a high priority

                   in his planning and personal preparation for

                   the Police role on that day.



                   It is accepted that the time given to him was

                   limited and he was obliged          to rely he^ri'ly on the

                   advice of those around him whose experience was

                   far greater than his own.
However a commander in these circumstances is

still under an obligationto question closely

those giving him that advice in order to obtain

the knowledge he knew he would require       to carry

out his role competently



He has a duty to refresh t o tae±f c » d   his knowledge

by reference to at least that material which was

readily available   to him.



He has a duty to familiarise himself with the

ground and its potential problems and liase with

those officials who would support him in his

command role in order that he could fulfill his

duty which was to ensure      that he could carry out

the obligation he had fairly placed upon himself

and which he had incorporated into his briefing

notes for the event i.e.



-SAFETY OF SUPPORTERS IN THIS GROUND IS PARAMOUNT-

 ^   (As-e-
                                                                         NW c    I

Should he have seen the geography of the Leppings Lane area

and in particular that area immediately outside the turnstiles

as a problem and catered for it accordingly.



In his interim report para 214 LJT refers        to a large volume of

evidence to the effect that in 1988 there had been a systematic

filtering of fans and checking of tickets in Leppings         Land

and on the approaches     to the area.

The Police evidence is that no such specific policy had been

persued,   and there is no evidence to suggest that it was.

There is however evidence from fans in particular; STEVEN ALLEN / L - 'I 'f W / w

who recalls being filtered     through barriers at the Leppings

Lane Penistone Road Roundabout.          That evidence is in total

contradiction to the evidence' of Inspector Paul Kerry GRACE         \       5

who was in charge of that area in 1988 and specifically states

that no such barriers were errected.

The situation in hindsight, which was not recognised by the LJT

enquiry appears to be that when fans       talk about barriers in

Leppings Lane and filtering,    they are referring to the permanently

fixed railings around the roundabout itself which creates a

natural filtering system for any crowd entering Leppings Lane

from that direction.

With regard to the problems immediately outside the turns tiles



As far as the area immediately outside the turnstiles         is concerned

Whilst there is no evidence to suggest that it was seen or considerd

as a problem it was catered for as follows:

Senior Command - Supt Marshall

Whilst it would appear that his area of command ended at the line

of the perimeter gates,    he considred himself responsible for t h e — ' ^ Y i

area up to the turnstiles.

This accords with SYP Standing Instructions       Para 2.2.   in that that

officer should not be below the rank of Chief Inspector and his
responsibilities    include the main tya ina nc e of public order.



Chief Inspector Creaser

This officer was in command of the turnstile area both inside

and out and had exactly the same responsibiliteis as 1988.
                                   'V " tC(
He was allocated four serials of men    whose duties according

to the operational order on both occassions was the formation

of orderely queues at the turnstiles.

In accordance with SYP S.I.s para 7.6        , there were 6 mounted

officers available     to him whose duties   included    the formation

of orderley queues.



Previous problems

The only evidence to suggest any previous problem i.e.          in 1988
                          L   “
came from D/Supt Mackay who describes        acompacted queue    at the

turnstiles between 2.50 p.m.      and 3 pm in 1988.       He has however

never been asked wh ether or not he mentioned         that incident to

his collegues in any debriefing session.

It certainly does not apear in the debriefing documents for

the 1988 Semi Final.
        Clearly a vital part in relation        to this charge is the

        intelligence available    to Duckenfield.

        The evidencein relation to Sgt Charlesworth the Divisional

        Intelligence officer will be dealt with here in full and will
                                                                   /
        be referred to later in this summary.                  /

        Sgt Charleworth provided 3 recollections to the Wain Enquiry

        in which he was outspokenly critical of the intelligence

        provided by the Mersydie Police Liason officers.               Those

        recollections were condensed     into one recollection which

        was supplied   to the West Midlands enquiry team and which

C ,/    'watered down'    his critism considerably.      The basis of

        his evidence is that he could not obtain any intelligence              re

        crowd behaviour from Mersyside.

        The question which has never been posed is       'Did he tell

       Duckenfield of his difficulties     ?'      Duckenfield clearly

       relied on the information supplied by Charlesworth.               In

       his evidence to the Inquest P.39 he states:

              'We didn't receive any intelligence that related

             to public order matters as such.'


o
       Subsequent to the disaster an /    enquiry was conducted by

       Insp Kang of the South Yorkshire     Police in relation to

       the possibility that a conspiracy may have existed between

       the Liverpool supporters    to arrive at the ground en mass

       at a prearranged    time in order to cause the confusion required

       for the Police to open the gates and allow them in without

       tickets.   This theory was dismissed by the Lord Justice

       Taylor enquiry but it does underline the fact that

       intelligence was available if sought regarding the activities

       of Liverpool fans and their propensity to cause trouble,

       arrive late and ticketless at away games.
                                                  ( if


     DID DOCKENFIELD IDENTIFY THE TORNSTILES AND ACCESS THROUGH THEM
     AS A PROBLEM.



     The only direc t qu est io n posed in relation to this matter is

     contained       in his evi de nce      to Lord Justice Taylor page        no.
     Q.
             Did you     regard       the turnstiles at Leppings    Lane and       the pens

             as be ing included         within problem areas that you reffered              to
  A.
             Not a m a j o r problem area,       because   from previous experience

             other than the discussions I had with Mr Greenwood                    about the

             area,    that it was not a mojor problem area because                 recent

             evidence did not indicate it was a problem.



 On the 15 April              1989 it is known that:
                                        >    T,fJf £■C - 1~t' C~c
           Turnstiles       1- 10 (Ten) were used to give access         to the

           permitted capacity of 9882 fans to be accomodated within
 the North Stand.



          Turnstiles     11   - if,                    ,,
                                      1 i x J were used to give access   to        the
 j        permitted    capacity of             fano   v.
                              y                lans to be accomodated within
           the   West Stand



       Turnstiles       A - G (Seven) were used to give access           to the

      permitted        capacity of 10100 fans to be accomodated on the
      Leppings       Lane     terraces.
                                                                              ■/


If matters were as simple as that clearly with                    the knowledge of

flow rates as laid out in the 'Green Guide' which he admits he

had read         (See page 7 this draft)         it should be immediate!* obvious

that it would          take some       1 hour and 56 minutes at full flow to

accomodate            the supporters      throueh A-fi anH             ^
                                              g R u . and that     would undoubtably
cause problems.
  Chapter 5 parag rap h 47 og the guide            states:


           It is unlikely that the m a x i m u m notional        rate rate

           per turnstile would exceed 750 persons per hour.



  In hsi ev id e nc e to LJT he admits       that he knew that turnstiles

  A- G were       to be used    to feed the Leepings Lane terracing LJT
  DAY 1 Page 118

  It "ill no doubt be argued          that those figure refer to paying

         and thCL at an all ticket match           the flow rate could be

 in the region of ,000 per hour.                Even So for ,0,00 fans to

 enter through gates A-G would still              take approx'     one and one

 half hours          full flow,     and the problem as such is till evident

 That problec m          not forseen fc*, Du ck enf iel d as stated in his

 evidence    to LJT did not see the Tu rnstiles as a problem.                            #



 However m at t e r s were not as simple as        that.



 In his ev ide nce     to the LJT P.87 The Secre tar y of the SWFC

 describes how he prior to the ,987 Semi              Final had agreed with

 the resident      Chief Suptr Mr Hole that        in order A c h i e v e     seg reg at ion ,

entrance     to the West and Horth areas of the ground would be

accomodated       by the 23 tuirnstiles at Leppings Lane.              He goes
on to say     :

    o.      And so far as the standing was concerned you had to get

            10,100    through A-G,     seven turnstiles      ?

    A.      Yes,    but we knew we had the fl exi bi lit y of,         if necessary,

            b e i n g able    to use ,1 - ,6 for standing as well because              the

            t i ck et s for   the West Stand,    ob vi o us ly checked,    a s e c o nd ad ar y

            point,    if the need was there we could utilise              those turnstile

           to take up any slack if we found A-G being                ____ •

If indeed this was an agreement between Mackrell                 and Chief S u p e ri n te nd
                                                     \&                                                  %

  Mole,     it would be necessary to prove                 that Duckenfield was not

  aware of it and would of nec es si ty have then seen turnstiles

  A-G as a problem in relation                 to flow rates.

  U nf o r t u n a t e l y the question has never been            asked of     him albiet he

  has had “ any opportunities at                the LJT and       inquest to announce his
  knowled ge of it.

  If it were in fact the case that he did not know it presents
  problems:

  1.    Was ^ c r i p i - n a l   o£f*nce ' b ^ ^ c o j u r f t t e d | J breac hin g a

        condi tio n set out in the certificate that records should be

 made and kept of supporters e n te ri ng those                   parts of     the ground

 specified in Schedule              three to the certificate.                    -/    ,



       Did    PC Guest in the SWFC control                 room know'i ^ h T ' t o o ^ h t s ! ’ ' ‘ '

       never been asked.                The implica tio n being that if

       a.      Turnstiles         1-10 as opposed         to 1 - g were being used for

 the North Stand,          the totals on his computor would be inacurate.

       b.      The same would apply             to the West stand which is fed

 no rma lly by turnstiles 9 - 16 and catered for on the co mpu to r as such.

       c.     Equally if terrace             ticket holders were b e i n g allowed

 through    1# _ 16 the numbers given for the terrace would                           fall well

short of the actual figure,                wh i ch    certainly appears to be the case

on the day in question as the figure for the West Stand shows at

3 o'cl ock    1154 over capacity.



 f ur hte r question to be answered                  is whether in fact Mr Mole or

indeed Mr Du ckenfield knew of the extra gates being used for                              the

North Stand.          From Mr Moles ev ide nc e           to the LJT it would          appear

that he did.          There is no e v i de nc e to show wether Mr D u c k en f ie ld

did or did not know.               It is ho w e v e r relevant that both o pe rat io n

orders for ,88 and ,989 place a serial of men on turnstiles                                ,-9

and a further serial on 10-16.
      were the club fully aware of their own a m e n d m e n t ?

      Police Constable 2 4 0 9   Larkin recalls          in   ^ ~'5 ./I
                                                              v-' r t- {) * n
      About 2.00pm a steward came to the turnstiles and said that someone

      had put the wrong boards above the turnstiles entrance and that fans

      with north stand tickets were going into the enclosure for the

      West Stand.      Be then opened the large dividing gate and moved

     a small barrier so that there were two more turnstiles for the -                            ''

  Horth Stand now 1            o and two less for the West Stand.                        f
  The tunrstile operator                         |r e c a ii„                   ^
                                                  r e c a l ls the signing being wrong
  but makes no mention         in his recollection of the m ov in g of the

  barriers.           He did not give evidence           to LJT or inquest                       -J.V'?

  His instructions h ow eve r were          to take tickets for the North Stand


                                                                 and he confuses the
  situation even further,          in his evidence        to LJT page 2:
  Q         there was some evidence

            the West Stand then by          __

 A          That is true.        That was early on.            That was very early on

            that.      Then they changed it to the can tilever stand.                     They
            altered   the barrier.

 He EOeS °n *° Say that          the c h a "Be           pi ;ace at, 1 p.m.       and that
_______________ rfas resP°n sible for altering the b a r r i e r s

_______________________ a <3u e s tionnaire      and a recollection             to the

 enquiry team neither       of which       deal with this matter.               He did   not

give evidence         to LJT or ther Inquest.        ,

The timing here is to some e x t e n t important a T f h e r e ^ f s              a^ h o u r

difference between        the e v i d e n c e of PC Larkin and that

The only corrobor ati on a va i l a b l e was       the club camera ov erl o ok in g

these turnstiles whic h u nf or tu na te ly         is the one that is missing.



The allegation being ma d e         is that Duckenfield neglec te d his duty

in that he failed       to i d e nt if y   the Leppings Lane tur nstiles            as

a potential problem for wh i c h he should have made plans
    •                                                   ^
        To summarise:

        If he had not known about the arrangements between Mr Mole and

        Mackrell and if he was unaware of the turnstile allocations,            then

        he should have recognised    the potential    problen of turnstile
        flows   through A-G.

        If he knew of the arrangement then he could quite rightly say

        that it was not a problem because he would have         the seven T/Ss

        A-G plus   the 6 11-16 through which   to accomodate     4,565   fans

        which at 1 ,000 per hour would have    required     them all to be full>j

        op eratioanl   shortly before 2 p.m.

C       It "°uld also indicate    that he would    know that any figure given

        to him by the SWFC would be grossly       innacurate.




c
