                       SUSAN OSBORNE   -   PC 3020

              PROSECUTIONS C DIVISION, MAIN STREET, ROTHERHAM

On Saturday, 15th April 1989 I reported for duty at 8.30 am at Main Street

Police Station, Rotherham, for duties at Hillsborough in connection with the

semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.        I was in serial 42.

The Sergeant in charge of the serial was PS 2171 Keenan and we were supervised

by Inspector Broomhead.

My duties were to patrol Halifax Road from its junction with Southey Green Road

to Brotoning Road to maintain order;       this was both before and after the match.

During the match I was to take refreshments at Claywheels L a n e .

At just before 9.00 am together with serial 42 and Inspector Broomhead I set

off in a personnel carrier for Hillsborough.         We arrived at the ground at

9.30 am.   At 10.00 am I attended the briefing in the ground.        Our duties were

unchanged and after a packed lunch at about 11.00 am together with PC 31^9

Wilkinson I walked up to the top of Halifax Road.         As we reached the White Horse

Public House on the junction of Halifax Road and Southey Green Road I could

see that there were football fans already drinking inside the public house.

At about 11.30 am the Threasher Off-licence started to restrict entry to the

premises due to the large number of fans wishing to purchase alcohol.

From this time until about 2.00 pm there was a constant queue of fans outside

;the off-licence, at times the queue numbered over twenty.

At about 12.00 noon I noticed that the White Horse Public House had closed

 its doors and was admitting no-one.       The premises were packed to capacity

 with Liverpool fans.     In the gardens around the public house fans were

 congregating, drinking alcohol purchased from other premises.        There were

 approximately 200 fans drinking and singing football songs.        Apart from

 an isolated incident when the songs became obscene the fans were well-behaved

 and in good humour.

 At about 12.15 pm two fans were ejected from the ladies hairdressers on

 Southey Green Road.     Both were causing a nuisance in the shop, requesting

 that their hair be cut.     Both youths were under the influence of alcohol.
There were large numbers of fans making their way to the football

ground.    They were all well-behaved and orderly   although many   were drinking

alcohol from cans and bottles as they walked.

At about 1.30 pm some fans informed me that the     Threasher had sold out     of

cans and all that was left were bottles, about half an hour later the

off-licence closed.     Some fans informed me the reason was because they

had no alcohol left.

At about 2.30 pm a fire engine attended at a supporters coach which was

parked on Halifax Road opposite the junction with Southey Green Road.

At thistime there were numerous supporters making their      way to the ground.

At 2.45    pm there were still large numbers of fans at the top of Halifax

Road and also fans leaving the White Horse making their way to the ground.

These fans did not appear to be in any hurry.

At 3-00    pm together with the rest of Serial 42 I startedto walk towards

Claywheels Lane to take refreshments.     As we were walking down Halifax

Road I heard someone shout over PS Keenan's radio "Open the gate .        We

continued to Claywheels Lane.    I heard nothing else come over the radio.

As we reached the junction of Claywheels Lane and Penistone Road North, PS

 Cloke informed us that all personnel were required at Leppings Lane entrance

 as there was some trouble.

 At Leppings Lane entrance the gates were closed, there were a large number

 of fans still on the outside trying to get in.      The crowd was moved back

 from the gate.     A number of serials were doing public order at the gate.

 No radio message came over, the nature of the incident was not known.

 An Inspector, who is not known to me, kept deploying serials inside the

 ground.    Serial 42 was left at the gate with the Police Horses and the

 crowd.    I was unaware of whether any other officers were in that area

 as the Ambulances and fire engines were arriving at the ground.

 It was about 3-30 pm when I heard over a transistor radio what had

 happened inside the ground although it was not implied that this was
serious and no deaths were mentioned.   There was still no Police radio

messages.   We were still experiencing crowd control problems but at this

time it was fans filtering out of the ground. These were unhurt, extremely

abusive, intoxicated and shouting.

At about 4.30 pm an announcement came over the Public address system

stating the match had been abandoned.    The fans from the Leppings   Lane

stand started to leave the ground.    They were mostly in a state of shock.

It was from these fans that we learned the severity of the incident.

I was near a Police radio from 3-00 pm onwards.    The only message   which I

heard was the one to open the gate.

After the fans had left Leppings Lane exit, serial 42 went to Leppings

Lane island where we did traffic control.

At about 6.40 pm we went to Claywheels Lane,at 7-00 pm we left Claywheels

Lane returning to Rotherham and at 7.30 pm I went off duty.
