                                                                                            MIR.tg


 0T H B R £ I? CUM ENT F 0R M                    Date and time raised   ~ ^ > \^ /^ )   .   !/**=,       Number


 Tit,e - ^-^8 ^                                                 y                                    -
 {Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receiver's instructions - urgent action -J ^ jU o               <SS>




 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                             Indexer

 No(s) of actions raised

 Statement reader
   7~ -----------   *             Jtyk* tvt&AA 4
                        - nst™!iore                                                                               Statement Reader



 Indexed as indicated                                                                                                 Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                     ]Nottingham                                            |Nottingham

                                   16th April 1989
The Football Association
                                                     considering whether this tragedy would have happened
Lancaster Gate,
                                                     if drinking were allowed inside the ground before
London.
                                                     kick off.
Dear Sirs,
                                                     This coupled with the abolition of standing with 100%
                                                     seating would certainly tempt me to let my grand­
I was a spectator at Hillsborough yesterday and I
                                                     children go to a match again.
want to express my views on one aspect of the
tragedy.
                                                     Yourg-^f)aithfully
We arrived by car about 1pm and were able to park
almost opposite the ground.  We had a picnic lunch
by the car and all around us were fans doing the
same thing but also,I regret were ’tanking up' on
beer.  I asked them why and they explained that as
they could not drink in the ground,they had to
fill up beforehand.

My friend and I finished lunch around 1.45 and
decided to take walk before taking our seats. We
went northwards and within a few hundred yards
of the ground was an Off Licence which was doing
the trade of the century. There must have been
several hundred around the shop.  I thought no
more of it at the time.

When later,I heard and read of the crush outside
the gates at ten to three,I realised that many
of these fans had probably been drinking up to
just before the game outside the ground instead
of going in an orderly fashion much earlier as
they certainly could have done.

I do not know the statistics on ground drunken­
ness since the prohibition,but it may be worth
TELEPHONE:                                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                          POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                      SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                                  SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE




NO TTING HAM
                                                          2 May 1989




Dear

Thank you for your letter of 16 April concerning the tragedy at Hillsborough Football
Ground. It was good of you to allow me to read your letter to the Football Association.

I feel your views may be of interest to Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of the West
Midlands Police, who is conducting the police enquiry into the events at Hillsborough.
I have, therefore, forwarded your letter to him.

Yours sincerely




Chief Constabl
                    THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                 L IM IT E D
                                                  Founded 1863
                                 Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                               President: H . R .H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                      Chairman: F . A . M i l l i c h i p

    Chief Executive:                                                                  Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G. K e l l y FCIS                                                                      Telex: 261110
                                                                                        Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                          16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  Our Ref:    PFS/SKC/850                      Your Ref:                             2lst April,         1989




  Nottingham.



  Dear

                             F. A. Cup Semi-Final - Hillsborough

       Thank you for your letter dated 16th April, in connection with
  the above.

       It is extremely helpful to have the observations of people such
  as yourself and will ensure that they are brought to the attention
  of the appropriate people.

             Thank you for bringing your comments to my attention.

                                               Yours sincerely,




                                               Chief Executive




                              Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, L ondon W2 3LW
                              Incorporated in L ondon Registration Num ber 77797
