         M                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                        ?c /{U fOR,
                                                            REF:
                                                                                   "£13
                                                                          CID/AF/JED
FROM:   Chief Superintendent Denton
                                                            STATION/DEPT.: Headquarters
                                                                                        < ^°t1
TO:     Chief Superintendent Nesbit, Ops & Traffic          DATE:         2 June 1989

           SUBJECT:                      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


           The West Midlands Inquiry team have ngtf requested that officers of your
           Division who are named in the atta^ed schedules be asked to provide
           written accounts of their duties arid activities relating to the FA Cup
           Semi-Final at Hillsborough on 15 /April 1989•

            The written accounts, when obtained, will be subjected to the usual
            vetting procedures carried /out by solicitors acting on behalf of the
            Chief Constable, prior to ..their submission to the West Midlands Police.

            Officers are being asked to co-operate in providing their individual
            written accounts, but the wishes of any officer who objects to
            disclosure will be Respected.

            It is requested that the officers’ accounts are:-

            1.     Handwritten in clear, legible writing.
                         ./                        •


            2.     Written on plain paper (not statement forms).    /

            3.     To include full name, age and date of birth, rank and number, and
                   station.
                                                           /
            4 .,   To be factual accounts only - expressions of feelings, opinions,
                   hearsay evidence! etc, are not required.

            5-     To include Serial Numbers, wh^te applicable,         and   details   of
                   specific duties, times and locations.

            6.     To be signed at the end of jeach page.    Corrections, alterations,
                   etc, must be clearly marked dnd initialled.

            Officers should take a copy of their written accounts which they should
            retain for any future reference.

            There is an urgent requirement for the submission of these accounts, and
            it is therefore requested that they be prepared, collated and submitted
            on a 'section' basis to Detective Inspector Gunn, Hillsborough Incident
            Room, Force Headquarters, as soon as possible, and no later than Friday
            9 June 1989•

             Submissions should not be delayed due to the unavailability of
             individual offices through Annual Leave, Sickness, etc.        Separate
             arrangements wilX be made to obtain written accounts from such officers
             as soon as it    possible to do so.

             Thank you for your assistance in this matter.




             Detepuj-vys wi-Lei— nisptrdtor Foster for
             Chief Superintendent Denton
