                                                                                      M IR .15


                                                                                                     T >I3^
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised



Title
                              < £ > C (L

(Include source a n d an y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action -v>*€f/No
                                                                                                         Receiver




                      Z .                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructio


                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed asj/dicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                SIO
Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                            x    r       Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                              JMJ/AES

J Sharpies Esq. QPM LLB                                       2nd November 1990
Merseyside Police Headquarters
P 0 Box 59
Liverpool
L69 1JD




HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

As you know I have assumed responsibility as the Coroner’s Officer for the
resumed inquests which will take place in Sheffield on Monday 19th November
1990 and onwards.

The Coroner has asked me to write to you and ask if you will provisionally warn
the Officers on the attached list to attend the Inquests at the Town Hall,
Sheffield to give evidence.  As we get nearer the date of commencement I will
inform your nominated liaison officer (Sgt SMITH?) of the likely date of
appearance with final confirmation a day or hopefully days before.

As far as your appearance is concerned, I have discussed the matter with the
Coroner (stating my opinion rather than yours).   As a result he has decided not
to call you although with the caveat that if something emerges which is only
within your knowledge he may have to re-consider.   I trust this is acceptable
to you.

In the meantime, if there is anything with which you think I can help, please
do not hesitate to contact me.




J M JONES
Deputy Chief Constable
                    LIST OF OFFICERS TO BE PRQVTSTOWAT.T.Y WARNKD



PC 5043 FRY        fU IfeZ              Mounted Branch                u?'?on
PC 1300 GRUNHILL   rOffc>3              Mounted Branch        (X oi            t)
PS 1952 SMITH      f J i& U             Greenhill Road Police Station (Mounted
                                        Branch)    C t(D 2 - cOf3§r<sj
