   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT?




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 1STH APRIL, 1989




                     Bef ore

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's C o r on er )




                       At

                The Town Hall,'
                  Sheffield.

                       On

              19th February, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEED INGS




    From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
         Official Shorthand Wri te r s,
     55, Queen S t r e e t , Sheffield Si 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                  Page

     G.H. MACKRELL Recalled

          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien (Cont)     1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell            10
          Further by The Coroner                   13
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs     16
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole          17
          Further by The Coroner                  2*+

     D.J. LOCK Sworn

          By The Coroner                          31
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             59
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              77
SUBMISSIONS                                       96
            FIFTY THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

           • TUESDAY.   19th FEBRUARY 1991

     MR. TOULSON:  If it please you, sir.  My name is
Roger Toulson and I shall now be appearing some of
the time with Miss Sinclair on behalf of Dr.
Eastwood. _

     THE CORONER:  I hope you will be comfortable
with all your colleagues.

     MR. TOULSON:   Admirably, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, you were interrupted
by time on this occasion.  Please carry on.

                GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL

       Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN (Cont'd)

You will remember that you said yesterday that the
only means of safe admittance at Hillsborough that
you knew of was that of turnstile entry.  That is
correct, is it not?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am very sorry, I
have interrupted you already.    It is just that I
could not hear you.   Would you mind repeating the
question?

Mr. Mackrell, you will remember that you said
yesterday that the only means of safe admittance at
Hillsborough that you knew of was that of turnstile
entry, that is correct, is it not? - A. Yes, not just
Hillsborough but any large stadium.

You read paragraph 44 of the Green Guide giving the
common sense reasons for that method? - A. Correct.

Would you agree, therefore, by allowing fans into the
stadium through a large exit gate as opposed to the
normal turnstile entry would speed the rate of flow
of fans considerably? - A. Through the large exit
gate?

Yes, rather than the fans going through the turnstile
entry if they went through a gate that would speed
things up.  Would you agree? - A. Yes, it would
obviously speed things up if you were simply gaining
entry to the ground but obviously you would not have
control over the numbers that were coming into the
ground.

I think you said that you arrived early at the ground
on the 15th April 1989? - A. That is correct, some
time just after seven o'clock.
                                                              2

                                               ' G. H. MACKRELL


Q. As Safety Officer were you constantly watching out
   for problems that day? - A. Indeed, yes.

Q.    What time were you aware that fans were entering the
     Stadium through a large exit gate? - A. On two
     occasions, the first occasion being the first time
     the gate was opened and when approximately 300
     persons came through.  The second time, which was the
     larger number of people coming through, that was not
     until the following day.

Q.    You said that you actually went in through Gate C
     yourself yesterday, is that right? - A. That is
     c orrect.

Q. What time was that please? - A. Some time after three
   o'clock.  By the time I had got round to the Police
   Control Box the game had stopped and people were on
   the pitch and so we could work it from that.  It was
   some time shortly after three o ’clock.

Q. So when you went there you did not see large crowds
   outside in the area then? - A. No.

Q. As Safety Officer were you yourself required to wear
   a special conspicuous piece of clothing that da^? -
   A. No, it is not a requirement, no.

Q. So nobody would know that you were a Safety Officer.
   You would just mingle amongst the crowd? - A. It is
   not a requirement that members of the general public
   know that I am a Safety Officer.

Q. Do you know there is a difference between egress time
   and emergency evacuation time? - A. Indeed.

Q. And the two should definitely not be confused? - A.
   Indeed.

Q. Would you mind reading paragraph 56, page 23, of the
   Green Guide please? - A. It says:

           "Some research has indicated that when it
           takes more than about 7 minutes to vacate
           an area of terraced spectator
           accommodation, the crowd flow tends to
           become turbulent.  In these conditions
           the rate of flow may be reduced and
           individuals can lose control over their
           own movements; there is thus higher
           potential for accidents.  Exits from each
           area of spectator accommodation should be
           so designed that all spectators can leave
           that area and if desired pass into a free
                                           G. H. MACKREUi


     flowing exit route system in 8 minutes or
     less.  The capacity of any exit route is
     the number of people who could pass
     through restricting parts of it as
     calculated in Chapter 16, paragraphs 229-
     232."

And the note at the bottom as well please? - A. It
say s:

      "Note: This time is not necessarily the
      same as emergency evacuation time, which
      is dealt with in Chapter 11, paragraphs
      183-188, and which involves other
      considerations."

Thank you.  That clearly states what egress time
means.  If we turn to page 52 where it says
"Emergency evacuation time" and will you read
paragraph 183 please? ** A. It says:

      "The emergency evacuation time is the
      notional time it would take spectators to
      leave their viewing positions and reach a
      place of safety in the open air or a
      protected stairway or emergency exit
      route with fire resistance in accordance
      with paragraph 180.  It is calculated
      from the spectator capacity of the
      accommodation (see Chapter 16) and the
     )flow rate (see Chapter 17) through
     ’restricting parts of the exit system used
      for evacuation purposes."

Thank you.   Also paragraph 184? - A. It says:

      "The emergency evacuation time should not
      be confused with the egress time of 8
      minutes (referred to in Chapter 6 ,
      paragraph 56) which is the maximum time
      it should take spectators to enter into
      the normal exit system from their viewing
      positions at the end of play."

You will notice then in paragraph 185 that it says
that emergency evacuation of not more than two and a
half minutes is considered the right length of time
for fans to evacuate a certain area and you would
agree with that? - A. That is what it says in the
guide, yes.

Mr. Seamen, the Fire Officer, told the Court that it
was possible to evacuate the terrace in just over two
and a half minutes by using the tunnel and the radial
                                              G. H. MACKRELL


g at e s . I do not suppose you would disagree with what
he said, would you? - A. I would not disagree with
Mr. Seamen's professional judgment.

     THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, you stopped halfway
through paragraph 185.  You have got to read the next
sentence as well.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I just picked out the two and a
half m i n u te s.

      THE CORONER: Yes,   I know.  You have   picked out
the point that you want   to make but it is   only fair
to the witness that you   should get him to   read all of
it, particularly as you   are now examining   him on the
time.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  If Mrs. McBrien could get him to
read the first sentence which contains the words two
and a half minutes but it does have to be said it has
a potential for rapid fire spread, which we have had
evidence from Mr. Seamen as to the nature and
construction of the particular stand.




                                 /THE CORONER.
                                                          5

                                        G .H . MACKRELL



        THE CORONER: If you read paragraph 185. Leave out
  the first sentence.  In fact read 185 till I tell you uO
  stop.

        THE WITNESS:    Right.

        "The emergency evacuation time will depend
        largely on the fire hazard present in the
        accommodation in question.   Any stand which
        has a potential for rapid fire spread
        because of its interior use and contents and/or
        the nature of its internal surfaces which would
        be exposed to fire should have an emergency
        evacuation time of no more than 2 \ minutes.
        An increase in this time may however be
        acceptable where the interior use and
        contents, and the nature of the internal
        linings, are such as to eliminate the
        possibility of rapid fire spread, and the
        emergency exit routes are not vulnerable
        to a fire occurring within the accomxuod&tion.
        In setting an emergency evacuation time
        longer than 2 \ minutes the advice of the
        fire authority should be sought."

        THE CORONER:    Now you can carry on.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.

Q. I know that refers to a fire but if a serious situation
   arises on the terrace of another type that still requires
   very fast evacuation, then that would still apply,
   wouldn't it? - A. That is what the Guide states, yes.

Q. Would you agree that the importance of effective ground
   inanagement cannot be emphasised too strongly as far as
   safety is concerned? - A. Indeed.

Q. And that this management should ensure that ,there is free
   movement of fans throughout the entire e x i t rsystem?
   A. That is desirable, yes.                     !
                                                  IV
Q. In connection with that I wonder would you mind^referring
   to the Green Guide again at page 2 2 , paragraph 53 please.
   Would you mind reading that? - A. Yes.

         "Care should be taken in the planning of exit
         systems to ensure that in the event ot an
         emergency which blocks the usual exit route
         spectators will be able to use an alternative
         exit route (fiin&luding where -appropriate,
         forward evacuation on to the pitch:     see
         Chapter 11, paragraph 186).
A.                                              G .H ♦ MACKRELL



     Q.   Thank you. I know I ain using the Green Guide quitea lot
          today but I think as you are the Safety Officer at
          Hillsborough I think your work does rely a lot on this
          guidance, doesn't it? - A. Yes, it is a guide of course
          as opposed to statutory.

     Q.   Oh yes, of course. Once again I would like to refer to
          the Green Guide, page 13, paragraph 29 where it says:
          "Summary of management responsibilities is contained
          below".
                Now Mr. Payne drew your attention yesterday to a
          number of the points listed there and so I feel there is
          no necessity for me to go over the whole list, but I
          would like to draw your attention to the last one,
          number 13, where it says:

                "To keep records of:

                a. attendance figures; and

                b. all inspections and tests, any defects
                   noted and the remedial ; other action
                   taken."

          Would you agree that this and all the other points listed
          are essential management responsibilities? *• A. Yes.

     Q. Do you agree that arrangements should be made to-encourage
        the even distribution of the crowd on the terraces? - A.
        Yes .
     Q. And in connection with that I would like to draw your
        attention to the heavy type at the top of page 31,
        Chapter 8 . Would you read that please? ~ A.

                "Arrangements should be made to encourage
                the even distribution of the crowd an the
                terraces to provide ease of access and
                egress; to control and tacilitate mo vernen't,
                particularly if a local emergency should :
                arise during the event; and to contain
                pressures before they reach dangerous
                proportions.  The provisions set out here
                will assist in achieving these conditions."

      Q. Thank you. Were plans made for dealing with all types
         of emergency on the day in question? - A. I was not a
         party to all tne maxing oZ tne plans * madam.

      Q. I wonder could we turn to page 50, paragraph 175 please.
         Would you mind reading that again please. - A. Yes.
                                    G.H. MACKRELL



     "It is essential that plans should be made
     for dealing with emergencies, including fire.
     The onus to do this lies with ground management.
     Joint consultation between management, police,
     fire, ambulance and other emergency services-
     should take place in order'to produce agreed
     plans of action for all foreseeable types
     of emergency. While the public are in the
     ground the number of staff on duty should
     be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and
     other strategic points and to fulfil other
     essential duties (see Chapter 13).

Thank you.  So you say you weren't aware of any plans? -
A. The actual emergency plans for South Yorkshire were
compiled without the involvement of the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club.

Who was involved in that? - A. The Officer Working Party
and the Advisory Group.

I know I am referring to this Guide all the time, but as
I said earlier I do feel this is important and sir the
next point as well, it is to do with the ambulances.
Was there adequate ....

      THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien.    I have said quite
clearly on several occasions that we are not going to
go into that. By.no stretch of the imagination can I
bring myself to feel myself that these deaths were caused
because something or other was or wasn't done in connection
with the ambulances and the Club.
                                                    )
      MRS. McBRIEN:  Was there a communication system that
day capable of clearly relaying messages to all parts of
the ground? - A. I believe so, yes.

And is it true that the Club does not give any instructions
whatsoever to the Police? - A. In relation to what?

In dealing with the crowd control on the day of the match?
- A. No, there is constant liaison with the Club and^ the
Police ongoing prior to the game and on the day of the
game.

So there is. Did the Police consult the Club when major
decisions were made on that day? - A. The Police consult
the Club to a degree.  Obviously there comes a time when
it becomes an operational policing matter when obviously
the Club were not consulted and did not expect to be
consulted.

So you are saying that major decisions that were taken
you knew nothing about? - A. That is correct.
                                                             8 *


                                         G.H. MACKRELL



Q. You said yesterday the Club does not criticise the
   Police methods, but would you be able to speak up if
   you realised that a Police method was creating a safety
   risk? - A. I would raise the point with the Police if
   and when I thought that was the case.

Q.   Were the same number of turnstiles used for the same
     number of Liverpool fans, that is 24,270 in 1983 and
     in 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. So with that information would you agree that 23,000 fans
   could be admitted through 23 turnstiles between 2 p.m.
   and 3 p.m? - A. No, not between 2 and 3 p.m. but the
   turnstiles were open from 12 noon.

Q. What I am putting to you is, you said yesterday that it
   was a possibility that 1,000 fans could be admitted
   through a turnstile per minute? - A. Yes indeed.  You
   can comfortably do on an all ticket game, a good turnstile
   operator can do between 800 and 1 ,000, yes.

Q. So bearing that in mind if there were 23 turnstiles at
   the Leppings Lane end, if there were 23,000 to be admitted
   they could get in in one hour. That is what I am saying?
   - A. In an optimum situation, yes.

Q. And the additional 1,270 could have got in from any time
   between 12 and 3 p.m? *- A. One would have thought- so,
   yes.

Q. Would you agree with me that it would be extremely
   difficult to see the radial gates on a crowded terrace
   unless someone in conspicuous clothing was making known
   the fact that the gate was there? - A. I think that
   depends on the individual.  I cannot comment on it as
   a general point.  It may be the case, it may not be the
   case.




                               Q. Would you say when
                                                G.   H.   M AC KR ELL



0. Uould you say whan a terrace becomes quits crowded the
   gateway, unless something draws som eon e’s... - A. By
   definition a terrace does bacome full and therefore
   obviously the view is blocked on all sides, not just to
   the radial fence.

Q. Fans could be standing in that gateway so that other
   people wouldn't know it was there. - A. They could be
   standing anywhere on the terrace, yes.

0. Really they would need something to draw their attention
   to that spot, ideally? - A. Possibly, yes.

Q, You agreed the centre pans are the more popular part of
   the terrace. - A. I did qualify that remark - for some
   people.   It is a popular area for some peoDle.    You
   often find, for example, 'people who are bringing young
   children to matches don't wish to go to the centre pens.
   They choose to go to a wins; pen, where it may be that
   people are slightly less boisterous.

Q. Yes, I remember you saying yesterday that it attracts a
   certain element, the centre. - A. T h a t ’s rignt.

0.   tfhat exactly...? - A. Often the kind of people who   are
     very enthusiastic and demonstrative.     It isn't any
     criticism of their conduct, it just often is the way they
     watch the match.

0. Although the centre pans do appear more popular, would
   you agree it would be possible for fans to have gone into
   the concourse area and turned left or right and still
   have managed to get into the centra via the radial gates,
   as they were open? - A. It is possible, yes.

0. Yesterday we looked at a photograph, C.325\, and that was
   timed at 2.59, can you remember? - A. I remember the
   photograph, yes.

0.   Do you remember seeing a scene like that? - A. :!o, I
     didn't because I wasn't on the ground at that time.   I
     was making my way round to Gate C.

Q. This is the last question.    Yesterday we looked at a
   document dated the 9th December, 1935, and the number of
    that is C.405.   If you turn to the third page where it
   says "Segregation".    Yesterday Mr. Payne drew your
   attention to number 6.     As I haven't a copy of
   yesterday's transcript I just wanted to clarify that
   .point.   Number 6 is referring to segregation of
   spectators suoporting two different teams, isn't it? - A.
   Yes.
                             771.   .   -   ...


                                                             "t-T




                                                                          10

                                                       G.   !!.   M AC K R ELL



0.   It is not referring to the segregation in the pens at
     Leppings Lane? - A. I don't interpret it as such, no.

0. Therefore the Police would not be expected to form, a
   human barrier~bn the Leppings Lane terrace, but jiiat to
   assist at the radial gates? - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR.      RUSSELL:

Q. I want to ask you about three matters.   The first one
   concerns the segregation within the ground.    You told us
   yesterday that you, of course, were aware of the division
   of tickets between the rival sets of supporters for a ^
   semi-final, whereby the Worth Stand and VJest Stand and
   terrace were allocated to one team and the Kop and the
   South Stand was allocated to the supporters of the other
   team? - A. Yes.

0.   Were you also aware of the segregated area within the
     Spion Kop for fans foe the 1939 semi-final who supported
     Liverpool who had arrived with Kop tickets? ■* A. Yes.
     There is a small area which holds some 300 persons which
     is adjacent to the North Stand which normally has a tape
     kept across it.   That is for supporters who get o n t o
     the Kop, not just for semi-finals but for the visiting
     supporters, and the Police can often move them into that
     area.

0. At both the 1938 and 1939 semi-final it was the area
   reserved for Liverpool supporters who had got on to the
   Kop? - A. I would anticipate, yes.

Q. Because the rest of the Kop was occupied by Nottingham
   Forest supporters.   Was the trouble that was experienced
   between those people in that segregated area and those
   people in the rest of the Kop that was reported in 1983
   at that semi-final, reported to you? - A. Mo.

0. You were not aware of that trouble? - A. I was aware
    obviously there were a number oc supporters, who one
    assumed were Liverpool supporters, into that area.   I
  * was not made aware it was a problem situation by the
    Police.

0. You were not aware that for the 1939 semi-final it 'was a
    focus for the Police's concern within the ground? - A.
   ■Mo .
0. Shortly before the kick-off you have described your
   position at or about the players' tunnel at a time when
   you believed the Liverpool team had come on to the pitch
   but the Nottingham Forest team had yet to do so? - A.
   Yes.
                                                                   11

                                                G.   H.   MA C K R EL L



0. Your presence there was to d o with the newsworthiness of
   Mr. Clough, is that right? - A. Yas.

0. John Motson, the television commentator, described tne
   background to that.   He had bean banned from the
   touchline but was allowed to sit two rows back for that
   particular match? -A. That is correct.

Q.   It was a feature of the game, a feature of the day and a
     feature of the team that was of news interest to
     journalists and cameramen alike? - A. That is correct.

0. It represented a honeypot for cameramen,   including a BBC
   camera? - A. That's right, yes.

0. As witnessed by our attendance, it had prompted the
   attention of a senior club official? - A. Yes.

0. No doubt the attention of the Police as well? - A. There
   is always Police in that area, yas.

0.   Do you recall any senior Police Officers being in that
     area when you came out of the tunnel? - A. Mo, not
     personally, but there normally is an Inspector or Chief
     Inspector in and around the players' tunnel.

Q. The video evidence shows you to be in close proximity to
   Superintendent Greenwood at about that time and ^bout
   that place? ~ A. That is possible, I just can't confirm
   that.

0. Finally, can I bring you back to photograph C.23GA?
   Mr.. Mackrell y.&u have confirmed that you did not ever
   recall seeing a scene like that? - A. That's correct.

0. Of course, you were at no stage in the afternoon, as I
   understand your evidence, in that position from which
   that photograph was taken? - A. Mo, that is taken from
   the wing of the North Stand.




                0. High up and looking
                                           G. H. MACKRELL


High up and looking down? - A. That is correct.

When you were at your position at the players' tunnel
shortly before kick-off, you were of course at ground
level with your feet   on the pitch? - A ’.That is rights-

Or beside the pitch?    - A. I was onthe running track
alongside the pitch.

I am afraid I can't offer a photograph for you to
consider taken from that position, or even at that
time, but I would like you to have a look at C449 in
that bundle, if Sergeant Griffiths could put it up.
That is a photograph, Mr. Mackrell, taken probably from
the steps of the Police Control Box looking across the
West Terrace towards the North Stand. - A. Yes.

At about 6-minutes-past~3, but I’ am afraid it is the
nearest that we have for the purposes of this question.
You have told us that the scene in pen 6 , you do not
recall it being as shown in C326A. Can you please look
at the relevant part    of the terrace, in other words pen
6 , pen 7 and the elevated section of the terrace, as
taken from the Police Control Box steps, admittedly
some six minutes after C326A was taken? Now, doing the
best you can from your recollection on the day, your
view of the players' tunnel, was it of this particular
area, by which I mean pens 6 , 7 and the elevated-
section, was that more in accordance with what we see
in C449 or what we see in C326A? - A. Well, it didn't
notice anything untoward.    I think the first
photograph, 326A, obviously looks as though there were
very few people there.    It did not catch my attention
as being like that, so therefore I can't say that it
did look particularly empty.

But as far as C449 is concerned, if you can divert your
attention from the very unusual scenes on the pitch, is
the apparent density of pens 6 , 7 and the elevated
section more in accordance with what to you was normal?
- A. Yes, it didn't look untoward.

So would it be fair to say that although you were not
in the same position as that from which this photograph
was taken, your view from the players' tunnel of pens
6 , 7 and the elevated section was more in' accordance
with what is seen in C449? - A. Yes.   However, I did
qualify that by saying I did not particular study that
terrace while I was there at the time, but I glanced up
at it and it did not look unusual.

It looked normal? - A. Yes.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL


And what is shown in that part of C449, again leaving
aside the scenes on the pitch, is a scene of normality?
- A. Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:    I see you have got a-question, sir,
from the Jury.   Perhaps you would like to ask that
question, then if I may be permitted to ask a number of
questions arising out of some of the questions that
were asked yesterday which prompted some discussion,
before my learned friend Mr. Catchpole finishes off?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, indeed.  Let me just look at
these questions from the Jury, then we will listen to
Mr. Isaacs, then Mr. Catchpole, then me.

               Further by THE CORONER

The Jury have passed a number of questions to me and it
is my normal practice to ask them.  Now, the first one
they have asked is this - I don't know which order
these are - the question is: did you have a radio on
match day? - A. Yes, I did.

Was this tuned into the Police frequency? - A. No, but
the Police have one of our radios so that we can have a
mutuality.

I see, but did you hear any messages being relay-ed on
your radio on that day, that you can recollect?"- A.
No.

Is it that you can't remember hearing any messages, or
didn't you hear any? You see the difference? - A. Yes.
I have a radio; I use it to a certain degree, obviously
usually with Mr. Lock, is the person I relate to, but I
don't recall any messages being put through onto our
system.

The next question they ask is this:  you remember you
told us twice or even three times that after you had
been out round the back to have a look at what was
going on, you came back through Gate C, had a word with
Mr. Beadsley? - A. That is correct.

Then made your way to the Police Control Box? - A. Yes.

And you presumably had to walk up the stairs? - A. That
is right, yes.

What the Jury want to know is on your way up the
stairs, or indeed down the stairs when you eventually
left, did you hear any fans seeking to communicate with
the Control Box? - A. Not communicate; there were fans
there who were angry and they were irate and upset.
                                                                /   /•
                                                          14,

                                             G. H. MACKRELL


Q. Did you hear any shouts from any fans asking for any
   specific actions to be taken? - A. No.

Q. So when you say there were fans who were angry can you
   please tell me exactly what you mean by that? » A. Yes.
   They were throwing coins at the Police Control Box and
   you could hear them bouncing off the Control Box while
   you were in there.

Q. You are quite satisfied that you did not hear any
   requests or pleas or appeals for action? - A. I did not
   hear anything, no.

          MR, PAYNE:   Sir, I wonder if it would be helpful
     in connection with that last question to find out the
     time that Mr. Mackrell is speaking about in relation to
     the ending of the match or whatever?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes.  I had understood you to say
     that by the time you got into the Police Control Box
     the match had finished? - A. The game had stopped and I
     was not aware, I cannot confirm whether the players
     were on or off the field.

Q. Did you go straight out or did you stop en route on the
   steps? - A. No, I went.straight into the -- obviously,
   I was looking at what was happening, which slows you
   down a little.                                  7

Q. What the Jury have is a question which deals with the
   numbers of spectators.  This is a multiple section
   question and the first question is this:  were you in a
   position during that day to know how many spectators
   were in the ground at any particular point in time? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You could tell which section of the Ground they were in
   as well? - A. Y es.

Q. This was because the computer was continuously updating
   the screen? - A. That is correct.

Q. The question they want to know is this:   were those
   figures recorded for individual times'? - A. No, it is
   an ongoing, constantly updated system.

Q. You can stop it and print numbers at any particular
   point in time, is that right? - A. If you stop it to
   print it, you lose the actual time while it is
   printing, you can't use the screen to see the numbers
   that are coming in.

Q. So you lose the numbers? - A. That is right, yes.
                                                          15.

                                            G. H. MACKRELL


Q. In other words, what you are saying is that the system
   works, it is live .... - A. It is live and so therefore


Q. You can look but you cannot get a hard copy without
   losing the information? - A. One retains the
   information but you can't actually see the information
   that is still being obtained whilst you are taking the
   copy off.

Q. In that case I have misunderstood you.  Are you saying
   that the machine will continue counting?_ A. It will
   continue counting but you can't see it counting.

Q. The real question is this: were hard copy prints made
   during the day before 3 o'clock? - A. No, not before o3
   o'clock.

Q. So apart from what is in your memory and anybody else's
   memory as to the numbers at a particular point in time,
   there is no way of telling? - A. No, that is right.
   There was as hard copy print taken at the end,
   obviously, which I think has been produced previously.

Q. So you can't tell them what the numbers were from 2
   o'clock onwards? - A. No.

Q. Apart from your memory, I think? - A. Exactly. ~

Q. Can you recollect ...? - A. I can't recall numbers, no.
   I have tried to think back.

Q. And presumably exactly the same problem applies to
   1988? - A. Yes.

Q. You have got the final figure, I take it? - A. That is
   right.

Q. But not the intermediate ones? - A. That is correct.

Q. The Police in their Control Room do not have that
   monitor which does the counting, that is right? - A.
   No. At that stage they had a Police Officer who was
   situated in the Club's Control Room, with a radio that
   was radioing that information back to the Police
   Control.

Q. So they had access to it by means of communication, a
   radio link or telephone? - A. A radio link and there
   was a telephone link if ....

Q. But they did not actually have it visually in front of
   them? - A. No.
                                                             I S:

                                                G. H. MACKRELL


Q.-In the Control Room? - A. That is correct.

          MR. KING:    Sir, it might be helpful - I have
     forgotten - to have the name of the Officer who was in
     the Control Room.

Q.        THE CORONER:    P.C. Guest, I think? - A. It was
     Harlot Guest, yes.

             Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

Q. Mr. Mackrell, just on that point, in relation to the
   numbers coming into the ground are we to understand
   that the numbers come from the turnstiles? - A. Yes.  I
   am not a technical expert, but basically there is an
   electronic link, and each revolution of the turnstile
   moves forward, it reads and it sweeps round all the
   turnstiles and updates all the information.

Q. So that counts the numbers actually going into the
   Ground? - A. Yes.

Q. They are not further counted, that is, the fans are not
   further counted as they go into any particular area? -
   A. No.

Q. Just two matters that I want to ask you about arising
   out of some of the questions you were asked yesterday
   afternoon.  The first thing is this: do I understand
   your evidence in relation to the pens to be this, that
   you considered the pens to be part of the whole
   terrace? - A. Yes.                        ^

Q.   Not individual self-contained areas? - A. Correct.

Q.    You considered that to be the case because there was
     the ability to move from pen to pen through the gates
     at the back, is that right? - A. And the tunnel.

Q.   I was going to say, and the tunnel? -   A. Yes.

Q.    It is right to say, I think, that you foresaw no risk
     of overcrowding on the terrace having regard to those
     matters? - A. Yes.

Q.    The next point is this, and I want to come to reality
     rather than theory if I may: a number of theoretical
     statements were put to you yesterday by Mr. King, if
     this was the case, if that wa.s the case, and I think
     there were some seven or eight in all and he went
     through them.    I am not going to go through all those
     again but what I want to ask you is this:    on that day,
     or indeed before that day, did you go    through those
     individual matters in your mind, considering the next
                                                            17,

                                                 G. H. MACKRELL


  step and then the next step and the next step? - A. I
  possibly did not go through them as precisely as Mr.
  King did yesterday, but obviously the total operation
  had been discussed with the Police and the situation
  was that it appeared to work, so therefore it was
  something that both parties were content with.

Q. Certainly you did not foresee any risk before that day?
   - A. Not at all.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   I don't know whether Mr. Payne
  has any questions, sir?

        MR. PAYNE:   No, I don't,   thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Mr. Mackrell, can we go back for a bit of background in
   your capacity as .the Safety Officer of the Club, Chief
   Executive of the Club in effect, and from your
   knowledge of the finals?   Can we go back to 1985? You
   won't know but you may have guessed from some of the
   questions that were put to you, that there have, been a
   number of plans which have been shown to this Jury,
   relating to proposed changes at the Leppings Lane end?
   - A. Yes.

Q. The proposed changes show dedicated turnstiles £hat
   feed in exact numbers onto different sections of the
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. We know that those did not go forward and we will go to
    that in a moment, but are you able to confirm from the
    records that you have in the Club that the only reason
   -behind those proposals was in order to segregate home
    and away fans at that end of the ground? - A. That is
    my understanding of the matter, yes.

Q. There was no suggestion to the Club, as far as you are
   able to tell, that those were required for safety
   purposes? - A. No.

Q. And there was no one, as you said before, who suggested
   that the pens and the system that was in operation was
   in any way unsafe from the records that you have and
   from your own experience? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you just explain very briefly why those proposals
   were, I think they were shelved rather than abandoned
   by the Club in the mid part of 1985? - A. Yes.
   Obviously, this is prior to my time, but from the
   records at the Company and reading the minutes, whilst
   they were under consideration the Bradford Fire
   occurred and the Mr. Justice Popplewell published his
                                                      — t-8-

                                             G. H. MACKRELL


    report, and as a result there was a vast amount of work
    that was required in relation to the fireproofing etc.
    of the South Stand.

B




D




                             /Q. So those were ..
G
                                                              ><**




                                             G. H. MACKRELL


Q. So those were matters of safety and the money had to
   be spent on that? - A. That is right.

Q. Another aspect of segregation; when you joined the
   Club in December 1986 I believe, during your whole
   time at the Club had the Leppings Lane terraces, as
   opposed to the West Stand, ever been used to house
   home supporters? - A. No.

Q. Were there home supporters when you arrived in the
   West Stand? - A. Yes, there were a small number which
   one virtually inherited for want of a better word,
   approximately 100 season ticket holders who
   particularly liked the view from that position in the
   ground.

Q. Can you briefly explain what happened to them? - A.
   Yes, sure.  I had a conversation with Brian Mole and
   we both agreed it would be better to relocate those
   spectators to another part of the ground because it
   was a potential problem if people said the wrong
   thing or people got obtuse.  So, therefore, I got
   Brian Mole to write me a letter just formally
   requesting it which I acceded and then I wrote to all
   those spectators, the season ticket holders, in the
   close season and offered them a financial arrangement
   to move elsewhere in the ground.

Q. Did everyone move? - A. Yes, there were no spectators
   in that stand.

Q. From 1988 and 1989, two seasons, no home fans were on
   that terrace or in that stand at all? - A. That is
   correct, from the start of the 1987/1988 season, yes.

Q. Still when you joined the Club, you were shown page
   31 of the Green Guide by Mrs. McBrien, down to my
   left, and I wonder if you can open it up.  I imagine
   when you join any Club and assume this role of Safety
   Officer you had to satisfy yourself that the season
   you are inheriting is indeed to your satisfaction? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You were shown the bold type here and it says:

         "Arrangements should be made to encourage
         the even distribution of the crowd on the
         terraces to provide ease of access and
         egress — "

   In relation to the whole ground, were you satisfied
   from whatever inspections you undertook that that
   particular paragraph's intention was satisfied in
   relation to Hillsborough? - A. Yes.
                                           G. H. MACKRELL



At the Leppings Lane end that is true as well, is it?
- A. Indeed, yes.

What was the system for ensuring even distribution
and access of fans? - A. In relation to the Leppings
Lane end?

The Leppings Lane end- - A- Basically it was agreed
that the Police would handle the distribution of
spectators on Leppings Lane.

No stewards involved at all? - A. No.

When you joined the Club in order to assess whether
this was being fulfilled, did you actually undertake
a tour of the ground? - A. Yes, I did.  In fact, I
had a game at the end of the first week when I was at
the Club which was a reasonably large attendance and
the second home fixture whilst I was Secretary of the
Club was in fact Liverpool and I think there was an
attendance of either 42,000 or 48,000 on then.

So a very large crowd? - A. Yes, it was a large
crowd.  It was over 40,000.  It was either 42,000 or
48,000 and it was something whereby obviously I_was
able to see it operating at two extremes.

Did you talk at all to Mr. Lock? - A. Very much.  I
obviously kept very close to Mr. Lock because Mr.
Lock was a man 'yith a great deal of experience.

We will hear from Mr. Lock shortly but can you just
tell us of what your understanding of what Mr. Lock
had been prior to joining the Club? - A. Mr. Lock was
a former Superintendent I believe in South Yorkshire
Police and obviously had a great deal of experience
in relation to crowd control matters. He has written
articles for Police magazines.

Is it right he was the Superintendent in charge of
Hillsborough Football Ground for three seasons? - A.
That is right.

You were satisfied the system was there.  That is the
system I know you have said you go on towards the
ground during the week day, at football matches, and
you saw that system week in and week out at home
matches, is that fair? - A. Yes.

It was put to you as well in relation to this Green
Guide, this time by my learned friend, Mr. Payne, and
would you go to paragraph 19 5 please? It was quite a
                                              g   .'h . m a c k r e l l


clever question.  Again it was related to the
preamble which says:

      "Effective stewarding should prevent
      overcrowding..."
and I do not think I need to go on any further.   He
ask you in general terms whether you, as the Club
Management, accepted responsibility for that which
you quite properly said yes. - A. Yes.

At the Leppings Lane end who achieved these
objects? - A. That was agreed that the Police would
operate that at the Leppings Lane end.

Just turning to the way that those pens are actually
filled, we have heard of a number of systems, two
systems, for filling the pens.  The first is
sequential filling of the pens? - A. Yes.

The second is one that has been termed "find your own
level"? - A. That is correct.

I do not need to go through it but it is obvious if
you are sequentially filling a pen that someone has
to take the decision that that pen is full and £hen
open another pen? - A. Yes.                     •

So that requires some monitoring? - A. Yes.

If you have a system of "find your own level" there
are two theoretical ways of carrying it out and what
I want to explore is your expectation as the officer
of the company and the Safety Officer as to what
system would be employed.  That is just your
understanding.. You can either open up all the
entrances and just let the fans go in where they want
or you can let them go in initially where they want
and if necessary, if the occasion arises, you can by
looking at the terrace first seeing if one pen is
full and another is not, or one is fuller than the
other, you can take steps to close off and move
people round? - A. Yes.

Which was your expectation and understanding of the
system that would be used if "find your own level"
was employed? - A. They would operate the second
system.

On that point if you, as officer of the Club or any
other officer of the Club, make a decision as to
which system would be employed on any given day? - A.
Mo.  It was the Police that would make that decision.
All they would obtain from us was our estimate of the
                                            G. H. MACKRELL


numbers of supporters that were likely to be
attending from the visiting Club.

The importance of that, Mr. Mackrell, is that if you — -
can go to the documents put to you on behalf of Dr.
Eastwood, C.483, you will remember that this is the
record of the memorandum covering the conversation
with Sharon Lane and you said that this was at your
request in relation to a general enquiry about
capacity and I think it was in the build up to the
Semi Final match? - A. Yes, it is an FA form to be
completed.

So you had to know what the different   capacities were
for each end of the ground? - A. That   is correct.

We can see in fact the request is, in relation to
capacity, has any account been taken of the
alterations to the Leppings Lane end over the past
few seasons, and is the 10,200 or so figure still
correct.  The reply came from Dr. Eastwood and he
says:

      "Leave the capacity at the Leppings Lane
      end as it is providing the Police leave
      the gates under the West Stand open so
      that people can distribute through the
      terrace evenly.”

It may be being suggested that this particular answer
was a comment on the system that ought to be employed
for filling the pens as opposed to the capacity.  Did
you understand when you received this information
that what was being told to you was that a different
system ought to be employed? - A. No, because
obviously I did not have sight of this memorandum
until obviously subsequent events.

What was the information that you got back then that
you, remember? - A. The basic information I had back
was that the capacity, they were happy with the
capacity.   It was a capacity question which I was
aisking.

The gates, for a full capacity match, you had to
leave those gates open at the back? - A. Yes.

Is that right? - A. That is correct.

Did you also get the information back as appears from
Mr. Strange, passing this message to Mrs. Lane, that
it would be the Police who would be leaving the gates
open, have the gates open? - A. Yes, because that was
the accepted procedure that one had.
                                                                 23

                                                   G. H. MACKRELL



    Q. Again we have seen other evidence that you, as the
       Club, did not have any control o^/er those gates? - A.
B      No.

    Q. That leads me on to one further question.  You
       presumably did not have any input into how the Police
       would carry out any operational policing matter? - A.
       No.

    Q. That would include how those pens were actually
       filled or whatever system? - A. No, that is correct.

    Q. If you ask another question in relation to
       segregation, you were asked whether it was the Club
       policy to expect a human chain at the back of the
       Leppings Lane stand for the purposes of segregation
       and you answered no.  Does the Club have any policy
       in relation to how the Police ought to carry out
       their functions? - A. No, obviously that would be an
       operational policing matter and for them to decide.

    Q. If they choose to have a human chain or not, that is
       a matter for them? - A. Yes.

    Q. As long as you .do not find anything unsafe in tjie way
       that system is operated then you do not comment' on
       it? - A. Correct.

    Q. I think you can confirm in all of your time that you
       as an officer of the Club have been very happy with
       the way that the Police have carried out their work
       throughout the ground, at the Leppings Lane end and
       everywhere else? - A. Yes, that is right.   The Club
       and the Police have had a very good working
       relationship.

    Q. You had a particularly good working relation with
       Chief Superintendent Mole I believe? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. Turning to a slightly different matter, you were
       asked questions by my learned friend, Mr. King, about
       the numbers that could get through turnstiles A to G
       and it was put to you — again a fairly general
       question — that if you do not have three-quarters of
       the people for those terraces in by half past two you
       have got and I quote "problems".   The answer to that
       quite rightly was yes.  I just want to explore what
       you meant by problems.  Had you, either from the
       records you have read or from what you have been told
       as Officer of the Club, or in your own experience
       ever had any experience of crushing at the turnstiles
       at the Leppings Lane end? - A. No.
                                                              24

                                                 G. H. MACKRELL



 Q. What were the problems that you were answering yes to
' - - if you do not have three-quarters of the people in by
     half past two? - a . Problems meaning that some
      spectators would miss the start of the match.

Q. Again very briefly — and I do not     think we need to
   go through it too much — you were asked a number of
   questions about the B on the tickets? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think you can confirm that the B, and we have seen
     it, was on the stub of the ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. Would that normally be handed in to the turnstile
   operator as you go through? - A. Yes.

Q. What is the sign above the A to G turnstiles? - A.
   There is a B sign on it.

Q.   So does that B where it says "Entrance B ” relate to
     that? -» A. -That is right. It was colour coded also
     to match in with the tickets.

Q. The effect is that if someone goes through a
   turnstile in the normal way when it gets into the
   ground all he has got is a ticket which says
   "Leppings Lane standing"? - A. That is right.

Q. Lastly, in relation to a number of questions asked by
   Mrs. McBrien, you went through the Green Guide, quite
   properly^ as you are the Safety Officer of the Club.
   In relation to all matters in the ground, whether at
   the Leppings Lane end or otherwise, as far as you are
   aware at the time, had they all been approved by the
   Officer Working Party or discussed — engineers —
   and then put forward for the Officer Working Party to
   approve? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. So whatever we see as the physical layout of that
   ground has actually been explored and matters of
   professional judgment have been applied to those
   proposals and they have been approved and we have the
   layout as we see? - A. Yes.

                     Further bv THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have asked me a question, namely about the
   final count in Leppings Lane in 1989. We will get
   this answer I think from Dr. Nicholson but do you by
   chance remember what the computer print out was for
   Leppings Lane ? - A. I am afraid I do not but a copy
   of it was produced as evidence for the Inquiry.
                                                             25

                                              G. H. MACKRELL


         THE CORONER:  Dr. Nicholson will tell us about
   that.   So you will get the answer but not from Mr.
   Mackrell.

Q. I want to ask you two or three more questions arising
   out of some of the issues which have been raised and
   which I want to be quite clear about in my mind.   The
   first one is to deal with the question of what has
   been described as even distribution on the terrace? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You may remember you were shown a photograph of
   C.326A which we have already looked at several times?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You very properly said that whatever that photograph
   showed you had not seen it because you were not
   there.  In particular your attention had been drawn
   to what we know as Pen 6? - A. Yes.

Q. Which appears on that photograph to have a relatively
   large amount of space on it? - A- Yes.

Q. Mr. King who, in fact, put this to you accepted that
   you were not there but said, would you accept there
   was no evidence that the pen had emptied in the^time
   when you left the ground and by the time of thi-s
   photograph and you said none.  That, of course, is
   only half the equation because he did not ask you
   whether you knew whether there had been any evidence
   that any of the other pens had failed to any,larger
   or lesser extent in the intervening period. /Do you
   know about that? - A. No, I do not, sir.




                          /Q. So the question I am asking.
                                       •— e-.-jfrc- MACKRELL




Q., So the question I am asking you is this:  if that picture,
    assuming for a moment, ignore all the aspects of angles
    and where you were and so on, were the picture where there
    had been no movement in or out either into Pen 6 or Pen 3
    or Pen 4, which are the relevant pens, or indeed the
    further ones 1 and 2, you would presumably say:  "If I*
    had seen that I might have said the distribution was
    not even".  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. But if there is any variables then you would have to allow
   for that as to what you yourself saw? - A. Exactly and
   obviously I did not notice it as such.

Q. That is the point.  That is what I want to find out. When-
   you looked, I accept that you did not do a study, because
   you have just said you glanced, nothing impinged on you
   as being from a safety point of view critical that you
   had to take an instant decision or action? - A. No.

Q. Now the second question I want to ask you is this,     and it
   is still on the question of distribution:     are you saying
   that in order to achieve even distribution throughout a
   terrace you have to have completely equal density throughout
   the terrace throughout the period of its use.     It is a
   complicated question? - A. Yes, I d o n ’t believe so.

Q. So what do you understand by "even distribution"? - A.
   Even distribution is obviously the spectators th§re are
   comfortable in the location where they are.

Q. You have been asked several times and you have qualified
   your answer and I accept the qualification about the
   popularity or otherwise of the centre pens? - A. Yes sir.

Q. I am sure you are right that there will be in a mass of
   10,000 people some who prefer it and some who don't?
   - A. Yes.

Q. The question I want to ask you:  from your experience
   do the centre pens tend to fill first as compared with
   the wings if one is not filling sequentially? - A. It
   is dependent upon the supporters sir.  If you are looking
   at say the standing support which comes to watch Sheffield
   Wednesday regularly on the Kop, which you are not comparing
   like with like, the area that fills first is the centre
   at the back.  There is no real logical reason that should
   fill but that is the area that fills first.

Q.   This is in fact the point I 'am getting to.  Whichever
     area it is, there is a preferred area on a standing
     terrace? - A. Normally yes sir.

Q.    And that tends to fill first? - A. Yes sir, by the certain
     type of people who want to be in that area.   I have to
     qualify it by that.
                                                     27          >*
                                                                  #



                                         G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Would you expect anybody, be it Stewards, Police, fans
   themselves, it does not matter who, to have a look.at the
   rest of the terrace and say:  "There is more space here
   than where X am, we have to be redistributed or redistribute
   ourselves in order to be even at that point in time",
   assuming that there is plenty of space on the terrace?
   ~ A. Yes sir.  It is difficult when you are asking people
   to sometimes who have come early for matches and they are
   the ones who have come first and you are asking them to
   may be move down and things.  Obviously people are not
   conducive to being moved.

Q. What you are saying there may be a resistance to people
   being moved? - A. There can be.

Q. Now the other question I want to ask you, still on the
   question of distribution, you have looked at this
   Green Guide several times and I am not going to make you
   look at another section again, but it is right, isn't
   it, that the Green Guide specifies capacities for terraces
   between 27 per 10 sq.m. and 54 per 10 sq.m? - A. Yes.

Q. And the number depends on various, factors such as the
   floor area, the slope, the type of barriers, the exit
   routes. There may be other factors as well. That is
   right, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. If a capacity has been fixed at say 27 as opposed^to 54
   the visual impact of the number of people in a given area
   would be different to a 54. That is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. In fact it would be half virtually.   It is half? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. Therefore     the criterion of whether a terrace is packed
   in the sense of being uncomfortable cannot be measured
   simply by the numbers.of the Certficate.  Is that right?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Because that figure may hav;a been calculated or stipulated
   for different reasons others than compression.  That is
   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, -/ery much so.

Q. And it follows of course from that that the person who
   is looking at the terrace which has a capacity overall,
   the person has got to know what that capacity is, what
   the rate per metre is and what a group of people at that
   rate looks like? - A. Yes sir.

Q. If he is going to assess it absolutely accurately? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I just want now to turn to a different topic which is
   first of all the radial gates on the terrace.
                                     G.H. MACKR5LL


      You have told us, because it is very difficult not
to, but you have told us at least two things with regard
to the terrace. One is that it was treated by the Club
as a whole as a complete terrace? - A. Yes.

Despite the radial fences because of the access via the
radial gates plus the tunnel? - A. Yes.

And I expect you would have added, if you had thought of
it, the other entry routes? - A. Yes.

On the other hand you have also agreed that if you look
at the terrace when it is populated and particularly if it
is heavily populated, it might be proper to consider each .
pen as an individual section because of the difficulty
of seeing the radial gates on the one hand and the possible
difficulty of getting out of the tunnel if there is a
substantial inflow.  That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

From the Club point of view, never mind about hindsight,
on the 15th April 1989 at 10 a.m. which view were you
taking of the terrace? - A. We looked upon it as a global
view.

Now the second question on the radial gates is this:  you
have been asked several times about the fact that these
gates were under Police control and in fact you have more
or less agreed that that was your understanding? - A. Yes
sir.

What I want you to tell me is what your understanding of
the word "Police control" is.  I have not got that yet?
- A. In relation to?

To the radial gates.  We are talking about the radial
gates only? - A. Radial gates being the same.  Basically
they were responsible for the crowd control of the
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace which included
the control of the radial gates.

Yes, but what do you mean by the word "control of the
radial gates".   Do you mean, I will give you a few
examples and then you can tell me which one you mean.
Do you mean the gate is controlled by having it locked
in an open position and nothing more, or do you mean
that the gate is shut but aot locked but has an Officer
standing by so that he can open and shut it if he wishes,
or do you mean that the gate is locked open but that
there is one or more Officer standing in, on or by that
gate- in order to signal or direct people along, or is
there another? - A. Neither really with respect sir.
I would regard the control of the radial gates is under
the control of the Police as they so choose to actually
determine it, depending particularly in relation to the
numbers who were coming there, particularly if they are
                                     G.H. HACKRSLL



looking to sequentially fill the pens there may be different
control from if they are going to leave them open.

Yes, forget about sequential filling because i think you
have said that on this particular day that was hot the
method which was being used and you knew that? - A. Yes sir.

So on a day when, the pens were not being sequentially
filled but where the terrace was being used and treated
as a whole, which X think you said for 1989, was that in fact
the position in 1983 as well as far as you were concerned?
- A. Yes sir.

And in 1987 as far as you were concerned? - A. Yes sir.

So those are the three semi-finals, recent semi-finals,
and in fact the only ones where you were in charge, so to
speak, of the Club? - A. Yes.

Did you have a clear view, understanding, as to how tnose
gates were going to be controlled by the Police? - A. No,
that would be an operational matter for the Police.

Let me ask you another question.    Think back, rorget about
1989 f o t a moment, think back to 1987 and 1988, a long
way back, can you recollect before the kick-off, it is
an important qualification, whether there were any Officers
-* because you have already said there were no Stewards
so I am not going to ask you about that — any Officers
located at those radial gates? - A. I can't recall sir.

I now want to turn to the concourse? - A. Yes.

Nov/ in the concourse you have already explained to me
that you did have a number of Stewards? - A. Yes.

And that these Stewards had primary tasks, you know like
the gangways and the exits, and there was one at the gap
in the wall as we call it. There may have been more,
I don't know, but there were some there anyway? - A.-That
is right.

And you would have expected those Stewards to direct,fans
in whichever direction they thought appropriate if
requested to do so? - A. That is correct, yes.

And that you had not placed any what I will call dedicated
Stewards, dedicated to directional activity.  That is right,
isn't it? - A. Yes.

You have also said to me, and correct me if I have mis­
understood you, or not me to the jury, that you had
understood that the Police would do the directing? - A.
Yes, as part of the general stewarding, yes sir.
                                    G.H. MACKRELL


Are you saying that part of this understanding was that
there were dedicated - I use the word dedicated in the
same sense as I used for Steward ~ dedicated Police
Officers whose task it was pre-match to direct people
left, right or centre--or wherever they wished? - A. X
can only say that was implied in my understanding ot how
they would control the supporters on the terraces.

May I ask you:  I can understand your arguments as to why
you did not have Stewards on the terraces, and this question
is potentially incriminating so I have to warn you if you
don't wish to answer it you don't have to. Can you explain
to me why it was that you did not place Stewards on the
concourse in order to perform this directional task at
that location? - A. Because on an even flow or
spectators through the turnstiles, the flow in which they
come through the turnstiles, the number of Stewards who
are already situated there by way ot the gates, the gate
in the central wall and the entrance to the West Stand,
were in my opinion sufficient for the task.

So are you in fact saying that in a normal situation where
the gate is not opened, you know the concertina gate is
not opened, the arrangements both with regard to Stewards
and with regard to Police was effective to ensure that
people were evenly distributed? - A. To the best of my
ability, yes sir.




                      Q. One final question
                                                             31

                                                 G. H. MACKRELL


Q. One final question from the jury.   They have asked:  do
   you know, and if you don't know you must not say, do you
   know whether the Police looked at the terrace as a global
   terrace or as an individual pen?   It is a difficult
   question because what does the word "Police" mean, so I
   had better rephrase it.   Do you know whether, shall we
   say, Superintendent Mole, for a start, because he was the
   man you had had most dealings with, looked at it globally
   or...? - A. It was my understanding that was so, but
   obviously I have to qualify that by saying it was my
   understanding.

Q. I take it that your understanding was that when_
   Mr. Duckenfield took over he wasn't making any immediate
   changes? - A. I wasn't aware of any.

Q. He didn't indicate to you he was changing the policy? -
   A. No.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Mackrell, I think that is all I
   need to ask you and I would like to thank you very much
   for being here and giving us your answers.   Perhaps I .
   could take this opportunity of saying that we have very
   much appreciated that on two occasions at least we have
   been allowed to visit the ground, the jury and I, and on
   the second occasion some of the legal representatives and
   others came along.   We very much appreciated that you
   and the Board, so to speak, made that facility available
   to us.

        MRS. MCBRIEN:     I was wondering if I may ask one
   question?

        THE. CORONER:  Not really, Mrs. McBrien.    We have
   had a very good run with Mr. Mackrell and I have
   exercised my right to ask the final questions so I am
   going to say no.

        Mr. Mackrell, thank you very much indeed.    We are
   going to rise for coffee.   After our break it is
   hopefully Mr. Lock.

                        (Short adjournment)

        THE CORONER:      Mr. Lock, please.

                  DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK Sworn

                         By THE CORONER:

Q. You are Douglas John Lock? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is it                      Barnsley, South Yorkshire? - A.
   It is, sir.
                                               D. J. LOCK


Mr. Lock, at present, or at least in 1989 and for all I
know still, you were employed as the Security Officer at
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club? - A. I was sir.

Are your-still there? - A. I'am, sir.

In fact at that time it wasn't a full-time appointment,
it was a part-time appointment? - A. Yes, sir, that's
correct.

You had, amongst other things, the advantage of (a)
having been a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire
Police? - A. Yes, sir.

And obviously having retired;  and (b) that you had had
considerable experience of policing football matches,
including those at Hillsborough? - A. That's correct,
sir.

In fact, without giving a blow by blow account of your
experience, just briefly outline particularly your
Hillsborough experience. - A. Yes, sir.   I was promoted
to Superintendent after a year's acting in 1930 and I
worked in headquarters then.   In 1982 I was transferred
as the Sub Divisional Commander for the Hammerton Road
Station, which is north Sheffield, which included the
football ground at Hillsborough.   During that time I
worked for three seasons as a Police Officer at that
ground and the first season Sheffield Wednesday were in
the Second Division and in contention for promotion.
The second season they were in fact promoted and in the
third season they were in the First Division.   I retired
on the 28th February, 1985.

So between 1982 and 1985 you looked after, amongst other
things, the Hillsborough Ground? - A. That's correct,
sir.

Would I be right in thinking that in those three seasons,
your position was in the Control Box? - A. That's
correct, sir.

Perhaps you had better tell me what the correct
designation of your appointment in that Control Box was?
— A. I was in charge of the ground control, sir.    The
situation was in those days that we had no television
cameras, we had no computer.   There were three Chief
Superintendents, including Chief Superintendent Mole at
the latter end, and they were in overall command of the
outside of the ground.   Mr. Mole was the type of active
"hands-on" Chief Superintendent that liked to be involved
in all aspects of the operation.   He used to look after
outside.   He had a Land Rover with a driver.    He would
go out and survey the scene and see where the fans were
                                                              33

                                                       D. J. LOCK


   coming from, the trains and the coaches, and he would
   pass back, as would other Officers, information to me.
   I was in charge of the immediate vicinity of the ground -
   a team of Officers outside the ground and team of
   Officers inside the ground - and I would, from
   information received, direct their operations.

Q. We have heard in 1989 there was a ground controller who
   was Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, and then there was
   a controller in the Control Room who was Superintendent
   Murray and then there were various other Officers.

Q. Were you in fact in the position of Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield or Superintendent Murray? - A. Superintendent'
   Murray, sir.

Q. The Chief Superintendents who were above you, if I can
   use that term, were in the position of Chief
   Superintendent Duckenfield in 1989? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. It.sounds to me, from what you are saying, is that they
   weren't necessarily in the Control Room? - A. No.    In
   fact ray Chief Superintendents were never in the Control
   Room continually.    They visited, of course, and we
   discussed things, but normally they were outside. ^ They
   were looking at how the operation was running outside,
   relaying information back to me by radio and I lcTOked
   after the inner of the ground in the immediate vicinity
   and they did everything else.

Q. When you say outside, do you mean outside the confines of
   the stadium or simply outside the Control Room? - A.
   Outside the confines of the stadium, sir.

Q. So they were actually in the roads? - A. Yes.

Q. As you have said, you didn't have all the facilities
   which we have come to expect, like TVs and so o n ? - A.
   That's true, sir.
                      iv                           t
Q. You had to do it by!visual inspection and reports? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. Can you then tell me in your day, when you were sitting
   in the Police Control Room, what was the position like
   with regard to the policing of Leppings Lane terraces? -
   A. Do you want me to start with the sort of pra-match
   build-up, sir?

Q. Yes, that is what I am interested in. - A. Before the
   beginning of every season we sat down and categorised
   every match - A, B or C.   There were general
   categorisations because obviously we did not know what
                                                         34

                                                  D. J. LOCK


   situations the individual teams would be in when we came
   to play the games later on in the season.   We
   categorised them on our information and knowledge of
   where the teams had been the previous season and what
   sort of crowds they attracted.   A gate under 20,000
   would be a G; up to 30,000 would be a B; and then over
   that number or if there was something special because it
   was a team from which we apprehended problems, we would
   categorise it A.   Then, of course, that would be in the
   period of July/August when we first received the fixtures
   from the Football League.

  Thereafter things might change because one of the away
  teams may be doing well and of course bringing more
  supporters.   About a fortnight before the match
  Inspector Calvert and I - he was my Liaison Officer with
  the club - we would sit down and we would look at the
  type of operation that we would need that particular day
  of the match.   It may well be that if it was going to
  be, for instance, an A match, that we would need to raise
  Police Officers in addition to our own resources from
  other Divisions in South Yorkshire.   We would contact,
  for instance, Doncaster or Barnsley and ask them to
  supply us with a number of Serials of men.   We would
  know we would need horses so we would contact the Mounted
  Division.   We may need dog handlers.   We would
  certainly need Road Traffic because people would be
  travelling by road, by coach and car, and we woujd also
  have to liaise with British Transport Police because
  people may well be coming by train.

   Having looked at that we would speak to the club.   Clive
   Calvert would speak to the club and see if they had any
   difficulties or any problems they wanted to discuss with
   us.   Then I would see either the Chief Superintendent or
   his deputy and we would sit down and discuss what sort of
   Operational Order we would want.   Then we designed the
   Operational Order according to the manpower and the times
   when people were going to arrive.

Q. We have heard that from the point of view of the filling
   of the terracing, there were two basic methods.   One was
   that Leppings Lane terrace would be filled sequentially
   and the other one was that it would be filled as a whole?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Were those the methods applicable in your day? - A.Yes,
   that was true, sir.   If it was a small match - say we
   had a match with under 20,000 crowd and we were only
   going to receive somewhere in the region of 2,000 away
   supporters, we would know that we would only need a
   certain amount of space.   Now the unfortunate thing when
   I was in charge there was that the west end of the
   ground, both Leppings Lane terrace and the stand, was a
                             •                    .. . .




                                                            35:

                                                     D. J. LOCK


shared facility.   Some of our season ticket holders had
seats in the West Stand and some of our fans used to like
to stand on the terraces.   To achieve that without any
problems, to do it safely, what we used to do was to
decide - and may X add this as well, in those days—
Leppings Lane was only divided, the terrace itself, into
three areas.   What is now 1 and 2, then 2 and 3...   I m
sorry, 1 and 2, then 3 and 4, and 5 and 6 , they were
separate entities so we called them the south, the
central, the north and then there was the north-western
elevated section.

If we were only going to have 2,000 crowd, some of those
the club would tell us had bought tickets, so we would
try to seat them on the south side of the ground, above
pens 1 and 2.   We would know that we could accommodate
the standing supporter in pen 1*   We would close the
remaining sections, that is what is now 3 and 4, a n d k e e p
that sterile, and we would direct all the away fans into
the first pen under their seated supporters, and keeping
the remainder of the centre sterile we would allow in our
own fans in the north-west and in pens 5 and 6 as they
are now.

In other words, it was a very convenient way of
segregating relatively small numbers of fans and it give
you a bit more space for Sheffield Wednesday people if
you needed them? - A. That's right, sir.         -

How did you render the centre section sterile? - A. There
were two ways in which we could do that.   We could close
the gates in the centre tunnel or we could throw across a
barrier, and we always did have little barriers there for
that purpose.   We had to appreciate there are certain
games...   I mean, if it is a small game we could have
taken the action I have just described.   If it was a
large game we might give the whole of the terrace
exclusively to the away fans.

Yes, I am talking about the small ones at the moment.   I
will come to the big ones in a second.   I am just
interested to know how you actually did it. You are
saying you would either close the tunnel leading to the
centre... - A. The gates...

The gates, or by a barrier? - A. Yes, sir.

Of course, by definition, you were only having a few
people in? - A. Quite.

A few in footballing terms? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                           36

                                                   D. J. LOCK


Q. I can understand that from the concourse end.   Was this
   a Police operation, the sealing of that tunnel, in your
   days? - A. Yes.

Q. What about preventing all these lads and lasses coming
   through the gates at the back of the radial fence?    You
   had your radial fence, you had a gate at the back because
   I think that was always there, and even if it was not
   people could climb over those fences? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you set about maintaining...   Having got them
   all into the south end how did you keep them there? - A.
   Well, the Police orders in those days u s e d t o designate
   certain Serials certain jobs.   We had Serials who worked
   outside the ground off-loading the fans, on the concourse
   inside the ground, and some of those Serials were divided
   in half in the pre-match build-up.   Some of them would
   be on the back of the pens 1 and 2 and the gate would be
   locked because we had the key. We would have Police
   Officers - and they used to use the tunnel to have a
   smoke or to have a cup of tea or a sandwich - we had
   Police Officers in the tunnels and, of course, we had
   similar arrangements on the north pen, so there were
   Police Officers there at the back and also outside.

   So they did a shared job, and this was included in the
   Operational Order and the Operational Order from my
   memory said something to the effect that the pens'would
   be filled as directed by Control,




                Q. This was of course for
                                                       37,

                                                D. J. LOCK


Q. This was, of course, for sequential filling? - A. That
   is right, sir.

Q. Now let's’ turn to the other method, where you would use
   the whole of the terrace for the away fans, or where
   you would expect larger numbers.   What was the
   methodology employed in your days? - A. With regard to
   the centre pen in particular, it was always a bit
   difficult because as you emerged from the tunnel onto
   the terraces there was a barrier, and this barrier was
   an obstruction to the free flow of supporters going
   onto the terraces.   Quite often you would get a
   crushing so what we did, we had Police Officers, as I
   have described for the smaller matches, on the backs of •
   the terraces and looking after the gates, but the gates
   would then be unlocked and left open so there could be
   a free flow.

  The centre pen is always the most popular because it is
  directly behind the goal where the action is happening,
  and as a consequence I used to place Officers at.each
  end of the barriers so that we would keep people moving
  because if they stopped, of course, there would be an
  obstruction, and we used to allow the people to come
  through and direct them through from outside, either
  around each end so they could go into the wing pens, or
  down the centre, but there were Officers there, and we
  used to have Inspectors who were in charge of tKat part
  of the ground.  I remember quite a number of them - I
  can remember Inspector Sykes and another one whose name
  alludes me fpr the moment - but I have known them come
  up to my Box and say to me, "How are we filling? Have
  we got room in the centre or in front of the Box?",
  because pens 5 and 6 used to be the least popular and
  were always the last ones to fill.  We used to look at
  it and say, "Yes, we can get some more in", and when
  the centre pen, which inevitably filled first, when
  that was full, comfortably full, I would give the
  order, "Close the centre pen".

   Now, we didn't close the gate for obvious reasons,
   because if anything happened, of course, it would be
   obstructing the exit.  We used to then put into effect
   the barrier system and Inspector Calvert, Inspector
   Sykes, have done that on numerous occasions, acting on
   my instructions, and sometimes on their own when they
   saw that the situation was arising where the pen was
   full, but they would then inform me, "We've closed the
   centre pen by putting the barrier across".

Q. So have I understood you correctly, that in a situation
   where you were using the terrace as a whole you would
   lock open the radial gates? - A. Yes.
                                                              38.'

                                                   D. J. LOCK


Q. On the terrace, I am talking about. - A. Yes.

Q.   You would leave the tunnel gates open? - A.   Yes.

Q.    You would allow the people to enter throughthe tunnel
     or whichever route they chose? - A. Yes.

Q. On the concourse area? - A. Yes.

Q. Without any let or hindrance, so to speak, at that
   point? - A. That .is right.

Q. But because of this barrier which was barrier 144, I
   think? Do you know the numbers? - A. I am sorry, I
   don't know the numbers, sir.

Q. There was a barrier near the entrance to the terrace. -
   A. Yes.

Q. Which tended to make people stop, you had Officers on
   that barrier? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It was just one pen at that time, wasn't it? There
   wasn't the radial fence? - A. That is right, one pen.

Q. Whose job it was to prevent people stopping on that
   barrier, basically? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Then when you or somebody judged the centre pens were
   full enough you would, I am going to say seal off but I
   don't mean with the doors, by some means, and direct
   the people round the sides? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. The radial gates in this system, were they manned or
   were they not manned? - A. They were manned, sir, for
   the simple reason that what we would do, because
   obviously the centre pen had become full, people who
   used either wing, if they weren't manned and the gates
   were locked back, could go into that centre pen and, of
   course, increase the number of people in there, so what
   we did, we closed them but we didn t lock them and we
   had a Policeman on them.

Q. Perhaps I ought to have phrased the question a bit more
   carefully.  When the gates were open while you were
   shall we say freely filling the terrace, were the gates
   manned or not manned? - A. There was a Policeman there
   with the key and he was standing in the vicinity of the
   gate, sir.

Q. Then once you had taken a decision with regard to the
   fullness of the centre pen you then closed them but not
   locked them? - A. That is true, sir.
                                                           39;

                                                D. J. LOCK


Q. And the Policeman, of course, had to be there to open
   and shut them if necessary, so to speak? - A. The whole
   of the time, that is right, sir.

Q. In those days, we are talking up to 1985, in fact,
   aren’t we? - A. Up to 1985, yes, sir.

Q. Because you left. Were the stewards in the concourse
   area doing anything at all with regard to this
   activity? - A. No, if the stewards were there they were
   manning the gates and the stairways and the entrances
   into the stand, and of course they were expected to
   direct people if they were asked but there was no
   specific order that the stewards moved people around.

Q.. In your three years at Hillsborough did you have any
    semi-finals? - A. No, sir.

Q. Gan you remember what the absolute maximum crowd was
    that you had at the Leppings Lane end? - We had a night
   game I can recall - it was a Cup match - and we had a
    crowd, and I think this was about the biggest crowd .
    that I ever had, of 48,000.  The Leppings Lane end was
    full that night and I know it was full because we had a
    number of the away team supporters who were excluded
    and had to go into the stands, and there was a bit of a
    row because obviously they had to pay more monejf to go
    into there.  We did have capacity then and although the
   ground was not full, it was not full because the Kop
  • end had not filled.

Q. I see, so your recollection is that you had at least
   one night game where the terraces were full to
   capacity?- A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember, just as a matter of interest, how
   many turnstiles were used on that occasion? - A. The
   whole of them, sir.

Q. The whole of the turnstiles in the Leppings Lane or
   turnstiles in Penistone Road as well? - A. All of the
   turnstiles were used then, sir.

Q. Yes, but I don't think you have understood my question.
  • Perhaps I ought to put it this way:  we have been told
    that in normal League matches the Leppings Lane
    turnstiles, plus a number in Penistone Road, are used
    to fill the West Stand, the West Terrace and the North
    Stand, but that in the semi-finals, '87, '88 and '89,
    for segregation reasons the Penistone Road turnstiles
    were not used, only Leppings Lane, 1-16 plus A-G. What
    I am trying to find out is in this big match which you
    have mentioned, were the turnstiles used 1-16 plus A-G
    exclusively or did you use any other turnstiles as
                                                            4a

                                                    D. J. LOCK


      well? - A. No, we filled from the Leppings Lane end
      only. We didn't fill from Penistone Road, sir.

    Q. So in other words, you were able to fill that part of
B      the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Using those turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. From your recollection of that match, irrespective of
       the method of filling and the turnstiles, did you have
       any difficulties or problems getting the people in on
       that occasion? - A. Yes, we did, sir. We found, and_
       strangely enough it wasn’t the away fans, they were in
       reasonably early, but we found we had a great number of
       our fans out on Penistone Road, and it became obvious
       within ten minutes of the normal kick-off that we were
       not going to get them all in, and there was a great
       deal of anxiety by the fans to get in, and the Police
       were worried, out on the road, that fans might start to
       run around and try to get in other parts.  They asked
       me if we could delay the kick-off.  I spoke to the
       Secretary, I believe it was Dick Chester then, and told
D      him of the problems and told him that we would not get
       them all in before the kick-off, and the game was put
       back for 15 minutes - it was a 7.30 kick-off and they
       put it back to 7.45.  The strange thing is that we got
       the crowd in by about 7.35.  That breathing space gave
       us enough time; we did not need the whole of the
       quarter of an hour.

    Q. But the problem was not at Leppings Lane? - A. No, it
       wasn’t .

    Q. It was at Penistone Road where there are actually many
       more turnstiles? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. It may be a difficult question for you to remember, but
       in fact you have actually told me already, the away
       fans who were using Leppings Lane were in on time? - A.
       They were, sir.

    Q. The problem was your own people, so to speak? - A. That
    is right.  In lots of matches, sir, the away fans arrive
    on time because, of course, they are travelling by coach
    and train which have definite times of arrival, whereas it
    is one of the problems in football that home fans just do
    not turn up on time.

    Q. So that is where the real problem lies as far as your
       experience goes with regard to lateness, if that is the
       right word to use? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. You then retired? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                                               41-.

                                                    D. J. LOCK


 Q. X think you wrote a few articles? - A. Yes.

  Q. Which I don't think are relevant to this Inquest - that
     is not to say they are not worthwhile - but as a result
—     of your experience and the people who knew you, and the
     articles, I think after the Heysel Football Stadium
     Disaster people became aware that you might be able to
     assist? - A. Yes, sir.

 Q. And you were invited to consider joining the Club as
    the Security Officer, is that right? - A. That is
    correct, sir.

 Q.    When did you actually join, can you remember? - A. It
      would be August 1985, sir.

 Q.    I should have asked you one other question before I
      moved on to that.   You said that you were working with
      Chief Superintendent Mole.   Was he your Chief
      Superintendent whilst you were still in the Police
      Force? No, he was the Deputy Divisional Commander;
      The late Chief Superintendent Moseley was in charge
      then.

 Q. So you never worked operationally under Chief
    Superintendent Mole, would that be right, in the
    position which you have described as Ground Controller?
    - A. Well, I did, because on occasions, of course, the
    Chief Superintendent would be on holiday and the
    Deputy, the Acting Chief Superintendent who would be
    Mr. Mole, he would then take charge.

 Q. So you did actually work under him? - A. Occasionally.

 Q. And that would mean presumably that he would be aware
    of the methodology which you have described as being
    employed? - A. Oh yes, sir.

 Q. And presumably he would be aware of the form of the
    Operational Orders in those days? - A. Yes, sir.

 Q. We will now move on.  You have left and you have
    rejoined the Club as the Security Officer but, of
    course, no longer as a Police Officer? - A. Quite.

 Q. I think you report to Mr. Mackrell? - A. No, in those
    days it was Mr. Chester.

 Q.    Yes, but if you like you report to the Secretary of   the
      Club? - A. Yes, sir.

 Q.    I think your first task was to try and assess the
      Ground? - A. Although I wasrecruited as the Security
      Officer, the biggest problem that they seemed to have,
                                                         42:

                                                D. J. LOCK


  and I don't think I mentioned this in the Inquiry, but
  one of the biggest problems they had at the time was a
  number of thefts which were going on by gatemen
  stealing monies from the supporters. 'I know Mr.
  Holdsworth, the Security Consultant, did an analysis
  and saw that the Club were losing considerable amounts
  of money at that time.  During two seasons I
  unfortunately had to call the Police in on 40 occasions
  in respect of thefts which were going on in the Ground.

   My primary task at the initial stages seemed to be
   dealing with that problem, but I did, of course, have a
   look at the safety side, although, of course, I am not
   qualified as an engineer or have any specific expertise
   in football ground construction.

Q. Yes, and I don't think we want to go into too much
   detail, but you made various recommendations with
   regard to gates and the PA system and various things of
   that sort? - A. That is true, sir.

Q. You also, I think, attempted to what I would call
   upgrade the quality of the stewarding? - A. That is
   right, sir.




           |




               /Q. I think you have said
                                                        43

                                               D. J. LOCK


I think you have said — and we ought to get it right
— you are not denigrating the previous stewards-   It
was just that you felt may be some improvement could
be made? - A. That is true, sir.

One of the things you did, and probably still do, is
to have training sessions at the beginning of each
season? - A. Yes, sir.

You have two evening sessions, one for gatemen and
one for stewards generally, is that right? - A. Yes.

Do not go into too much detail but just encapsulate
what it is you are trying to do at those sessions? -
A. Yes, sir. We try to instruct our stewards and our
gatemen and our staff in, first of all, methods of
first aid.  So we have a first aid St. John*s
Ambulance man there.  Secondly, we instruct them in
basic fire precautions and so we have a member of the
South Yorkshire Fire Brigade attending.   Then in the
aspects of possible dangers and the problems that can
arise such as Bradford and Heysel and. the evacuation
procedures and so we have there the Police there, a
Police Inspector.  Then we had videos of the
disasters showing to our stewards the problems that
can arise and then lastly I used to gather it aj,l up
and talk about ground regulations and the stewards1
instructions which we originally printed on a paper
sheet and later I incorporated into a small booklet.

Which y^u handed to them and it had various other
functions as well? - A. That is right, sir.

It did mean they had it with them because of the
combination of functions.  That is right, is it not,
Mr. Lock? - A. They had to have it with them.  They
needed it for their pay, sir.

Exactly.  I think you said it was August 1985 you
joined.  Is that it? - A. Yes, sir.

Within a very short time from that date, in fact,
Chief Superintendent Mole became the Chief
Superintendent? - A. He did, sir.

SO you saw him more regularly, would that be right? -
A. That is true, sir.

Did you work closely with him during the period when
he was Chief Superintendent at the ground? - A. Only
on match days, sir.

That is what I meant? - A. I was only saying that
because I was not involved in any of the planning
1. v..„ _   ' .. _   .. -                   i,   '        -    -r _ „




                                                              44

                                                     D. J. LOCK


 operations-  I just worked on the match day.    I used
 to always make it in my way to see Mr. Mole.

 Of course, there were events which happened at two
 Semi Finals, 1987 and 1988? - A. yes.

 That is right, is it not, Mr. Lock? - A. Yes.

 First of all, from a practical point of view, taking
 1987 and 1988 were there any problems you were aware
 of which needed resolving in either of those years? -
 A. Yes, sir.

 Of any major nature? - A. In the 1987 one, the
 Coventry Leeds one I believe, there were some delays
 on the motorways and fans -- and these were mainly
 Coventry fans — had difficulty in arriving at the
 ground on time.   It was a midday kick-off and as a
 result Mr. Mole had the game postponed whilst the
 fans arrived.   In the eventuality, even though the
 kick-off was put back, the whole of the fans for
 Coventry did not arrive and they were arriving up
 until half time.   I can recall on one occasion Mr.
 Mole coming through to me on the personal radio
 because the Police have one of our personal radios,
 and saying to me, "I have got a couple of coach^ loads
 of fans who are going to arrive and all the gates are
 now closed, all-the admission gates are closed, where
 can we get them in and where can we put them?" We
 took them to 0 Gate on the Penistone Road end of the
 ground and we offloaded them there.   Escorted by the
 Police we marched them along the pitch in front o f J
 the Kop and we put them through the safety perimeter
 fence gates.

  I see.  You actually allowed them in through an exit
  gate? - A. Yes.

  It was a controlled movement? - A. It certainly was,
  sir.

  It was only relatively a small number? - A. Two
  coaches of about a hundred people, sir.

  It was a convenient way of doing it? - A. It was,
  sir.

 Apart from this difficulty that you had all of these
 people arriving throughout the period, were the
 people themselves — obviously they were sorry to
 have missed the kick-off — difficult? You did not
 have any particular difficulty, did you? - A. No,
 none at all, sir.
                                                             45

                                                    P. J.LOCK


Q. At the other end of the ground, Leppings Lane, that
    was not a problem? - A. No, that was the Leeds end,
  ^ sir, and that had filled.   There were there_very
    elurly and it was a very nice sunny morning X remember
    and lots of people arrived early-

Q. There was no crushing or any difficulty outside? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. So far as you could remember? - A. That is right,
   sir.

Q. So far as you can recollect too only the Leppings
   Lane turnstiles were used? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Let us just deal with 1988 now? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What about 1988? What was the position like there.
   In particular with regard to Leppings Lane? - A. In
   1988 I was told — I did not know this because my
   function keeps me tied in my room quite a lot but, of
   course, we have the television cameras now and the
   radios — after the start of the game when I saw him,
   Stuart Thorpe, that there had been a problem in the
   centre pen and that the Police had put up the
   barriers to stop more people entering.

Q. When were you told that? - A. I was told that, as far
   as I can recollect, some time after the kick-off.

Q. On the day? - A. On the day, yes.

Q. It was Mr. Thorpe as far as you remember? - A. Yes.

Q. Did that surprise you? - A. Not really.   I mean we
   knew there was a finite number of fans arriving
   because of the tickets and we appreciate — and, of
   course, I appreciated from my Police experience —
   that the centre pen does get full.  We had closed the
   centre pen.  I had closed the centre pen.   So the
   fact that the Police had closed the centre pen was
   not a surprise, no, sir.

Q. Then why was it reported to you as an event? - A.
   Everything that goes on is reported to me, sir, to be
   honest. Anything I ask them, "Have you any
   problems?".  We now have a situation where wehave a
   briefing sheet and everything that happens is •
   recorded on it.  In those days we did not have a
   briefing sheet and I used to say to my stewards — I
   was constantly in touch with them for various matters
   — "Is anything happening? What has happened".     As I
   say, I know Stuart Thorpe — as I say, I think it was
                                                              46

                                                      D. J. LOCK


     Stuart Thorpe, I am almost certain it was, he said to
     m e . ..

Q. It does not matter.  I am not going to hold you to
   the name but somebody on the staff told you? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Carry on because X interrupted you? - A. I was told
   that the centre pen was full and that the Police had
   closed it by use of the barrier.

Q. By that you mean the mobile barrier as opposed to the
   gates? - A. Yes, X would never expect them to close
   the gates.

Q. You would not? - A. No.

Q. That was not something you would have expected to do
   in your days? - A. Not when there was a full crowd
   because if an emergency arose, well, that is the only
   real exit apart from the pitch where they could go.

Q. If I were to tell you that we have had several
   supporters who say that the gates were shut in 1988,
   and indeed a Police Officer X — who said that that he
   seems to recollect shutting the gates? - A. Yes...

Q. Indeed, he went on to say he recollects shutting the
   gates on many previous occasions.  Would that
   surprise you? - A. It would, sir.

Q. Because that, of course, would be within — I will
   use the word — your grade as well, would it not, and
   he went back I do not know how many years, 30 years
   or so? - A. Well, those gates I can recall.

          MR. ISAACS:    18 I think, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:     18 years? - A. Those gates open
     inwards.

Q. That is right. - A. After the Bradford disaster where
   gates open similarly and people could not get out, I
   would have thought it was very unwise and certainly I
   never ordered those gates to be closed.  They were
   never closed as far as I was aware when I was in
   charge and that I did not know that the gates were
   closed in 1988.  I was told it was the barrier.

Q. You would have been very disturbed if Mr. Thorpe had
   come to you and said, "We have shut the gates because
   the pens are full"? - A. Yes, sir.
Do I take it from what you have said that having been
told by M r . Thorpe or whoever it might have been that
there had been a block on the tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

To use that word, you noted it but you did not
consider it needed any further action? - A. No, sir,
because when I was in charge and I did a similar
operation I did not feel it was necessary to tell the
Club. We had carried out the operation.   It had been
done successfully and that was it.

What I am interested in is that you did not feel it
necessary to tell Mr. Mole? - A. I presumed he knew,
sir, and would have probably given the order.

Thinking back to 1987 and 1988 now, and again we are
sticking with the Semi Finals, can you recollect what
the position was like on the radial gates within the
terracing pre kick-off? I am not interested in what
the position was like once kick-off had taken place
but pre kick-off? - A. I cannot be absolutely certain
but it seems to me that those gates were opened and
locked open.

Locked open? - A. Yes.

If you cannot remember this then I would rather., you
say that you did not, but did you recollect seeing
any Police Officers on those gates in those years? —
A. No, I do not, sir.

You do not? - A. I do not recollect seeing any.

I know you are no longer in the Police Force and so
in a sense you had no right to see the Operational
Orders? - A. Yes, sir.

Is it correct that the Operational Order certainly
for 1988 was supplied to the Club so that you could
have access to it? - A. Yes, sir. It was always the
practice to supply the Operational Order to theClub
Secretary for every match and I understand that one
was supplied in 1988.

Did you have the opportunity to see the Operational
Orders for any of the Semi Finals? - A.- Not the part
of it which designated the duties of the Police
Officers.  It was just the general preamble which
stated the intentions.

So you are not in a position to say whether the
Operational Order followed the pattern which you had
been used to? - A. No, sir.
                                                                 48

                                                      - D. J'. LOCK


Q. You do not know? - A. I do not know.

Q. Let us move on to 1989? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In 1989 you were still Security Officer? - A. I was,
   sir.

Q. Mr. Mole was still Chief Superintendent when it was
   announced that Sheffield would host the Semi Pinal
   again? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Which from Sheffield Wednesday's point of view was a
   rerun of the previous year? - A. That is true, sir,
   yes.

Q. Subsequent to that, or perhaps earlier, you learned
   that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was taking over
   from Chief Superintendent Mole? - A. That is right,
   sir.

Q. Had you known Mr. Duckenfield before this or not? -
   A. Yes, I knew him from my Police days.

Q. And from your Police days I suppose you know that
   people do get moved around, they get promoted, and
   things happen? - A. Quite, sir.

Q.    I take it that did not strike you as anything    unusual
     that somebody might be promoted to a new job?     - A.
     No, sir.

Q. I think although the Semi Pinal was not Chief
   Superintendent Duckenfield's first match, it was
   almost his first match, was it not? - A. I think it
   was his third match, sir.

Q. His third at Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

Q. There were a couple of fixtures before that? - A.
   That is right, sir.

Q. But they were, certainly compared with the Semi
   Final, small beer? - A. Yes.

Q.   Would that be right? - A. Very, very small, sir.      I
     think one was Millwall and one was Wimbledon.

Q. So the problems of large crowds did not present
   themselves at that match? - A. No, sir.

Q. Whoever had been in charge? - A. No, that is true,
   sir.
                                                            49

                                                   D. J. LOCK


Q. Where were you located and what were you doing on
   that day? - A. On the day of the Semi Final?

Q. Yes, please. - A. I was located in my Control Room
   which is directly underneath the South Stand near to
   the players' entrance.  As you walk in the players’
   entrance my room is immediately on its right.

Q. That is the room where the club have their TV
   cameras, the computer that does the counting of the
   turnstiles? - A. That is right.

Q. PC Guest? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I do not know who else? - A. On that day besides
   myself there was PC Guest, Roger Holdsworth the
   technician, and also a member of his firm that
   installed the close circuit television equipment.

.Q. What was your task that day, and again not in the
    greatest of detail but as an outline? - A. I, first
    of all, of course because it was such a big day I
    liaised with the Police.  I did that several times
    during the morning.  I visited the Police box on two
    occasions and I spoke to the Officers in there.   I
    also at 11.15 time I saw that the Police briefings
    were taking place and I saw Inspector Sewell who was
    then, and is now, the Liaison Officer between the
    Police and the Club. We discussed if there was any
    problems and there did not appear to be any.

        From then on, after the briefing with the
   Police, I saw all of the head stewards for the
   sectors of the ground and there are four for the
   north, east, west and south, and I spoke to them with
   the Police Inspector just to discuss if we had any
   perceived problems.  We did not at that time, sir.
   Thereafter I was mainly — of course, I had other
   occasions to go outside — in the Control Room.    That
   is where the telephone is, that is where I have a
   radio control and that is where the information
   relating to what is going on comes in.




                       /Q. Of course, that is also where.
                                                           50

                                         D.J. LOCK '



Q.. Of course that is also where the computer is where you
    can look and see what is happening on the turnstiles?
    - a . That is right, there are close circuit T.V. monitors
    for the 95 gates; there is the computer and print-out
    and then there is the video, the 18 video recorders all
    in there, so everything that is happening comes into there,
    that is the centre.

Q. The one thing that you have not got is a physical view
   of the ground because you are within the building,
   aren't you? - A. That is true sir.

Q. Did you watch the build-up of the crowd in the sense of
   looking at the computer print-outs? - A. Quite frequently
   sir.

Q. Did you notice anything that alarmed you in any way?
   - A. Not that alarmed me.  In fact surprisingly nothing
   did cause any alarm until C gate was opened the first
   time, but certainly it was obvious to anyone that the
   Notts. Forest fans were coming in much earlier and in
   greater numbers than the Liverpool fans were.

Q. You say that didn't alarm you.   Should it have alarmed
   you? - A. Well at that time ....

Q. I mean of course with hindsight you will say:    "Yes, it
    should have alarmed me".  I don't want you to answer
    this question with hindsight.  What I want you to try
    and do is to tell me why on the 15th April 1989 without
    hindsight, without anything else, why if the mere fact
    there was a disparity in entry rates did not cause you
   )to be concerned? - A. I had seen no disorder.   The Police
  'had not spoken to me and said:    "There is a problem'
    because the crowds are arriving late".   There had been
    no notification that there had been hold-ups on the
    motorways as we had had in the previous semi-final and
    it seemed at the time, as you say without hindsight,
    that things were going quite smoothly but that the
    Liverpool fans would be in a little later.

Q.   The main penalty for being late, of course, is    that you
     miss a bit of the game, isn't it? - A. That is    true sir.

Q. That may be very un-fortunate 'out that is in fact the
   main factor.  You are allowed in, aren't you, after
   kick-off? - A. You are sir.

Q. It is not like a theatre where you are not allowed to
   take your seat? - A. No, you are allowed in. The gates
   normally are open till half-time.

Q.   I see, after that you may have soma difficulty? - A. Yes.
                                                              51

                                            D.J. LOCK-



    Q. As a matter of interest in big matches would I be right
       in saying there are always stragglers who come late?
       - A. Always sir.  It seems quite often it is ticket
       holders as well who expect because they hhve a tiCKet
       that they will have an easy entry into the ground.
B
    Q. Forget 1989 of course where we know what the situation
       was.   Say in a crowd like the match which you have
       mentioned, the 43,000, how many people would you expect
       to come in after kick-off in very round numbers? - A.
       It could be as many as 2 or 3,000, but I can tell you
       if we think about this present season, I still experience
       surprise at the number of people who come late and the
       95 gates, I emphasise the whole of the gates, at      ^
       Hillsborough are now taking in the last ten minutes^ of
       the game almost 1,000 people a minute and that is the
       enormity of the problem of trying to get people to come
       early.

    Q. So what you are saying is even now you are still getting,
       from 95 gates you are getting 1,000 a minute or 5,000
       in the last five minutes? - A. The computer is falling
       over, cascading figures all the time in those last ten
D      minutes and we look at the ground at a quarter-to-3 and
       we find out that there is only 15,000 in; we look at
       the ground at 5-past-3 and we find we have 28,000 in.

    Q. Of course that is well within itsf capacity? - A.-.There is
       no problem in that respect.

    Q. But what you are saying is there is still a tendency
       for largish numbers to come late? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. And you said you thought anything up to 2 or 3,00 0 might
       well be post-kick-off? - A. Yes.

    Q. Now whilst X am on that perhaps I could ask you this, it
       is not directly relevant but I think it is interesting.

             If in a capacity of 54,000 or whatever, s a y 50,000
       just to make life easier, 3,000 would be what, 6%
       wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. At what percentage would you if you had been Ground
       Controller or indeed F.A. or the Club, at what percentage
       would you say to yourself:  "Hang on, we have got so few
       people here that we need to postpone kick-oif" or is
       that a difficult question to answer? - A. It is sir.
       I mean I can't recall what percentage was outside the
       gates the night I had the match put back.  I know that
       game I think we had 43,000 and I think we were working
       on about the same numbers then, about 6%.




H
                                          ■B.J. LOCK


Q. Because of course   it means that 94% of people are already
   inside? - A. That   is right, sir, and you never do know,
   even when you get   a full house, when you have sold every
   ticket, you still   do get quite a number of people who
   don't come.                                      —,

Q. Mr. Mackrell said anything between 2 and 3%? - A. Yes.

q   . would you agree with that in round terms? - A. Yes, I would.

Q. So back to 1989.  I am sorry that was a digression.   You
   were in your Club Roora I think it is called? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You were watching the scenes.  There was nothing tnat had.
   been said to you which alarmed you and there was nothing
   that you could see in front of you which was alarming you?
   - A. No.

Q. I think the first intimation you had that something haa
   happened was when one of the Police Officers made a comment
   about the gate being opened? - A. That is right sir.   He
   said:  "The gate is open" and I looked at the monitor for
   Gate C and it was open.  There were people coming through
   but there was a mounted Officer there and he seemed to
   be able to control the situation and the gates were then
   closed but I don't know, if might be my imagination, but
   I think someone said something about "the gate is broken"
   and I thought first of all if it is it needs to b§ looked
   at because it is a concertina gate and of course ’it is^
   an emergency evacuation gate and by the same token I thought
   to myself:  "I had better make sure nobody is coming round
   the ground trying to get into our open areas".

Q. So you left the room to go and look at it? - A. I did.

Q. You had to go down the player's tunnel I think to get
   out? - A. That is true sir.

Q.    When   you got on to the pitch I thinkyou met Mr. Mackrell.
      Is that right? - A. I did.

Q. Can you remember, were the players already on the pitch
   at that point? - A. I don't think that they were.  There
   may have been one or two kicking about but I don't think
   the teams were out as such. .

Q. You don't? - A. I don't think they were.

Q. There was an exchange of conversation between you and
   Mr. Mackrell? - A. That is true sir.

Q. And the upshot of it was that he said he was going to
   have a look and you stayed where youwere? - A. I stayed
   there for a short while.   I spoke to a Policeman I believe
   and then I went back up the tunnel and made my way back
   to my room.
            r- V


                                                           53

                                          D • OT•   LOCK




Q. What happened, did you see the gate open again? - A. No,
   I didn't sir.   As I say I am not quite sure how long it
   took me, it certainly was not very long, but I eventually
   went back up..the tunnel, went back to my room and when I
   got to ray room as X walked in Harold Guest the Policeman
   said:  "They have opened the gates" and I said:    "Wno are
   they?"   He said:  "The Police have opened the gates".
   I looked at the screen and in fact there were very few
   people coming through that gate, so the gate must have been
   open for at least a short while and I looked at the computer
   and my recollection is that there were some 2,000 vacant
   seats still showing in the North Stand and there was still
   capacity on Leppings Lane for about 2,500 but I did know
   the disbursement of the crowd of course.    So I went down
   to see, back to the pitch, where they were.    I saw Graham
   Mackrell again and I told him what had happened.    He said
   something like:   "Can we accommodate them?" and I looked
   at that time at the North Stand and at the Leppings Lane
   end there was obvious empty seats and I looked on the
   terraces and I could see the terraces on the wings were
   still not full and I could actually see the concrete of
   the steps.

Q. And what did the centre look like? - A. The centre was
   very full.

Q. What was happening on the pitch? - A. The players were
   playing.                                         7
Q. They were playing? - A. They were playing.  I recall that
   because a Superintendent within a minute or two came onto
   the pitch and spoke to the referee.  I was surprised because
   I saw him walk on to the pitch during the game and speak
   to the referee.  The game stopped and I could then see the
   people coming over the tops of the fences.

Q.    So what you are saying is you actually had twoconversations
     with Mr. Mackrell? - A. I did sir.

Q.   Mr. Mackrell does not recollect two conversations.         You
     know that of course, d o n ’t you? - A. Yes.

Q. I d o n ’t want to challenge you in this respect at1;all but
   I just want to be quite -sure that you are satisfied that
   you spoke to him twice? - A. I am sir.

Q-. And that both occasions were at the player's tunnel, were
    they? - A. They were adjacent to the player's tunnel, yes.

Q. On the second occasion you say the match was already
   in progress? - A. Yes.

Q. The first time you came out, perhaps I ought to put it
   this way, can you recollect whether there was a large
                                                       54



                                        D.J. LOCK



  Press presence? - A. I do now sir, you have jogged my
  memory.   The first time I came out, as I went to go bacK
  I think the players had just come on to the pitch and
  Brian Clough, the i-lanager of Notts. Forest, had been
  ba'rred from the touchline because of an incident some time
  earlier and I had asked the Secretary during the pre­
  match build-up where he was going to sit and of course
  as X went to go back up again Brian Clough came down and
  there was a large Press presence there.    I spoke to the
  Sergeant and told him where Brian Clough was sitting and
  that did delay me on my way back, so the players would
  be on the pitch but the game was not in progress.

Q. And then what you are saying is by the time you came
   out the second time .... A. The game had definitely started.

Q. Because Mr. Mackrell says that he went to Gate <Z, came
   back, went up to the Police Box and in fact after that
   was engaged with meeting all the important people, so
   to speak, sorting things out.

         You are quite satisfied that the conversations which
   you had with him weren't in fact at the first visit? - A.
   I am satisfied that I went down on to the pitch tv/ice sir
   and spoke to Mr. Mackrell.

Q. It is not that vital from ray point of view it is just odd
   that the recollections are different? - A. Of coujrse.

Q. But then we have had a lot of people who have had problems
   with recollection.

         So just to get this absolutely right, the first time^
   players on the pitch but match had not kicked off.  That
   is when you spoke to Mr. Mackrell and he said:  "I am
   going to sort it out".  You went back- had another look-
   had the conversation about "They have opened the gates"
   which you understood to mean that the Police had opened
   the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. And which you interpreted as meaning that a substantial
   number of people might well have come in through those
   gates? - A. That is true sir.

Q. You did not know how many but you knew there could be a
   number and that is why you went out because you wanted
   to see where on earth you were going to put them, so to
   speak? - A. Yes.

Q. Or at least where on earth they were going to be put
   might be better? - A. Yes.

Q. Then within a moment or two you saw an Officer run on to
   the pitch and stop it, the game? - A. That is right sir.
                                                             55


                                          D .J . L O C K -



Q. On the second occasion when you came out you could see
   that the wings stil.l had space? - A. They did sir.

Q. First occasion did you notice anything about the terrace?
   - A. No, I can't recollect noticing anything about the
   terrace then sir.

Q. So you did notice it the second time/ the first time
   it did not impinge, or at least your recollection is
   not there? - A. That is true sir.

Q. Did you go up to the Police Control Room at any point
   after this? - A. Yes I did sir.

Q. Tell me a little tiny bit about that? - A. It was quite
   some time afterwards because first of all I was helping
   out on the pitch.  I then went back and if I remember
   rightly it was Superintendent Greenwood said to me that
   he had 3rian Clough and Kenny Dalgleish and he wanted
   for them to address the crowd.

Q.   I see so it was a long time after? - A. Oh yes.

Q.    Well I would not say "long" we are talking about minutes
     of course? - A. 15 minutes or so after the incident.

Q.    And that is in fact when you went ....    A. I went to      the
     Police Control with them then.

Q. Yes, in order to try and make  those arrangements for
   the announcements? - A. That is right sir.




                           Q. What were you wearing
                                                              5<3

                                                      D. J. LOCK


Q.- What were you wearing that day, just as a matter of
    interest? - A. I was wearing a very light grey suit, sir.

Q. A suit? - A. A suit.

Q. By this time, of course, it was self-evident there was a
   major disaster? - A. Yes.

Q. When you came out the second time and you could see the
   terraces, what impression did you form as to what was
   going on at Leppings Lane?    What was your first
   impression, apart from what you have alreadytold me? -
   A. My first impression, when I saw people climbing over
   the barriers, was that there was a pitch invasion.^    Then
   it became obvious it was not, because of the activity.    I
   saw young men pulling down the hoardings then and
   subsequently they used them for stretchers.    Did you
   realise it was not a pitch invasion before the match was
   stopped, or did that only come to you after the match was
   stopped? - A, I looked at that end and I saw the Police
   Superintendent run on to the pitch.    I then saw that
   some of the crowd was coming over the barrier and there
   was a great deal of activity.    My impression was there
   was a fight and there was a pitch invasion and that was
   why the game was being stopped.

   As I neared to that end I then saw what was happening.

Q. So you went over to see? - A. I did.

Q. It was at that point that you realised...? - A. That is
   right.   In fact I returned because we had some emergency
   stretchers in ray part of the ground, which were not
   readily available.    We got those out and took those to
   the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. Can I just ask you one other question w h i c h i s going back
   a little bit on what I have said, then' we will stop for
   lunch.    When you were looking at the Leppings Lane
   terraces, which in your days - you started in 1982? - A.
   Yes, sir.                                       ‘

Q. By then the dividing fences were already in (place? - A.
   They were, sir.

Q. You weren't there in 1981? - A. No, sir.

Q. When you weren't filling sequentially - in other words,
   when you had a capacity crowd or a crowd which was likely
   to use the bulk of the terraces - did you look at the
   terrace as a whole or as sections? - A. As a whole, sir.

Q. That was both as Commander? - A. Yes.
                                                        57

                                               D. J. LOCK


Controller I think is the word we need to use? - A. Yes.

And also when you were with the club? - A. That's right.

So you are able to straddle both? - A. Yes.

The second question I want to ask you is this, and this
is a question of even distribution.   You mentioned to me
that the centre pens tend to fill first? - A. Yes, sir.

And at least for sections of the crowd are more popular -
youngish people - who may in fact form in some crowds a
predominant number?   You would agree with that? - A.
Yes.

At what point would you, as Ground Controller, say to
yourself, "I have to start re-distributing."   Do you
understand what I am saying? - A. Yes.

I take it that if, for example, you had ten people in the
ground and they ware all standing in a bunch right^behind
the goal, you wouldn't walk up to them and say, "I tn
sorry, you have got to redistribute yourselves equally
throughout this terrace because we are going to have
10,000 people here and we have got to have you all
absolutely equal."   That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes,
sir.

So a point will come at which you will say, "I have got
to do some redistribution."? - A. Yes.

Now how do you do it? - A. We would be looking, we would
see that the terraces were becoming full, that people
were starting to press against each other.   I Would then
ask the question, "How many people have we still got
outside?"   If they said that there were only another ten
coming in, we would know they could be accommodated.    If
they said that there were another 2,000 outside, I would
say, "Close the centre pen," and start moving people
around to the wings.   The fact of the matter is the even
distribution would be quite simple because you would know
and could see, because that Police Box is the best view
of the terraces because you can see straight the way down
the terraces, right down the fence.   You could quite
easily close the centre pen, or close any of the pens,
and ensure that people do get moved to the other side.

One other question on the videos which you had.   Did the
videos which you had in your room show the turnstile
area? - A. Yes.

They showed the gate because you have told me that.
What I want to know is how far towards Leppings Lane
could you see? - A. Our turnstile cameras are all fixed,
                                                            58

                                                    D. J. LOCK


   sir.   All the turnstiles are   in groups of six and the
   camera looks straight at each   block, and we can't move
   those cameras, they are fixed   cameras.   If we see
   anything we see it by fortune   rather than design, because
   we saw part of Gate C because   it was looking at the
   turnstiles near to Gate C.

Q. So you didn't have a camera which was keeping an eye on
   the outside of the turnstiles? - A. The Police have.

Q. No, I am talking about the club. - A. No, but we have a
   monitor and we can look at what the Police are looking
   2 1•

Q. Whilst you were in your club room did you see the outside
   of the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you notice what we know to be a large build-up some
   time between half past two and five to three? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. What did you think about that? - A. As I said earlier, I
  •didn't see any disorderly behaviour and the Police seemed
   to be handling it pretty well.   PC Guest who was in my
   room had a Police radio. We had our own radio which was
   linked with the Police and no-one was saying to us that
   there was a problem at that particular time.

Q. Of course you. wouldn't be able to hear any messages on
   your radio which was going on the Police circuit? - A .
   Unless the radio was open-ended.    They can design it so
   that you can hear both messages received and given, but^I
   don't recall hearing any Police messages.    Normally, the
   only message that you receive is the message from Control
   which is going back to that particular Officer, but is
   picked up by all the radios.

Q. What I meant was that the club radios weren't tuned into
   the Police circuits? - A. No.

Q. You would have had to hear it on PC Guest's radio if you
   were going to hear it on anybody's radio? - A. Yes.

Q. However, your recollection is that you didn't actually
   hear anything? - A. No, sir.

        THE CORONER:   I think we will have lunch.
   Technically you are in the witness box during the lunch
   hour, don't talk about the evidence.

                   (Luncheon adjournment)
                                              D. J. LOCK


            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Mr. Lock, on the subject of the big blue gates at the
entrance to the tunnel, the Coroner,has already put to
you the evidence of the former- Police Officer, Mr.
Higgins, who gave evidence about it, and I hope I will
be forgiven  just for going over this ground again in
slightly more detail.  I have got here a copy of the
transcript of Mr. Higgins' evidence on Day 51 on the
subject, and I am just going to read it out; it is
quite short on this point.   He was asked at page 18E by
the Coroner:

     HQ. Are you saying that in 1988 the tunnel doors
     were closed? - A. They were closed, yes.

     Q. Which end of the tunnel doors are we talking
     about? - A. The entrance to the tunnel.

     Q. Can you say at what time those doors were
     closed?- A. No, sir.

     Q. Can you say for how long they remained closed?
     - A. Again, I would think for the whole of the
     match until perhaps the half-time whistle, when
     people  are allowed to leave, of course."

     Q. How  were the doors controlled when they-’were
     shut? - A. Two Constables stood there.

     Q. On which side? - A. On the inside.

     Q. Were both leaves of the door shut? - A. Yes.

     Q. Are you saying to me they were shut and
     remained shut until possibly half time when people
     might wish to leave and then they would be opened?
     - A. Unless, of course, someone wanted to pay a
     call to the toilet or something."

Now Mr. Lock, can you tell the Court when did you first
become aware that it was being said that in 1988 both
leaves of these doors had been shut for a significant
time during the game? - A. I wasn’t told that at all,
sir.

When is the first time you ever heard that? - A. I
think it was at the Inquiry.

At the Inquiry? - A. Yes, sir.

I take it you condemn this practice if it took place,
do you? - A. I would do, yes, sir.
                                             D. J. LOCK


Mr. Higgins dealt not only with the 1988 match but also
with his experience at other matches, and he was asked
this question at page 19F:

     "Q. I have understood what you said with regard to
     the gates. What I want to try and be sure about
     is: was that your regular task the tunnel job, if
     I can use that expression, at matches? - A.
     Obviously since the request to attend here, I have
     given it thought and of the times I have attended
     Hillsborough, the majority of times were on the
     tunnel, yes.

     Q. From your experience was it normal practice to
     control the tunnel in the way you have described?
     - A. Yes, I think it would be fair to say that."

And subsequently he went on to say that his length of
service was 18 years, so certainly as far as we are
concerned in this Inquest the clear message we got from
Mr. Higgins was that when he was on duty, as a matter
of ordinary practice these gates were shut, in order to
control access or restrict access to the tunnel. - A.
The only time those gates were closed as far as I am
concerned was on occasions when the centre pen was not
used, and the gates were closed because it prevented
people going into the tunnel and onto the terraces, but
I have never ordered the gates to be closed in k match
and I have never seen the gates closed when people are
occupying the centre pen.

This is a little bit of a mystery really because Mr.
Higgins -— when did you hear for the first time that
it was being said by a former Police Officer, Mr.
Higgins, that as a matter of normal practice these
gates were closed to control the tunnel? - A. I have
never heard it said as a normal practice that they were
closed, until you have just brought that up.  I heard
it said at the Inquiry that the gates were closed in
the ’88 semi-final, which was contrary to what my
information was - it was that there was a barrier
across - but I have never heard that the gates were
closed, and I completely refute the suggestion that the
gates were ever closed, other than the way I have
described, when I was in control there, and I have
never seen them closed at all since.  I am not saying
that what Sergeant Higgins says is wrong but I have
never seen that happen.

If he is right then this practice, according to him,
must have been going on at the time when you used to be
in charge of the ground, in the early 1980s? - A. That
did definitely never happen, sir. The only time we
                                              D. J. LOCK


closed the tunnel was when the centre pen was not being
used, and he may be referring to that, I don't know.

No, he was not referring to that.   The question was:

     "From your experience was it normal practice to
     control the tunnel in the way in which you have
     described?"

and what the Coroner was asking about was to stop more
people going onto the terrace. - A . No, sir, I would
condemn that.

The Court has also had the advantage of hearing from a
senior Fire Officer called Mr. Seamen, who gave
evidence on a number of topics and gave his opinions
from the point of view of the Fire Service.  He was
asked about this and I would just like your comment,
please, on his evidence.  At page 74F the question was:

    "The jury has in fact heard that in 1988 at some
    time these doors were closed tight at a time at
    which Pens 3 and 4 were crowded.  Does that give
    you any qualms as a Fire Officer? - A. Not
    provided they were kept closed and kept properly
    supervised under control conditions in case it was
    necessary to open them because there was an
    evacuation needed

What is your comment about that? - A. I would have
thought that was a most dangerous practice because, as
you are aware, the gates open inwards.  If there was an
emergency, if there had been an explosion or anything
which caused the crowd to run up that tunnel, the
opportunity to open those gates in the face of the
oncoming crowd would have been disastrous.  They would
have pushed the gates to and the weight of the people
would have pushed them against the doors, so to do
anything like that would be extremely stupid.

Can you offer any explanation as to the reason that you
were not aware of this practice, if it is true, if what
the Jury has been told by these witnesses is true? - A.
I don't believe it is true, sir.   I think the Officer
is mistaking the times when it was closed legitimately
because the pen was not being used.   He can only go on
his memory, and I know, I used to keep a tight rein on
what was going on there, and I was told or I was giving
instructions when I barriered it across.   We put the
barriers there for the simple reason that; we did not
want the gates closing.   I can't remember but it
crosses my mind now that at some stage we talked about
removing those gates all together.
                                                            62

                                                    D. J. LOCK


Q. It is not really a mistake because the evidence is
   quite explicit.  He was saying that not only were they
   shut but that two Policemen were stationed inside the
   tunnel by the gates, and he elaborated upon it saying
   that the Policemen who were chosen for that job were
   people who were not particularly interested in
   football. - A. I didn't go to those gates and I didn't
   see them closed, so I can only accept what you say, but
   I was not aware ....

Q. It is not me that said it, it is Mr. Higgins. - A.
   Well, Mr. Higgins.  I was not aware that the gates were
   closed; I was told the barriers had been put across.

Q. Very well.  I will go on to a different topic. The
   period of your responsibility, which was for the Police
   supervision of the-Ground, putting it in broad terms,
   was 1982-85, have I got that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    At that time the Leppings Lane standing terrace was
     divided up by radial fences, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. The difference between then and 1989 being that the
   middle fence between pens 3 and 4 was not then in
   position? - A. Yes.

Q. In addition the narrow pen which is now called pen 5
   had not been created? - A. That is true, sir.

Q.   But otherwise the radial fences were in position? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Were you aware at the time that you were responsible
   for this job that there was in existence for the Ground
   something called a Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, I was,
   sir.  I had a copy of it.

Q. Did you know that contained various capacity numbers
   for the different parts of the Ground? - A. Yes, sir.
                                           i

Q. Were you aware that the capacity for the Leppings Lane
   standing terrace taken as a whole was; 10,100? - A.
   Approximately, sir, yes.  I knew it was 10,000, 10,100,
   something like that, around that number.

Q. Did you know that capacity had been worked out at a
   time at which the terrace was completely open except
   for the division at the north west corner? - A. No, I
   don't know how they came about the capacities.
                                                           63

                                                  D. J. LOCK


Q. That is going to be my next question.  Did you know
   that it had been worked out at a time before the
   terrace had been divided up? - A. No, sir.

  When did you first find, that out? - A. You have told
  me that now.  I thought we treated the terrace as a
  whole and that the capacity was 10,100 and then 1,800
  to 2,000 for the elevated, area.  I did not know when
  they had worked those out but I thought that that was
  the capacity then and was up to 1989.

Q. Would you just step over to the model and say what
   you thought was the capacity during the early 1980s?
   Just point to the different areas and say what the
   numbers were? - A. I thought that from the bottom
   here in the South Stand the whole of the terracing
   along there (indicating) was round about 10,200 and
   that this elevated section up here was now another —
   it was about 2,000 there and about 1,000 there — and
   so in all we were approaching 14,000 for the whole
   extent of the area and there were about 4,100 in...

Q. I am not talking about the seated area at all.  Just
   confine yourself to the standing terrace.  You made
   that a total of about 14,000? - A. Just coming up to
   14,000.

Q. Thank you very much.  Can you come back to the
   witness box? Just for the purposes of the
   transcript, just to make sure that we have not
   misunderstood your evidence, can you look at C.274 in
   the black folder in front of you? - A. 274, sir.

Q. Just for the purposes of identification, the area you
   indicated, as you thought had the capacity of 10,000
   was what we can see on this diagram as Pens 1, 2, 3,
   4, 5 and 6 facing the Spion Kop? - A. Yes.

Q. Then the 1,000 was the corner, the hatched corner,
   bit below the lighting tower? - A. Yes.

Q. The 2,000 was the white curved area with the words
   "lighting tower" in it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That is what you believed to be the case when you
   used to be in charge of the ground? - A. That is as I
   can recall it, sir.  It was a long time ago.

Q. You had better remind yourself of the Safety
   Certificate which is in the bundle at C.381.  You see
   the crowd capacity here in Schedule 3? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Just run your eye down the column and you will come
   to West Terrace 7,200? - A. Yes.
                                                              64

                                                     D. J. LOCK



Q. North West Terrace 2,900? - A. Yes.

Q. If you can just keep that open and goto 274, which
   is further on a bit? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The evidence so far in the case is that the 7,200
   applies to the hatched area? - A. Yes.

Q. The 2,900 applies to the white lighting tower area? -
   A. Yes.

Q. The total is 10,100? - A. Yes.

Q. Does that mean at the time you used to be in charge
   of the ground you were working on the basis that the
   capacity of this end in the Safety Certificate was
   4,000 more than actually was certified? - A. No, I am
   working on the basis of you asking me a question and
   I replied but I have got the Safety Certificate.   I
   can see that I am incorrect.  I would have the Safety
   Certificate at the time I was in charge.   So I made
   an error when I estimated the crowd capacity on that
   whole terrace when you asked the question.

Q. This subject only arose because I was asking you,
   whether you were aware at the time at which these
   numbers had been worked out that the radial fences
   were not then in situ? - A. No, I was not aware of
   that, sir.

Q. You may have answered this question and forgive me
   because I cannot remember the answer.  When did you
   first learn that the radial fences were put in after
   these numbers had been worked out? - A. I was not
   informed of that at all.  I did know that the numbers
   were calculated before the radial fences were in.

Q. Take your time? - A. Yes.

Q. When did you first become aware of that fact, that
   there has been a difference in the layout of the
   terrace after the time 'at which these numbers were
   worked out? - A. I cannot remember, sir.

Q. Was it after the disaster? - A. I think it was but I
   could not swear to that-

Q.    You certainly were not aware of it   at the time that
     you were in charge? - A. No, sir.

Q.    As a convenient visual aid can you  look now at274?
     Just have 274 open so that you have not got to
                                                           65

                                                  D. J. LOCK


  struggle with two separate pages? - A. I have 274,
  yes, sir.

Q. We can use that to illustrate the layout at the time
   that you were in charge bearing in mind that the very
   middle fence was missing and so was one of those
   fences in that very narrow pen? - A. Yes.

Q. These questions which I am going to ask you are about
   distribution and visual impression? - A. Yes.

Q. Your evidence is that when the whole of the terrace
   was going to be used you would keep an eye on the
   sections of the terrace and when you thought that one
   looked you would close it off? - A. Yes.

Q. Have I summarised that correctly? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You gave an anecdote about that of Inspector Sykes
   coming up to you and saying, "How are we filling?
   Have we got room under the box? Then we have a look
   at it and say, yes, we can get some more in and work
   it out it like that"? - A. Yes.

Q. As an illustration? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you think that the total number of people on
   this terrace, whether it was 10,100 or whether it was   ■
   14,000, was going to be controlled to make sure it
   did not exceed the number in the Safety
   Certificate? - A. I am sorry, I am not with you, sir.

Q. We know that the whole of the terrace had a number in
   the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Safety meaning that that is the safe number to be
   allowed on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. We know there was a number.  Leaving aside exactly
   what the number was, how did you think that the
   admission of people was to be controlled to make sure
   that that number was not exceeded? - A. If I recall
   rightly, sir, the times when we knew we were going to
   get a crowd which would fill that capacity at the
   West End of the ground was all ticket and so only the
   people who had the tickets would be admitted.   So it
   was just a question then of where they were going to
   go rather than how many were going to come in.   I
   never had a game where there was more than 48,000, as
   I say.  It was the largest game I ever had.

Q. When there is a popular match about to take place, is
   it possible to forecast in advance exactly how many
   people are going to turn up? - A. Within 400 or 500,
                                               D. J. LOCK


yes. We used to go to the Football Liaison Section
and they would contact the Police Force from the away
Club and they would tell us how many coaches were
coming and how many trains were coming so that we had
a fair estimate of the number of people who were
definitely coming then.  Then, of course, there was
the incalculable numbers who would travel by road but
generally speaking the guestimate by the away Force
of the number of their fans who were coming were
usually right within 500 or 600.

When you were in charge of the ground was it
important for you to bear in mind that there was a
safe number of people certified for this terrace and
it was important that the total number should not be
exceeded? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                      67


                                       D .J. LOCK



Q. Yes? - A. Y e s .

Q. How, by what means was that total number to be controlled
   to make sure that no more people got in than were
   certified safe? - A. Well'as I say the games where tnere
   was going to be a full capacity, therex was only one I
   can remember, was all ticket.

Q. Leaving aside the question of all ticket? - A. Well we
   never had a situation which arose where ....

Q. You were just relying on luck, were you, that with any
   luck more people than the certified number won't turn up.
   - A. Well we don't know how many.  Even today you can
   still have 50,000 turn up and the ground only holds
   37,000.

Q. I know.  In that case are you going to let the 50,000 in?
   - A. Of course not.

Q. But how are you going to control it then to 37,000? - A.
   Because when situations came to a push, and they never
   did so it never arose your question, but if they had have
   done I could have sent round to all the gatemen and we
   could have done a rough check of the numbers coming^
   through because they have a calculator on each or the
   turnstiles then and now.

 Q. When would you have sent round to the gatemen to^ do a
    rough check? - A. Before the match was started obviously.
    You would look at the terracing - this is purely
    hypothetical.
                                           0
 Q. No, it is not hypothetical at all.   I v/ant you to put
    yourself in the position that you were in 1982-1985,
    there you are in charge of the ground week in week out.
    We know that there is a certified safe capacity.    All
    I am asking is how you, as the Officer in Charge, are
    going to control the total nurabers to make sure that
    more than that does not come in.   That is all? - A.
    Well the situation was in 1932-1935 that we got our
     information weekly about the number of fans who were
■   coming from away and then we had the category of the
i   match and if only 5,000 came we could quite easily
     accommodate them. On the occasion when we were going co
     have more than that and we anticipated that,- we had an
     all ticket match and we had all ticket iaatches on a
     number of occasions, so the situation which you postulate
     never arose.

 Q. Luckily?
                                                                68



                                               D.J.LOCK



              MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, that with respect is what
        my learned friend is putting.   This gentleman has given
        his evidence as to what the system was.   If my learned
        friend wants further evidence there is plenty of it in
        the Club records no doubt.   It is not a question or
        luck.  It has been given by Mr. Lock.   That was the
        system he employed and my learned rriend should leave
        it at that, with respect.

              THE CORONER:    I don't think it was appropriate.
        I quite agree.

q   .         MR. PAYNE:  It is rather on the point of visual
        impression because really that is what all this is about.

              If I understand correctly, Mr. Lock, what you are
        saying is on an ordinary league - not an all ticket mauch
        - ordinary league match, you would keep an eye, your
        method of controlling the capacity was to keep an eye
        on the terrace yourself and if you thought that it was
        getting crowded then you would send one of your men
        round the gatemen to do a rough count ....  A. No, I
        didn't say that.  I said I could have done that but I
        didn't because it never occurred.

Q. if it came to that point ....         A. We could do, yes.

Q . T h a t is what you would have done, would you? - A- Well
     it never happened so I don't know what I would have
     done, because the first thing is, if you want to broaden
     your argument, first of all I want to know how many are
     still outside?    How many more are we expecting off a
     train?    How many are in the concourse?

Q.       Yes? - A.   Well I don't that.  I can't answer that sort     of
        question.     You are asking the impossible.

Q. The jury may find it surprising'that you have not found
   it easy to answer this question by saying that you would
   just keep a running total of the numbers coming through
   the turnstiles and that would tell you at any time how
   many people had come in? - A. Yes, that is true.       I
   could have said that but I would not have been telling
   the truth if I said that.  I have told you what we used
   to do.  We used to know how many roughly to within 500
   were coming.  If we only needed one pen or two pens we
   would see them go in; we would see the e m p t y pens.

Q.       Thank you very much,   so you have given your answer about
         that.

              In fact when it came to filling the individual
        pens and deciding when one was full so that you would
n-,
                                                                 69


                                                    D.J. LOCK


            then go on to fill the next, this was also done on the
            basis of you having a look at the crowd, was it? - A.
            Both me and my Inspectors who were in charge.  I said
            earlier that I could not remember the otner Inspector s
            name.  It was Inspector Bob Creaser, and I have nown
      B     him come to the Box on numerous occasions and say;
            "How are we doing? Can we get any more in? What is it
            like at the front?" Because we did not have the means
            to be able to count people into individual pens.

          Q. No, I appreciate that.  Iquite appreciate  that.  So it
             was done as a matter of visual judgment by yourself and
             Mr. Creaser and Mr. Sykes? - A. Mr. Sykes and any
             Inspector.  Calvert, yes.

          Q. Now looking as a visual aid at 274 which we have got open
             I hope? - A. Yes.

          Q. Suppose that you were filling Pens 1 and 2 by this method?
             - A. Yes.

          Q. Do you know how many people would be allowed in that
             pen 1 and 2 before you decided that you would close^ it
             off and go and fill another one? - A. Well I would have
             done then but I can't say now.

          Q. You would have done what?     - A.I would have done at the
             time I was in c h a r g e .

          Q. How many? - A. How many, yes, because I would have had
             this document that you have showed to me and it did breai-c
             down somewhere, there was a breakdown of the individual
             pens.  I cannot recall exactly what they were but it
             was something like 2,000 and 3,000 as it marched up the
             pen.

          Q. How would you judge that by looking at the people whether
             there was 2,000 or 1,500 or 2,500? ~ A. Well I would look
             at the density of the crowd and see whether there was
             movement and I would do what the Inquiry recommended,
             I would look at crowd distress and things like tnat.  That
             is what we do now.  That came out of the Inquiry.  So v/e
             would use precisely those same methods then.

          Q. Quite, so if you saw that the crowd was showing signs
             of distress ....    A. We would not allow it to get to
             that stage.  We v.Tould cut it off before then.

          Q. So what you are saying is that it all depended, during
             the time of your regime, on visual judgment? - A. I thin]:
             it is the same in every ground in this country at that
             ti m e .

          Q. Did you know that there was in force at the time that
             you were in charge very detailed guidance provided in
             something called the Green Guide? - A. I did sir.




      H
            V ' ; T ^ ; . - / > ; ; * v?> :* --;c -.t.
                                                                                r ,. , '-- >    1>1.


                                                                                           70


                                                                          D.J. LOCK.



Q. About working out the capacity of particular areas o£
   a ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever read it? - A. Yes,                                   I did read it.

Q. I am going to ask you to look at the part of the Green
   Guide which deals with this calculation of capacity and
   it is not the Green Guide that we have got because this
   only came out in 1935 or 1936.

         THE CORONER:                                    This is an extract from the 1976
   edition?

          MR. PAYNE: Mo, this is an extract from the 1976
   edition of the Green Guide and accordingly this is the
   one that was in force at the time that Mr. Lock is speaking
   about.

Q. Now, Mr. Lock, do you see here,                                   it is Chapter 15 in the
   1976 edition? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Headed:  "ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND CAPACITY".    Now the
   jury will recognise this in broad terms because it is
   very much the same as the 1936 version.    So this is the
   relevant part.   I just v/ant to take this through fairly
   briefly and then I am going to ask you a question based
   on your evidence about the system of visual impression.
   At 15.1 it says:

         "The foregoing sections of the code recommend
         guidelines for individual features of a ground
         in isolation.   This section suggests a method
         of calculating the number of people that
         can be safely accommodated when taking into
         account interactions between these individual
         features and when there are deviations from
         the guidelines.   To facilitate the calculations,
         a plan of the ground should be available with
         such details as exits, stands, terraces,
         stairways, passages, kiosks, seats and
         barriers.  A scale of 1:200 would be convenient
         for this purpose."

   Do you remember reading this when you were in charge,
   Mr. Lock?   A. I don't remember reading this particularly,
   sir.

Q. I am not criticisiag you for that because it may well
   be this does not fall exactly within your remit and it
   is the responsibility of others, but can you look at
   15.2? - A. Yes.
                                                            71



                                               D.J. LOCK



    Q.         "The method assesses:

               a. the holding capacity of a terrace (that
               of a stand being determined by the number
B              of seats when the stand conforms to
               the guidelines) ; and

               b. the capacity of a given exit route from
               a terrace or stand.

               15.3  The number of people that can be safely
               accommodat.ed. on a terrace, however, is either
               its holding capacity or the capacity of the
               exit system from it .... whichever is the
               smaller."

         Then 15.4.1:

               "The capacity of a terrace or viewing slope
               should be assessed from the area available
               for standing (that area of the terrace
               or viewing slope from which the whole of the
               playing area can be seen, excluding gangways)
               by allowing a packing density of between
               54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres,
               depending on the condition of the terrace
               or slope.  For this purpose the extreme
               allowances are ...."

         Then it gives calculations based on 54 persons per 10
         square metres when the viewing slope is in good condition
         or 27 persons per 10 square metres wnere it materially
         deviates from the recommended guidelines so as to
         constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely packed.

               "It may be necessary to interpolate between
               these figures where conditions fall between
               the two extremes.  When the positioning and
               width of gangways do not meet with the
               recommendations of paragraph 7.5.1, an
               appropriate reduction should be made in
               the area available for standing."

         Then 15.4.2 I think we can take it without having to read
         it in detail because it contains a formula for working
         out the capacity, and 15.4.3 builds in consideration
         of the spacing of crush barriers and how that affects
         the area available for standing.  Do you see that? - A.
         Yes sir.


                               Q. Then over the page
                                                               72

                                                   D. J. LOCK


Q. Then over the page, the rest of paragraph 15.      I will
   just do MbH at the top of the page:

        "Where a terrace contains both 'peak viewing areas'
        and 'other viewing areas' - by multiplying the total
        length of barriers by the appropriate distance
        between barriers in a 'peak viewing area' or the
        existing distance, whichever is less, and
        multiplying by the appropriate packing density.'

   Those are factors that are build into the equation.
   Just having had a look at that, Mr. Lock, do you know
   what the extreme allowances for packing density were on
   the different sections of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
   I may have done.   I don't recall, sir.

Q. Do you know whereabouts they came in that range, between
   27 persons per 10 square metres, and double, 54 persons?
   - A. No, I don't.

Q. Have you any idea where it came in between those   two? -
   A. No, I can't recall.

Q. What about these other factors that the Green Guide is
   recommending should be taken into consideration - the
   condition of the terrace or the slope and the recommended
   guidelines of crush barriers on spacing? - A. I would
   have thought the Fire Brigade would have done allr'these
   calculations with the club and the club's engineers and
   if anything had been wrong it would not h a v e b e e n
   certified.   I certainly had nothing to do with this.
   It is foreign to me.   As I said earlier, I am not an
   engineer and I do not know how they arrive at these
   figures.

Q. If you did not know anything about this, how would you
   know when looking at the terrace, that it was safely
   packed, that the number of people on it was safe? - A.
   Well, I can see if a bottle is full or if it is empty and
   I could see if the terraces were full.

Q. Yes, but you have got to take into account not only the
   visual impression of the number of people there, but also
   the condition of the terrace, the angle of slope of the
   terrace and the layout of the barriers and the types of
   the barriers - according to this? - A. Well, according to
   that, and according to what you say, every Police Officer
   in the country needs to go on a course for engineering to
   be able to do this.   Nothing like that was ever
   mentioned.   This is the first time I have ever gone into
   this area of the Green Code in detail.

Q. The first time today, this minute, do you mean?   This
   minute is the first time you have ever been through this
                                                    D. J. LOCK


in this detail? - A. Yes, I have read it, but I can t
recall.   I read a lot of things.   I was a
Superintendent in charge of a Sub-Division.

Of course if an estimation of safe capacity had been made
for these various sections of the terrace, then there
would have to be some means of controlling the numbers on
to that section, wouldn't there? - A. Yes, sir, like an
exclusive entry through a turnstile.

A separate turnstile? - A. Yes.

Can you think of any reason, bearing in mind the complex
and detailed guidance which is being given here in the
Green Guide which has been in existence since 1976, can
you think of any reason why these careful provisions have
been worked out? - A. To limit the number of people who
were accommodated in the stadium.

It certainly doesn't look as if the Green Guide
contemplates that it should be left to your visual
judgment, does it? - A. I can't answer that, can I, sir?

You are right. - A. It looks to me as though this is the
way of calculating how many people are going on the
terrace, and that s it.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, may I just interrupt you
for one moment?   Have we got a copy of the 1976...?
Rather than use our document as the exhibit, we might as
well use the whole guide.   The point is the wording is
the same...

     MR. PAYNE:     Well, it is not exactly the same.

     THE CORONER:     No, this is the 1976 Guide.

     MR. PAYNE:    If the jury are tempted to try to match
up the two if they think it is important, they will find
there are some discrepancies.
                       iv
     THE CORONER:    N o , you misunderstood me.  Your
extract of   the 1976 Guide will be identical to the
section in   the 1976 Guide which we are using.    That is
all I am saying, but I agree there are differences
between 1976 and 1986 and 1991.

     MR. BEECHEY:     The number is C.488.

     MR. PAYNE:    You may be asked by other people about
it, but I have finished with it, Mr. Lock.     Ijust want
to ask you   one more series of questions.   I know it is
difficult to answer these questions without bringing in
hindsight, but I am asking you to put yourself in the
                                               D. J. LOCK


state of mind you were before this disaster occurred and
to answer the questions, as far as you are able, based on
your state of mind at that time.    First of all, did you
believe that the ground prior ^to the disaster was safe to
be used for the full capacity cr'owdt-- A. Yes.

Secondly, before the disaster did you believe that if an
emergency arose on the Leppings Lane terraces then they
safely could be evacuated within the prescribed time of
two and half minutes? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you believe that, bearing in mind that the very
nature of an emergency means that it is something which
does not happen in the ordinary course of events? - A.
Yes, sir.

It is something which can’t exactly be foreseen? - A.
Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I don’t know whether the two and a
half minutes is the agreed emergency time.   That doesn’t
seem to be to be what Mr. Seamen said.   He said that the
emergency evacuation time was a time varying between - my
recollection - two and a half and eight minutes, and it
depended on the factors which they took into account,
including the fact this was a concrete thing, open air,
and all the rest of it, and they had not stipulated that
it had to be two and a half minutest   They were .'quite
satisfied that the emergency evacuation time was within
the limits.

     MR. PAYNE:   You are quite right.   Between two and
a half and eight minutes.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry, sir, to interrupt.   I
think Mr. Seamen did give me an answer of just over two
and a half minutes when I put that question to him.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I know what Mr. Seamen
said to you and it wasn't that question and it wasn't
that answer.   You were talking to him about something
different, namely the combined use of tunnel and radial
gates.   I can remember the questioning and answers and I
also remember what he said.   If you look it up you will
find I am right - for once!

     MR. PAYNE:   The emergency evacuation time worked
out by the Fire Service could be complied with? - A. Yes.

Did you believe that that could be done whatever the
emergency? - A. Yes, because I had seen the way people
exit normally at the end of a match.   It is absolutely
amazing how quickly the ground clears once the final
whistle has blown.
                                                             75
                                                     D.. J. LOCK


Q. Prior to the disaster had anyone ever suggested to you
   that he could foresee a risk of death by crushing in the
   Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I am not quite sure.   It is
   ringing a bell that somebody said something about
   crushing, not in those particular terraces but against
   the fences generally around the ground.

Q. You were worried about the perimeter fences? - A. Yes.

Q. I know what you may have in mind.   Do you remember that
   the club received a letter from somebody who had invented
   a system of explosive bolts at the bottom of the^
   perimeter fence so that they could be dropped quickly if
   an emergency occurred? - A. Yes, sir, it may have been
   that.

Q. In all your history of connection with the ground have
   you ever known of a case where they have had to open the
   exit gates to relieve a crushing situation outside the
   turnstiles, apart from this one? - A. No, sir.

Q. Has anything ever happened - and this is a very broad
   question - has anything ever happened to cause you to
   expect any circumstances in which a disaster like this
   could occur? - A. None whatsoever.   The only thing that
   ever caused me to worry about a major disaster was on an
   occasion when we had a bomb hoax and we were informed
   that a bomb was in the West Stand.   Within seconds of
   our putting the emergency evacuation procedure into
   existence we got a call back to say it was a hoax...

Q. That is quite   a different sort of thing though, isn't   it?
   - A. It is.

Q. That is an explosion you are talking about? - A. Yes, but
   that is the only time when I could have foreseen a really
   serious incident.

Q. Certainly nothing like this was ever in contemplation? -
   A. No.                  r
                           i
                           -
        MR. PAYNE:     Thank you, Mr. Lock.

        THE CORONER:     Yes, 'go ahead.

        MR. ISAACS:     I wasn't going to go ahead,   sir.   I
   was going to see if you would grant me an indulgence.       I
   need to take instructions on some of the evidence that
   has been given.    In those circumstances I would prefer
   it if I could go out of turn, and I think probably
   tomorrow morning having regard    to the length of timethat
   people are likely to be.     I wonder if you would grant me
   that indulgence?
                                                 D. J. LOCK


     THE CORONER:   Indeed.   What I am thinking of is
that yesterday I overshot with the witness, if I can put
it like that, and let him go on too long.   I d o n ’t want
to make the same mistake today.   Mr. Manning, can you -
estimate how long, approximately?

     MR. MANNING:   I appreciate you have greatly indulged
my learned friend Mr. Isaacs.   I am in a similar
position.   Neither of us, you will appreciate, had
clients who were separately represented at the Taylor
Inquiry and there are matters here which the two of us
have tried to look at over the lunch break.    I would
welcome an exactly similar situation, ifyou were
prepared to allow it.

     THE CORONER:   If I allow it to Mr. Isaacs, how can
I deny youl   What about you, Mr. King?

      MR. KING:   I seek no   indulgences.

      THE CORONER:    Mr. King, shall we break now and then
you    can start andI don’t have to interrupt you.

                  (Short adjournment)
                                             D. J. LOCK


             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Lock, as I   understand your evidence it is    clear,
isn't it, that   you understood that whether or    notyou
were dealing with a teague game when you might well, on
the Leppings Lane terrace, have a mixture of fans home
or away, or whether you were dealing with a larger game
when the whole of the Leppings Lane terrace might be
occupied by one set of fans, in either situation you,
in your time when you were in charge as a Police
Officer, expected a system to be employed which looked
to the filling   of the individual pens as a very
important factor? - A. Yes, sir.

You told us from your experience when you were still in
the Police Force that the centre pen, which of course
was only one pen in those days to 1985, was always the
most popular? - A. Yes, sir.

By which I take it you mean that is the pen to which
spectators naturally gravitated and were attracted? -
A. I do, yes.

And that was so also after you ceased to be a Police
Officer and became the Security Officer of the
Sheffield Wednesday Club? - A. Yes, sir.

Of course, by 1985-86 we had a situation at the?
Leppings Lane end that the centre pen was now two pens?
- A. Yes, sir.

But your experience was still the same, that those
centre pens would be the most attractive to spectators?
- A. Yes, sir.

And that would be, wouldn't it, for a number of reasons
and I want to go through a few with you.  I am not now
talking about where you are dealing with two sets of
fans and you want to segregate them, not dealing with
League games when you want to fill the pens
sequentially, but dealing with the situation where you
are looking at the whole of the terrace being filled by
one set of fans? - A. Yes, sir.

It is the most popular because people like to stand
behind the goal, that is one factor, isn't it? - A.
Yes.

It is also the most popular in the sense that if
spectators come through turnstiles A-G, which were the
turnstiles, certainly in the semi-final in 1989 and
1988, which were used exclusively for those who were
going to go on the Leppings Lane terrace as standing,
anybody coming through those turnstiles would have
                                                          78‘.
                                                D. J. LOCK


   right in front of them as the obvious route onto the
   terrace, the tunnel, wouldn't they? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That was clearly labelled? - A. Yes.

Q. And that tunnel led directly to the centre pens? - A.
   It did, sir.

Q. You would agree with me that there was no sign
   directing people as they came through turnstiles A-G to
   the left through that little gap in the concourse wall,
   which led them round to the side and pens 6 and 7?- A.
   That is true, sir.

Q. Such sign as there was, was high up, wasn't it? - A.
   Yes, it was.

Q. An eye had to be kept upon those centre pens to ensure
   that they did not become too full, is that right? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. What I want to explore with you is this:’ when you had
   the terrace utilised for the whole of a set of fans we
   know that the radial gates at the back of the centre
   pens would be locked open, wouldn't they? - A. They
   would.

Q. But notwithstanding that your understanding was->’ and
   certainly your experience when you were a Police
   Officer was that when the judgment was formed that the
   centre pens were comfortably full you then took active
   steps to discourage people entering the pens, the
   centre pens? - A. Yes.

Q. The active steps being, of course, to in some way block
   off the tunnel entrance, that is right, isn't it? - A.
   That is right, sir.

Q. You did not just leave people to use their own
   initiative to use the radial fences to filter into the
   side pens in that situation, did you? - A. No, sir.

Q.„ That again, can I suggest to you, is for a number of
    reasons which I will go through.  One is, is it not,
    that some people will put up with an awful lot in order
    to stand behind the goal? - A. Yes, I think that is
    fair to say.

Q. They may, in fact, be in a situation where they are
   uncomfortable? - A. Yes.

Q. Where they may well be in danger, but sometimes a man
   is not the best person to look after his own interests
   and they will just stay there, that is one reason,
                                             D. J. LOCK


isn't it? - A. Well, I would hope it was not when I was
in charge there but I can see your point.

Another reason is, isn't it, that when the pens become
heavily populated, the centre pens, the presence of
those radial gates at the back is obscured by the
population in the centre pens, that is right, isn't it?
- A. Oh, it is true, that, yes.

So that it can easily come about that somebody who is
in the centre pen, who has walked through the tunnel
and gone downwards, may not even know that those radial
gates exist, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is
true.

And another reason is that even if you do know it
exists, because of the numbers around it you may find
it very difficult to go upwards and back to get to the
radial bit? - A. That is right, sir.

Those were all factors known to you as a Police Officer
when you had a policing role in relation to the
Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

They were all factors known to you when you were
Security Officer working for the Sheffield Wednesday
Club, in 1988 and 1989? - A. Yes, sir.

Those factors clearly indicated to you at those times
that you could not simply leave spectators to their own
devices, to go where they will on the terrace, for
safety purposes, that is right, isn't it? - A. It is.
As I said, there was a barrier there as well.  We used
to move them around the barrier.

Yes, clearly when the barrier was there that was an
added safety problem. - A. Yes.

But even when the barrier wasn't there you could not
simply rely upon spectators to find their owii level
across the terrace, because of the problem oc the
centre pens being so attractive to people, that is
right, isn't it? - A. You have always got tojbe aware
of what is happening in that centre pen.

Yes, and the problem which we have just been through of
all those factors which militate against people either
using or being able to use the radial gates? - A. Yes,
sir.

In your experience it would be highly dangerous, and
obviously so, simply to allow people to go where they
will on the terrace at all times when it is filling up
in a big game, that is right, isn't it? - A. When it is
                                                            80

                                                    D. J. LOCK


     filling up, well, you can allow latitude when it is
     filling up.

Q.    But when the time comes ....- A. When the times comes
     when you observe that it is    becoming extremely
     uncomfortable and possibly dangerous, then you have got
     to stop it.

Q.    Not only that, you have got   to allow for the prevention
     of obvious disparity on the    terrace, haven't you? - A.
     Yes.

Q. You have told us that you don't wait, as far as the
   centre pens go, until there are signs of distress
   amongst spectators.  You have got to stop it before
   then, haven’t you? - A. That is true, sir.

Q. You used the expression., "You wait until the pens are
   comfortably full"? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Because it is obvious, isn't it, that if you wait until
   signs of distress you may be waiting until it is far
   too late; it may already be an overcrowded situation? -
   A. Precisely.

Q. Therefore you have to have a system, even when the
   whole of the terrace is being used by one set of
   spectators, for the careful monitoring of the c-entre
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. A system which allows for the ready closing off of the
   tunnel, as soon as a judgment is formed that the centre
   pens are comfortably full? - A. Yes.

Q. And for the directing of people to the side pens? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That is an active system which you would have expected
   to have been in operation in, for example, the 1989
   semi-final, the disaster semi-final? - A. Yes, that is
   true.

Q. I just want to make sure I understand you entirely.
   You would not, as a safe system, simply allow people to
   go where they will, you would have the system I have
   put to you in operation, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed, it appears that in 1988 the system which you
   expected to be taking place in 1989 did take place
   because you told us that you received information - I
   think you said after the game was started - that the
   central tunnel had been closed off? - A. That is true,
   sir.
                                                          8t

                                                   D. J. LOCK


Q. Was that exactly what you had expected with the system
   you understood was being operated? - A. Yes.

Q. Who did you understand was going to operate this
   system, by the way? - A. The Police, sir.

Q.    To operate the system you would have to have worked out
     in advance how you were going to close off the tunnel,
     wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

Q.    To operate the system you would have to have the
     ability to station men in the concourse  area to direct
     people to the side wings, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. You would also have to have very careful observation
   going on of the Leppings Lane terrace while it was
   filling up? - A. Yes.

Q. One of the tell tale signs you would be looking for,
   wouldn't, you, of the fact that the centre pens, as per
   normal, were becoming attractively full, if I can put
   it that way, would be disparity between the centre pens
   and the side pens? - A. Yes.

Q. You would want to stop disparity arising, wouldn't you,
   before it became too obvious? - A. Of course, sir.

Q. You would not wait until there was obviously a
   situation where the centre pens were full and the side
   pens had plenty of spaces with a full capacity game,
   would you? - A. No, sir.

Q. You would want to take steps before then to divert
   people coming in away from the tunnel to the side pens?
   - A. That is true, sir.

Q. The system you have described was a system which
   apparently took place in 1‘988, was a system which had
   been going on for sometime? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know, or did you know Superintendent Murray? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Had you ever spoken to him about this method of
   policing the Leppings Lane end? - A. Not as I recall. •

Q. I only say that, and it may be that I am looking at
   something which is totally on the wrong tack, but just
   could you have a look at page 46 of the transcript of
   your evidence at the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry? - A.
   Can you tell me where it is, sir?

           /MR. KING:   It is at letter
                                                            82

                                                  D. J. LOCK


     MR. KING:     It is at letter P to G, sir.

Mr. Lock, read that paragraph.   There' is a reference
to Mr. Murray and I am   interested to know who Mr.
Murray is in that paragraph? - A. Mr. Murray, sir? I
see, yes.  That paragraph...

First of all, Mr. Lock, who is the Mr. Murray? - A.
M r . M u rray.is Superintendent Murray who was in charge
of the Control Room on the day of the incident on
15th April.

1989? - A. 1989.

Just so that everybody knows it in the transcript to
Lord Justice Taylor you are dealing with situations
which had arisen as far back as 1981? - A. Yes.

All I am interested in   is whether or not you spoke to
Mr. Murray at any timefrom 1981 onwards about the
role of the Police in relation to the control of and
the filling of the Leppings Lane end, had you ever
spoken to him about it? - A. In this particular
paragraph I talk about Mr. Freeman before Mr. Murray.
When I retired Mr. Freeman, John Freeman, was the
Superintendent who succeeded me.   Then ultimately
when he retired Mr. Murray succeeded him.

Which year are we talking about now? - A. About 1988,
late 1988 I should think.  Certainly with John
Freeman he came before I retired and we did do quite
a lot of change over and talked to each other about
various policing aspects of the subdivision.   I did
speak to him in the box when he was in control and I
used to go up and speak to Bert Murray in the box as
well obviously.  I did speak to them about policing
and about the Leppings Lane end but if you ask me did
I specifically speak to them about that system I did
not.

Do I take   your evidence to be though that you had no
reason to   doubt that they were fully aware of the
system? -   A. I thought they were from the way in
which the   policing had been going on until that time.

Let me come now, bearing in mind what you said about
the system you expect to be operating, to your
observations as to what happened in 1989 at the time
of the disaster.  You told us when your attention was
first drawn to the problem of the gate that you went
down on to the pitch, did you not? - A. Yes, sir.

This is the first occasion? - A. Yes.
                                                                83

                                                        D. J. LOCK


Q. This would be at about when? - A. It must have been
   around the 2.45 to 2.50 time because I seem to recall
   that the Police closed off Leppings Lane to traffic
   at about 2.40.  I might be wrong in that but that is
   as far as I can remember.  It would be 2.45 to 2.50
   time.

Q. To be fair to you, you indicated that you thought the
   players had just come out? - A. I think they were out
   for a kick about, yes.

Q. A warm up? - A. Yes.

Q. On this first occasion when you came down on to the
   pitch you told us that at that stage you did not make
   the observation which you have referred to as you did
   on your second occasion as to the difference between
   the centre pens and the side pens.  That is what you
   have told us this morning? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You in fact have had occasion to either put your
   observations on paper or to give evidence about the
   disaster on a number of occasions, have you not? - A.
   Yes, I have, sir.

Q. I think you first presumably had to give a statement
   either to the Club or the West Midlands Police and I
   am looking at one which is dated 23rd May 1989.  I
   think you could probably accept that, could you? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   You also, of course, gave evidence t<3 Lord Justice
     Taylor? - A. I did.

Q. We are now in 1991, of course.   On the 23rd May 1989
   matters would be much more fresh in your memory than
   they are today? - A. Of course, sir.

Q.   That is equally true of the position when you gave
     evidence to Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I have not got the exact date? - A. It was about
   September, sir.

             THE CORONER:  Day 31 it was.   I can tell you
     that.     It is either Day 30 or 31.

Q.        MR. KING:  It would be some time in June anyway
     of 1989.  The likelihood is that if there is a
     difference between your recollection as you put in
     your statement of May 1989 or what you told Lord
     Justice Taylor and what you have told us today, the
     likelihood is, that the accurate account is that
                                                               84

                                                      D. J. LOCK


     which you put in your statement and told Lord Justice
     Taylor, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I am particularly interested, you see, to identify
   the time when you noticed clearly a disparity between
   the centre pens and the side pens-  Can I direct your
   attention first to what you told Lord Justice Taylor
   which starts at page 59 of the transcript?  It starts
   on page 57 although the relevant passage is page
   59. - A. Yes.

          MR. KING:   In order to put it in context the
     witness ought to see pages 57, 58, 59 and 60 because
     he deals on those pages with the first visit to the
     pitch and then the second visit.  In fact, the
     important part is on page 59.

          THE CORONER: What is it you are trying to
     establish, Mer. King.

          MR. KING:  I am seeking to establish, sir, that
     at the time he observed the disparity between the two
     centre pens and the wing pen was not the second visit
     but the first.  It was earlier than what he thought
     today.

          THE CORONER:  You are not trying to establish
     the timings of the visits?

          MR. KING: My    first intention is to establish it
     was the first occasion when he noticed that
     disparity.  I think the best way of dealing with it,
     sir, without asking the witness to read it out, is to
     just take him very   briefly through those pages to
     show him.

          THE CORONER:  Have you got page 57, Mr. Lock? -
     A. Yes, thank you, sir.

Q.        MR. KING: At page 57-G, you are giving your
     evidence of the first occasion that you realised that
     something has happened so far as Gate C is concerned?
     - A. Yes, sir.

Q. When you get the information that the gate had gone
   or possibly the gate had broken? - A. That is true,
   sir.

Q. At the bottom of the page you had been trying to
   identify when exactly that was when the gate went and
   I think you understood it to be, working backwards of
   course, that it was probably the first opening of
   Gate C? - A. That is true, sir.
                                                          85

                                                  D. J, LOCK


That would be the opening when it was opened and then
shut after a comparatively short time? - A. Yes.

Turning the page you continue to give evidence about
that matter and you look at page 58-C, and we see how
you immediately went out because of the number of
factors you had to consider and you have told us
about that today? - A. Yes.

You describe on page 58 what you do en route to
getting outside on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Then this is the matter which I am interested in,
because this is the first time you get on to the
pitch, page 59, where you then give your evidence of
what you saw and what you said to anybody on that
first occasion when you got out on to the pitch, page
59? - A. Yes, sir.

Would you just read to yourself from just above
letter B to E? All right? - A. Yes, sir.

First of all, do you accept that those were the
questions and those were the answers you gave to Lord
Justice Taylor? - A. I do, sir.

Do you stand by those answers today? — A. Yes, sir.

This is dealing with what you observed and said on
the first occasion when you went on to the pitch? -
A. Yes, sir.

Which we have established looks as if it was
somewhere — and we are guessing — between quarter
to and ten to three, something like that? - A. Yes,
sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, forgive me.   I do not
mind you establishing this but if you have accepted,
which it appears to me that you have, that he went
out after Gate C was opened...

     MR. KING:  You are quite right, sir.   To be
fair, can I clarify that?

     THE CORONER:   You have got six things you did.

     MR. KING: Absolutely, sir, and to be fair, it
is important because I wanted to establish that it
was the first opening.  I agree, sir.

It looks as if, so far as your evidence goes which
you gave to Lord Justice Taylor which you have
accepted today, your first indication about a problem
                                                              86

                                                     0 . -J. &0CK


   with Gate C is probably the first opening which we
   know — and so that no one is being misled and I am
   Sure the learned Coroner will put me right if I am
   wrong — 2.48.   How long does it take you to get from
   the Control Room on to the pitch would you say? - A.
   If I was going straight there it would only take me a
   minute and a half to two minutes.

Q. I do not know whether you went straight there.     I am
   trying to find out on the day. - A. Yes.

Q. Would that be the sort of time gap? - A. Yes, it
   would, sir.

Q. It is right, is it not, if you accept that
   evidence...

        MR. RUSSELL:  Excuse me.  Is his evidence that
   he went straight from the Control Room on to the
   pitch and that took a minute and a half to two
   minutes?

        THE CORONER:  That is what seems to be his
   evidence but I do not know whether he meant it.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Or did he do various things on the
   way.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:  I have   just invited my learned
   friend to refer Mr. Lock to   the passage he has just
   been referred to on page 58   C to E and it confirms
   the evidence which has been   given earlier.  My
   learned friend did actually   say he was going to take
   him back to it.

        MR. KING:  I think the fairest way to deal with
   it, sir, because my primary intention is to establish
   it was the first occasion...

        THE CORONER:  That is why I asked you, whether
   you were trying to establish the time.

       MR. KING:     Sir, we are obviously investigating
  both matters.

Q. I think the fairest way would be for me to put the
   question and for you to read out the answer you gave
   to Lord Justice Taylor in its entirety because you
   have told us that is the answer which you accept you
   gave and you accept today. - A. I thought when you
   asked the question just a short while ago you were
   asking how long it would take me to walk directly
   from the room to the pitch which would be a minute
   and a half to two minutes.
Q . I was trying to work out how long after on the day? -
    A. On the day X did things before I came out of the
    room and then started to do things.

Q. Let me just read though from "Right carry on please"
   because you are being asked to give your account.
   Could you read from letter B onwards. - A. I am
   sorry, I am not with you.

Q. To be absolutely fair we will go back to page 58.   It
   may take a bit of time but then we have got the whole
   evidence there.  - A. Do you want me to start at C,
   sir?

Q. Go from letter C? - A. Yes.   I was asked:

      "What did you do?"

Q. What was your answer? - A. I answered:

      "I immediately went out because there were a
      number of factors which I had to consider, not
      least of all was were the crowds forcing their
      way into the ground? I di d n 't know whether
      that was so.   I wanted to do a number of things
      so I did them as I came to them.    The first
      thing I did was, I wanted to reinforce the
      players' entrance which was immediately outside
      my room and was open, wide open, and I had
      intended to put some additional stewards on
      there but the chap who was standing there
      suggested that we would be better off if we
      locked the door, so I went to the caretaker's
      office and arranged for the key to be taken to
      them.  This happened very quickly, sir.    I went
      through the complex to the players' dressing
      room and I went to the directors' entrance
      which is a glass door.   There were two stewards
      standing there greeting the people and handing
      out programmes and outside there was a lady
      Police Officer, Miss Crottendon.    As I-walked
      along, I called to Brian Barker, the Chief
      Steward...."

Q. I will do the questions, Mr. Lock.   Question:

      "Can I just pause there?   You knew that
      Policewoman, did you?"

A. The answer is:

      "I used to be her Superintendent."
                                                              88

                                                      D. J. LOCK


    Q. Question:

          "And it would not surprise you if she got the
B         impression you were agitated from what you have
          said? You have said you were frightened.

       A. "I was not displaying panic or agitation.  When I
          say I was frightened, I was frightened of what
          the result would be and I left, but X didn't
          run down the corridor in a panic."

    Q. Question:

          "Did you pass any comment to Policewoman
          Crottendon?"

       A. "I did, sir.  To carry on in sequence, I
          radioed for Brian Barker to provide two
          stewards to support those on the door and I
          went outside and I explained to Miss Crottendon
          what I had seen, that the gate had opened and
          some people had come in, and I told her that I
          was afraid that somebody might come down and
          close the door."




                                    /Q. The question is




H
                                                         89


                                        D.J. LOCK



Q. The question is:

         "Did you tell her that there was still a
         large number of fans outside the ground?"

   A.   "I may have done."

Q. Question:

         "And that there might be difficulty getting
         them in?"

   A.   "No, definitely not.  I never made any comment
         about that.  I was just concerned about her
         safety."

Q. Question:

         "Right, carry on, please."

   A.   "So having achieved that, I went down the
         tunnel and I went on to the pitch and I saw
         Graham Mackrell and I told him what had
         happened.   I should add, sir, and I omitted
         to add it when I started off, but before I
         left the Control Room, I looked at the
         computer and I saw that displayed for the
         North Stand were 2,000 vacancies, approximately,
         and on the West end terracing, 2,500 vacancies,
         approximately again.   Our problem is, of
         course, we don't know the disbursement of
         those fans across the terracing, so I wanted
         to see Wi/ere those vacancies occurred on the
         terracing.   I went down.  I arrived on the
         pitch.   It was my intention to look ana
         observe and see where they were, and the
         first thing I noticed was that there were
         obviously places, seats vacant, in the
         North Stand.   When I looked to the West
         end of the ground, and I was approximately
         equi-distant between the players' tunnel
         and the terracing at that end of the ground
         I could see that the West end was quite
         full.   The centre pen was very full.  The
         two wings were showing quite clear spaces
         of concrete so there were vacancies and
         I realised that if the Police were going to
         carry out the arrangement we had, close
         the centre pen, they would have to deviate
         the fans around to each wing of the terracing.
         I then saw Hr. Mackrell and I told him that
         the gate had opened and I was going to see
         what was happening, and my intention was
                                                             90


                                               D .J . LOCK




              was to go to the gate, to find out what
              had happened, and call in at the Police
              Room as well, but Graham said, 'Leave
              it to* me, I'll do that' and I left him
B             then to return to my room."

    Q. We will just pause there.  So that was the account you
       gave to Lord Justice Taylor on the first occasion you
       went down on to the pitch? — A. Yes sir.

    Q. And the jury can make its judgment as to when that may
       have been in relation to events which you have now given
       in some details? - A. Yes s.ir.

    Q. But it was on that first occasion that you observea^tnat
       the two wing pens were showing quite clear spaces Oi
       concrete and that the centre pens were very full? - A.
       Yes  sir.
    Q. And the second important thing I want to investigaue with
       you arising from that.  You told Lord Justice Taylor,
       and you are telling us today, that it went througn* your
D      mind on the day, on the 15th April 1939, "that it
       Police were going to carry out the arrangement we nad
       "we" being the Club/ isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That is "close the centre pen, they v/ould have to deviate
         the fans around to each wing of the terracing ? * A. Yes
         sir.
    Q. And that is something on the 15th April 1939 whicn you
       would have expected of the Police in the policing o-
       the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes sir.

    Q.   Can I just now deal with one or   two other   matters please.

               You told us that you had been in the Club Control
         Room for most of the time prior to the events you have
         described? - A. Yes sir.

     Q. And you had access to figures and numbers or people who ^
        were coming in through the turnstiles at any given time i.
        you happened to be observing them? - A.. Yes.

     Q. I want to see if I can jog your memory.  I don'^t know,
        do you know an Officer, a Police Orricer called
        ilr. Darling? - A. I do now sir.

     Q. You do now because perhaps you saw him at tne Inquiry
        of Lord Justice Taylor? - A. I see him frequently at
        matches at Hillsborough.
                                                                  V   33   3 1.'£
     Q. Then you know exactly who I am talking abouv.? -




H
                                            D.J. LOCK




Q. You know, don't you, that Mr. Darling gave evidence to
   Lord Justice Taylor about a visit to the Club Control
   Room? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   And his evidence was he could not be sure about the time
     but it was either at about 2 o'clock or before 2 o'clock,
     something like that? - A. I d o n ’t know the time sir.

Q. Well you were questioned about it, weren't you, at Lord
   Justice Taylor's inquiry? - A. I was.

Q. I want to see if I can investigate it with you.  This
   was evidence about visiting the Club Control Room at about:
   that time and receiving an observation from somebody
   inside that Club Control Room as to the numbers which had
   already arrived by that time? - A. Yes, I know tnat evidence
   was given.

Q.   And the observation was that at that time whereas in 19oo
     there had been some 20,000 people already arrived,^ in
     1989 the numbers were only 12,000.  You remember that?
     - A. That is what he said, yes.

Q. And that the shortfall of some    ....

           MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry to interrupt.   I have not
     actually followed all this so I may be very rudely
     interrupting, but is what is being put to this witness
     something which was said -bv somebody else based on tneir
     knowledge and.tnis other person is not, I don't
     know whether he is going to be a witness ....

           THE CORONER:   We are not calling Inspector Darling.

           MR. PAYNE:   So what is being put to this witness is
     what somebody else said based on that other person's^
     personal knowledge, and the witness is being asked if
     that other person said it to him.

           MR. KING:  Well to be fair, this witness sir was
     in the Control Room the whole time.

           Mil. PAYNE; As I understand it the purpose of it
     is to elicit is as being' true.

           MR. KING:  No, I want to investigate with this
     witness the matter.  It is no different sir, if I may say
     so, from my learned friend Mr. Isaacs putting 'co a witness,
     Ithink it was Sergeant Higgins, -which I did not object
     to, as to what a number of Officers in his Serial had said.

            MR, ISAACS:  With respect sir I did not do that.
      I asked whether he would be surprised i “ tnat had been
      the case.
                                                    92


                                       D.-J. LOCK



      I share my learned friend Mr. Payne's objection
to this evidence, albeit that it does not directly
affect me, purely as a natter of principle that what
we are having here is matters being put_to this witness
as to what somebody may have said, who is not being
called before  you sir, on a different occasion and
being asked now whether he agrees with that or not.

      It may be, I know not, that Mr. Lock when these
matters were put to him before Lord Justice Taylor
agreed or disagreed, I know not, but surely the proper
way oc dealing with this is to put those matters, not
that they come from Inspector Darling or were first
said by Mr. Darling, that does not matter, but to ask
this witness what he says about these matters now.

      THE CORONER:   I think you are right.

      MR. KING:   Sir, with respect ....

      THE CORONER:  And the other point I think, Mr. King,
is I find it difficult to see what the relevance is
apart from saying at 2 o'clock somebody had noted that
there were fewer people in the ground in 1989 as compared
with 1938.

      MR. KING:  Sir, it does go further than that and
I would investigate it with the witness, if you “"Want me
to sir, as to the significance of it.

      THE CORONER:    Well what I would like you    to dois
to put to   the witness whether in fact he heard   that
conversation himself rather than whether he knows it
was recorded in Lord Justice Taylor.

      MR. Ka£G:   I agree.   I accept that.

      MR- CATCHPOLE:   Perhaps  the most effective way
of putting it would be to ask Mr. Lock whether      he has
any recoLfection personally of the numbers at whatever
time, 2 o'clock, 2.30, 2.40, looking at the computer
and then it is his evidence as opposed to someone
else's evidence.

      MR. KING:  Sir, T am sorry.  To be fair 'to my
learned friends and sir I don't pre-empt anything,
I ought to address you on it to be fair because other­
wise I don't want to commit any sin I should not commit.

      THE CORONER:   Yes.

      MR. PAYNE:   I don't mind what Mr. King says in
front of the jury.   I certainly don't ask the jury to
go out.  He can say whatever he wants.   This is an
obvious attempt to introduce hearsay evidence, that is
what I am objecting to.
                                                        93



                                          D •tT* LOCK


        THE CORONER:   It is hearsay,   I know that.

        Mr. King, say it briefly and then I will decide
  whether I need to send the jury out.

        MR. KING:  Sir, I don't want to mention figures
  at the moment in the light of what you have indicated,
  sir, because it would be going against the spirit^ of
  what you have presently indicated, but I would like to
  argue the point with you and that requires my referring
  to the figures sir and that is why it would not be proper
  if the jury heard me.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. King, would it be possible for
  you to laove to another topic because I want to let the
  jury go in ten minutes and then we can discuss it for
  a few minutes after the jury have gone?

        MR. KING:   Of course.

        THE CORONER:   That, I think, is fair.

        MR. KING:   Yes.

Q. The matter which I can move on to, you told us from
   your experience of the view which one has from the
   Police Control Box over the terraces? - A. Yes sir.

Q. The impression I got was your experience was tna€" it
   was a good vantage point for assessing the state ot
   the terraces.   Is that right? Could you give us a little
   more detail of that, put a bit of flesh on that as to
   the sort of view you get? - A. Well first of all the
   Box stands between the end of the South Stand at its
   West End and the West Stand there is a gap through
   which the fans come from the back of the Leppings Lane
   area and on to the terrace, the first terrace.    It is
   elevated.   It.must be some 25' standing in tne axr.
   It is constructed of wood.    It has a perspex scraen
   which goes from the left, completely wraps around the
   front to the right, so that you can see to the left,
   in   front of you and to your right.  Looking to your
   right the Box as well is turned at an angle so that
   it faces looking directly across towards the middle
   of the North Stand.

Q. Right? - A. In that   room, in that Box, there is a table
   if   I take it like this desk and there are three positions
   On   the right-hand side there is the telephone operator
   and he takes his messages.    In the centre there is a
   radio, both those use the radio, and on the left-hand
   side was the seat in which I used to sit.     In actual
   fact although it is   an angle this seat ran directly
   along the fence.   You could see straight along the fence.
                                     D.J. LOCK



Part of the first pen was below the Bos so if you wanted
to look immediately at your feet you had to lift yourself
up, I will demonstrate, and look like t h a t . You could
see then the remainder of the terracing, but m particular
you had a good view of the first pen and the centre pen.

You told us that you did not know who it was who had
given the instruction, if anybody had, witn regards
the 1988 closing off of the centre pens? - A. I did not
know because I was not aware until afterwards.

You said:  "I assumed that Mr. Mole for example i^new it
and gave the order"? — A. I would have tnought tnat one
Senior Officer in the Box would have done tnat:, yes sir.

Because somebody in the Box has a good vantage point for
making that assessment and judgment about tne centre pens?
- A. Quite.

And somebody in that Box is in a good vantage point for
assessing the disparity between the centre pens and the
wing pens? - A. Yes.

I apologise if these next points are rather disparage
but they in the last few moments collect together a few
po i n t s .

      The Stewards who were given their brieiings at tne
commencement of a new season? - A. Yes.

Were the Stewards made up of new employees and old
employees, if I can put it that way? - A. Yes.

What was the turnover of Stewards, would you say? - A.
It is very difficult to say that.  At different times,
you could lose 20 in a season, but no more than tnat.

Are you satisfied as regards the new Stewards, tnat tne
new Stewards would be given what would have to oe brand
new training instruction as opposed to merely rehearsing
what had been going on before? - A. They would all ae
given the same standard of instruction, that was a complete
review of the situation and they were all given the booklets




                        Q. Another point
                                                D. J. LOCK


Another point, something totally different.   You gave an
observation as to your initial feeling that when you saw
people coming over the front of the pens that you thought
it was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

You would agree with me that a pitch invasion is, if I
can put it this way, a law and order situation? - A . It
certainly is.

A pitch invasion is one where people come over the top
and run on to the playing area? - A. Yes.

The aim of a pitch invasion, more often than not, is for
whatever reason to stop play if play is going on? - A.
That's true.

It is right, isn't it, you didn't observe anybody
climbing over the fences and running on to the playing
areas as if to stop play? - A. Well, I didn't know what
they were doing.

It would be fair that the training of Police Officers,
and you were trained as a Police Officer, it would be
drummed into them that they should prevent people
clambering out of the pens on to the pitch? - A. I think
that is fair comment.

That the mind of the training would be directed to that
law and order perspective? - A. Yes.

As opposed to a safety perspective? - A. I can't say.      I
wasn t on that terrace and at that fence, so I don't
really know what was in their minds.

     MR. KING:   Sir, those are only little points.    The
topic which, whatever your ruling, I would want to
investigate, is a matter I had better deal with before
you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   I think it would be        f
inappropriate for me to ask the jury to go out and conie
back in today, so we will stop and we will discuss the;
point you have, Mr. King, and I will decide and tomorrow
morning we will carry on at ten o'clock.

     You too, Mr. Lock, back at ten o'clock tomorrow.
As I explained to you, technically you are still sitting.
All right?

     THE WITNESS:   Yes, sir.

        (The witness and the jury left court)
                                                           96




       MR. PAYNE;   It just occurs to me that if I identify
  the objection it may then become clear whether we are at
  cross-purposes or not.

       The'-reason I rose is simply this:  that as I
  understand it this witness was not being asked about
  something which he knew himself, but what was being done
  was that it was being put to him that he was told
  something by another witness and he was being asked
  whether in fact he was told that;   the idea being that in
  that way - and this is my gloss on it - the object of the
  exercise as I understand it being to get these facts
  before the jury.

       Now my objection is that all that is being done
  really is to recite the evidence which could be given,
  apparently, by Mr. Darling if he were to give evidence.
  It is being done by bouncing it off Mr. Lock who can then
  say, "Yes, that is what Mr. Darling did say.'^  If that
  is truly what is happening then my objection is that it
  is obviously hearsay and there ought to be another way of
' doing it.

       MR. KING:   Can I just explain in two parts, sir?
  First of all the relevance of the evidence and the manner
  by which it is to be elicited.

       Sir, the relevance of it is to investigate tfhat
  observations were made in the very room where this
  witness was for a lot of the time, so I am asking the
  witness who would be there and would have knowledge as to
  the numbers who had arrived by whatever time I put to him
  in 1989 compared with 1988. ?    )

       Sir, as you know, and I can say it now because there
  is no jury here, the evidence before Lord Justice Taylor
  from Mr. Darling was that he entered the room where^
  Mr. Lock would have been present for a lot of the time.
  Observations were passed to him by those of the club who
  were monitoring the figures.   The observation that was
  being passed, therefore, from the club control room to a
  Police Officer, was that at that particular time whereas
  in 1988 some 20,000 spectators had arrived, in 1989 at
  exactly the same time only 12,000 had arrived and that
  there was a shortfall of 8,000, which is a large
  shortfall.   Also that that shortfall was, from the view
  of the numbers and the ground, at the Liverpool end of
  the ground.

       You will know, sir, that that was highlighted by
  Lord Justice Taylor himself, sir.   As the jury is not
  here I can identify it to you at paragraph 59 of the
  Taylor Report.
                                                        97




     Sir, the significance is this, that one of the
matters I want to investigate with this witness is first
of all whether or not that was an observation which had
in his presence been observed by those in the club room*
Secondly, the significance of it is that by use of such
observations one can make an assessment as to the rate of
flow of fans arriving at a ground and one can make an
assessment of how many more are still to come in the
available time which is left and one can make an
assessment as to whether or not something unusual is
happening as regards the rate of flow of arrival.

      Certainly, sir, that is quite an important piece of
evidence as it goes to show that at about two o ’clock or
just before, if it be right through the witness, the club
had realised from the numbers and had passed it on to
Police Officer if what Mr. Darling says is right,' that in
fact there was a marked shortfall in the numbers which
had been expected of the Liverpool fans at about that
time.    One knows the numbers of Liverpool fans who
were...

     MR. PAYNE:   Mr. King is making a long speech on
fact to you.  I haven't interrupted because he is...

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't object.   Mr. King is
trying to explain to me why he wants to ask this
particular series of questions.                  \

     MR. PAYNE:   I am not disputing that the evidence of
fact which he is now going into in great detail, that may
well be material.   All I am saying is that it ought to
be given by a witness who actually knows about it.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING: With respect, sir, you asked me the
relevance and I was trying to explain.   Can I very
briefly deal with the manner of the evidence?   I would
much prefer that you would call Mr. Darling.   I didn't
know because I haven't got a full list behind me, that
you weren't calling Mr. Darling, sir.   I have to say it
comes as a surprise to me, given the nature of that
evidence, that you are not, sir.   It is important that I
put it to this witness because this is the man who
apparently was the chief man in the control room.   He is
one of the senior club officers in the club room where
this observation was apparently made.

     MR. ISAACS:   Can I just say this, sir?   It m a y b e
that if Mr. Darling came to give the evidence it would be
of some relevance, but surely, so that the jury is not
confused by what would clearly be inadmissible hearsay in
any other court, and the fact the question is asked in
this way doesn't make it any less inadmissible hearsay,
is to ask this witness whether anything was said to him,
without actually saying what it was that was said, about
the number that had come into the ground at any
particular time.

     If the answer to that is no, then that is an end to
the matter.   If the answer is yes, then it can be
investigated further - who said it, what was said, did
what was said accord with what he saw on the screens
himself, but not as my learned friend was doing, with the
greatest respect to him, to give chapter and verse of
what somebody else said on a separate occasion.    Whether.
Lord Justice Taylor accepted his evidence matters not a
jot, with respect to the good Lord Justice - not a jot!

     MR. KING:   There is a slight flaw in that
reasoning.   If hearsay evidence was inadmissible before
you, everything my learned friend says is right.   I
accept that.   However, sir, as is too apparent already,
hearsay evidence can be accepted before you, but my aim
on that wasn't to introduce by the back door some hearsay
evidence which wasn't going to be investigated further.
I say quite openly I assumed that Mr. Darling would be
giving evidence, but this was my opportunity to put to
this witness about Mr. Darling and that observation and
whether this witness knew about it.

     Sir, there can't be an absolute objectionon the^
hearsay point.   It is very little difference in quality
to the example I gave already about my learned friend
quite clearly putting, and letting the jury know, that
there were statements made by a number of Officers in a
Serial who contradicted Sergeant Higgins.   He may have
put it in the terms of, "Would it surprise you if...",
but in fact the message there was just as clear.   Sir, I
didn't object because the rules of evidence aren't as
strict.   However, I would much prefer Mr. Darling to be
called, certainly.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, as I understand it, my learned
friend Mr. Kin-; is about to embark on an exercise whereby
he is putting and exploring the significance of a fact
established by-Inspector Darling on some other occasion.
What I would urge you to do is let Mr. King establish^
whether Mr. Lock recalls a conversation with Mr. Darling,
whether he recalls any discussion about the disparity and
also we know,land he can be reminded if necessary, that
Mr. Lock does have a recollection of precise figures at
particular times.    If my learned friend - as I hear him
whispering in my ear - would have gone on to that, then
exploring the significance of a conversation which
purportedly took place at two o'clock when there were
supposedly only 12,000 fans in, whereas we know that
Mr. Lock in evidence on a previous occasion said 24,000
were in at two o'clock, the thing becomes irrelevant and
rather hazy, and if necessary call Mr. Darling.

     What this witness should establish is what he knew
and what he remembers, if anything, of any conversation
that my learned friend wants to explore.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, you are quite right when
you say that hearsay evidence is not ipso facto excluded
in the Coroner's Court.    I think there is plenty of
authority for that and I wouldn't for a moment say that
that is wrong.    Indeed, we have had hearsay evidence.
I am not sure whether the example you have picked is the
one which I have chosen, but we have had hearsay
evidence.   Simply because something is hearsay I don't
necessarily consider to be fatal.

      On the other hand, I think what you were actually^
putting to Mr. Lock was not just hearsay, you were asking
him whether or not he knew or recollected evidence which
was given by Inspector Darling to another Tribunal, which
he may or may not have heard.    We didn't even establish
that.

     I think whilst the rules of evidence in a Coroner's
Court are pretty flexible and I have certainly^
interpreted them in a pret ty -liberal way, I think:, that
that was, and is, going too far.     I think it would be
perfectly proper in the manner, perhaps, that
Mr. Catchpole has, for instance, instanced, for you to
ask whether he recollects Mr. Darling coming into the
Control Room.   If he doesn't then that is the end of the
matter.

     I would also not object if you were to put to him
whether he would accept that at two o'clock, or whatever
time it was, the computer merely showed 12,000 or
whatever the figure is that you have in mind.   He might
say yes or no to that depending upon what it is, but, of
course, he may come back and say that no, he doesn't
accept it.   Who knows what he is going to say?
Therefore I don't object to that.

     Now with regard to exploring its significance, I
think the very most you could do with that is to explore
how he would have interpreted it if this information had
been conveyed to him in the Control Room.   I don't think
you can explore the question of how anybody else might
have interpreted that information.

     I hope that is clear.
       MR. KING:   I would gladly abide by that ruling,
• that is to say, I will simply ask the simple question
  "Do you remember Mr. Darling coming in?"   If he says
  I will forget that.

      THE CORONER:   If he 7ays he does remember then,
 course, you can ask him what he remembers being said.




          MR. KING:   Sir, I will simply put to him
     MR. KING:   Sir, I will simply put to him the
numbers at around that time, but could I also ask you
to consider, and I would ask you not to give a ruling
now because I would ask you to reflect on it, the
wisdom of a decision which you may have made without
realising why I wished the witness to be there - I had
not realised he was not on the list - to consider
perhaps again whether or not you want to call Mr.
Darling.

     THE CORONER:   I will reconsider that but you will
appreciate it is very, very easy to have a total rerun
of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.  We have got almost
to that but not quite yet, and I have tried as best as
I can to draw the line somewhere.  I will certainly
reconsider that point and I will re-read the statement
and-see what I make of it.  I won't make a ruling on
that at the moment, particularly as you have asked me
not to.

     MR. TOULSON:   Sir, before you rise I wonder if I
might be permitted to make an enquiry about the
timetable?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed you may.  If all had gone
according to plan, which of course it never does in
this Court, we would have been halfway through Dr.
Nicholson by this afternoon.  The position is that as
soon as we have finished with Mr. Lock we will start on
Dr. Nicholson, and as soon as we have concluded his
evidence we are starting on Dr. Eastwood.

     MR. TOULS.ON:   That is very helpful.

     THE CORONER:    It is impossible for me to give you
an estimate.

     MR. TOULSON:    Of course not, and I appreciate
that my friends my not know quite how long they are
going to be.   It may be we can get some indications
after you have risen.   Sir, I appreciate entirely the
reasons why things run behind.   If there were any risk
that Dr. Eastwood was not going to finish this week it
would cause some very substantial difficulties for ■
some, and I hope we are not going to be anywhere in
danger of that.   Should we find ourselves in the
position that there was any risk of that I wonder if it
might be possible for us to sit a little later in the
afternoon?   Perhaps we could consider the position
overnight and see how long people think they are going
to be.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  We have sat a bit later from
time to time.  It is not the most popular activity in
                                                           **


                                                     102




which I indulge, but if need be we would.  I have
actually gone beyond half-past-4 once and was very
severely reminded that it was a bit too much. Be that
as it may, we do go on to 4.30 occasionally and I will
certainly bear that in mind.

     Mr. Toulson, you weren't here so I am going to
repeat it maybe for your benefit, but it is really for
the benefit of everybody else as well.   When we get to
Dr. Nicholson and Dr. Eastwood we are in terrible
danger.  What has been going on at the moment is
child's play to what we could be doing with regard to
time and questioning with those two gentlemen, because
the topic and subject matter that they discuss is
interesting, but it is also very complex and very
technical.   That would mean not only that everything
would have to be said but would have to be explained,
if we were going into the mathematics and what have you
of various factors.   I am as determined as I am able to
be to try and keep the evidence that they are going to
give simple.   I am interested in the principles which
are at stake and not the detail, partly in the
interests of time, mainly because    it is no use
burdening the Jury, who are already carrying a pretty
heavy burden, with a lot of stuff - there may be
engineers among them for all I know - which may well be
beyond their capacity and which will not advance, and
this is the crucial point, the objectives of the
Inquest.

      I say this now and I have said it, I think, three
 times already, because I don't like interrupting the,
^Bar.  I feel it is necessary that the Bar should hav,4
 its opportunity to ask its questions but on the other
 hand I do expect you in this particular- instance to
 exercise the utmost restraint in the formulation of the
 issues which you want to discuss.     This is not a
 criticism of you, I am just using the opportunity
 because you are here, for me to repeat what I have
 already said on previous occasions.

     MR. TOULSON:   Since I have not yet asked one
question I feel that at the moment I am able to wear a
white sheet!  I am most grateful, sir, because when you
make your comment about trying to avoid a rerun of
Taylor, I have in mind that in relation to technical
evidence, Dr. Eastwood was, I think, 2 \ days in the
witness box, and that was dealing with technical issues
when the Lord Justice had the benefit of sitting with
Prof. Maunder as an engineering assessor, an advantage
the Jury won't have, and if one was therefore going to
be going over all those matters with a technical
explanation, I imagine one could translate 2 \ days
comfortably into 2% weeks.  I am most grateful for your
indication and will take steps to keep any questions
which I may ask of Dr. Nicholson as succinct as
possible, bearing in mind those observations, and will
not go into technical detail.

     THE CORONER:   I have got a pretty clear idea of
what we need to find out - I think I have a pretty
clear idea - and I am pretty sure everybody else has as
well, with regard to those two people.

     Whilst we are here can I just say something else,
about Mr. Phillips?  I have thought about Mr. Phillips
at length and whilst there are arguments both for and
against, and the arguments range not only for and
against as far as one party is concerned, they also are
for and against in respect of other parties, because as
Mr. King very rightly said when we were discussing
this, putting a witness up gives him an opportunity to
cross-examine, but I think that having considered - and
that was the reason why I had gone off Mr. Phillips, if
you like, in the first instance - having considered the
evidence which we have already heard, even if we hear
nothing more, but there will be a little bit more
certainly, and taking that into account, in other words
knowing the people we are going to call, I think that
the value that the Jury are going to get from hearing
Mr. Phillips is not going to be sufficiently   ..
significant, in my view, and may not, in fact, even be
helpful, I don't know.   I don't think it is-going to
be sufficiently significant for me to call him, so in
the circumstances I have decided against calling Mr.
Phillips.

     I know that there was another expert I had been
toying with, Mr. Stalker, another Police Officer, and I
have decided against him as well.

     One expect I do intend to call who has got nothing
to do either with Mr. Phillips of with Mr. Stalker, is
the statistician - his name is Dr. Nicholls.  Perhaps I
ought to say this as well while I am on the
statistician, I have not handed to him the document
which you allowed me to see, because as you know I have
done a bit of preparatory work myself on the issue, and
in a sense the parameters which I had used are slightly
different, the timings, and I decided that it was
sufficient if he worked on the figures which I have
given him.

     That is not to say that when he comes you will not
have an opportunity to ask him if, in the light of his
evidence, you feel it is necessary to explore the
split, if I can use that term, in the way in which you
have presented it.
                                                       104




     MR. PAYNE:   Do you invite me to make a comment,
sir?  I would be grateful for the opportunity to do so
about that.

     THE CORONER:     Yes,, by'all means.

     MR. PAYNE:   What I am slightly concerned about is
the idea of having to work through what is a very
substantial exercise, in order to arrive at that
deceptively short summary which I have handed to you
for consideration by the expert.

     The only thing I am concerned about is whether it
is factually correct, and my learned friends have had a
chance to have a look at it and if it is not factually
correct then it is something that we ought to get right
out of Court, between ourselves, because it is
something which is capable of being determined
factually.  That is the reason that I have put it in,
so that the statistician may have a chance to look at
it, to determine its factual accuracy before he gives
evidence.  If he is taken completely cold, and I know
that you have got this point in mind, in evidence, and
we have to work through all the background material
which is very substantial, in order to arrive at those
short points in evidence, it will be quite an unfair
burden on the Jury to have to follow it all.

     THE CORONER:   The thing is, Mr. Payne, the split
that you have used is 14.40, pre 14.40 and post 14.40.

     M R . PAYNE:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   It is based upon the tabulations
which presumably are based upon the transcripts?

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes, the evidence which has already
been given.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  It may help"you in your
thinking that the split, if you like, which I have used
and which I have given - and I will teill you now so
that everybody can hear it because thilt is the basis
upon which the work has been done - has been that I
have split the deceased, in fact I think it is into
five groups, and I will tell you what; they are.   There
is the pre 2.30 group, if you like; 2.30 to 2.47,
turnstile entry, proved; 2.,48 onward, turnstile entry,
proved, as far as one can from the transcripts; gate C
entries - how many groups is that? About four.

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes.
                                                     105




     THE CORONER:   A further group which in my
judgment to the best of my ability are people who^
entered either through gate C or through a turnstile,
we don't know which, but where the evidence clearly
points that they entered after 2.30 and may well have
entered later than that; then a final group of what I
have called unknowns where I might want to guess, but
where the evidence is, in my view, too weak to be able
to say were they early or late, earlier or later, pre
2.30, gate C or what have you.

     So the split which I have done is, in fact, much
more comprehensive than the one that you put up, it is
just that it happens that I chose 2.30 instead of 2.40
as the marker, if you like.

     Of course, I have done it based upon the
transcripts, particularly from the interim Inquests,
not on statements which I have got on the files but on
what evidence has actually been put before the Jury,
because I thought that was the best and fairest way of
doing it.  I think on that basis the statistician has
got plenty of meat, if you like, to bite on.  I think
you may feel that is, in fact, adequate for the
purposes of this Jury.  It is true that the split is
slightly different but I don't think that it is going
to be too difficult for him to deal with the matter. I
am telling you this now because it may assist you in
understanding what he is working on, if I can put it
like that.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   The only thing is I would be quite
prepared, if it were of any assistance to anybody, to
let you have - and if I let you have, I would obviously
have to let everybody else have - a copy of the roll
date schedule - if you like, my splits - so that
people, if they wish, could go through them and see
whether they agree with me.  This is not because I
think that you are right, but simply for the same
reason that you have raised, that I would like to think
that the data was as accurate as you can make it in the
light of the evidence which we have got, but I would
only want to do that if that was a popular idea. . It is
a big job checking it, I warn you.  It is not the
world's easiest activity.




              MR. PAYNE:   I was wondering
     MR- PAYNE:  I was wondering whether I dared be
impertinent enough to ask you to be kind enough, to
ask you to do that, sir?

       THE CORONER:   Yes, of course.

     MR. PAYNE: We would certainly welcome that
offer, sir.  Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER: Would you want to see it, Mr.
King, as a matter of interest?

       MR. KING:   Certainly it would be of assistance,
sir.

     THE CORONER:     I will try and get something
photocopied.

       MR. KING:   Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER: We will do it as soon as we can.
I should tell you that it contains a lot of other
information as well which I have put on there for my
own use.   I might leave it because it does not really
matter if you see it. There is nothing controversial
about it.   I hope that helps.  Thank you very much
indeed.   It is half past four now and I am sorry
about that.   It will be ten o'clock tomorrow.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until ten o'clock
                   the following morning)
