                                               Sheffield Archives Ref:            l ^/ l j b lO S f    M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                           Date and tim e raised                                 Number



T itle

(Include source and any oocument number it relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o              (3 L          t jtr SU         ffn i                 \V hsJULs
                                                                                                                                  Receiver
-----------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                              1     W
                                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised_______

                                                                                                                             Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions                          s2js__

                                                                                                                                 S '< 4 ^
                                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                            f \)l
No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                                  S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                               Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
Tele:
                                                           MERSEYSIDE

The Secretary,                                         V   28th April, 1989.
Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry.

Dear Sir/Madam,

              I wish to put on record my account of the happenings at
Hillsborough on 15th April 0

              Accompanied by three younger friends I made my way to the
ground arriving at the entrance about 2.25pm. This is earlier than I
would normally arrive when I have a ticket for the stands. At Anfield,
where I have a ticket for the Kemlyn Road stand,I do not arrive until
sen minutes before kick-off and I have never missed the start of a
match. At^Hillsborough it was very different. There were few turnstiles
and the limited space for access to them was shared by those queuing for
the Leppings Lane Terrace.

              The lack of supervis.ion at the turnstiles was obvious.
There was a mounted policeman who was well away from the turnstiles and
completely ineffective. There was^no filtering system or examination of
tickets prior to entering the turnstile areaTTiie task of the few police
by the turnstiles was hopeless.but, on my way to the ground, I had
noticed at least two policemen guarding the entrance to each side street
off Leppings Lane. Why they were there is a mystery because people were
more interested in getting to the match than wandering the streets. This
waste of manpower meant a shortage at the critical areas.

               The atmosphere outside the ground was no different from
that of other 'big1 games. The crowd was full of excitement, noisy
anticipation, singing and occasional banter. There was no evidence of
hooliganism or. drunkeness.

              On the inside of the turnstiles there were policemen
'frisking' and looking through handbags. There was no one directing
spectators to various sections of the stands or terraces but in the
North Stand there were a number of stewards directing people to their
seats.

                 Shortly before the match started I remember remarking that
the rigi.it—hand* wing section of the Leppings Lane Terrace was very sparsely
populated while the rest of the terrace was overcrowded. This interested
my party because we had been on Leppings Lane Terrace last year and it
was so crowded that people were being hauled up to the stand above.

              On the 15th, when incidents began to happen, I was too
far away to see clearly. At first   I thought itwas a case of hooliganism
especially when I saw a supporter, arm twistedup his back by a policeman,
being escorted to the side of the   pitch. Therewas an absence of inform­
ation on the PA system. The first   announcementwas by Mr Dalglish about
'one or two problems'- we could observe, only too clearly, the understate­
ment of that message. There were other calls to 'clear the pitch' from time
to time. I heard no call for doctors, nurses, first-aiders or any other
kind of assistance. One person in my party could have given assistance had
she known what was wanted.

              The police operation after the incident happened was
extremely well disciplined. They marched in very orderly and took up
their positions across the pitch at the Spion Kop end and then slowly
marched up to the half-way line where they stayed. Another line of
constables marched in to take up their position facing the North Stand
and to complete the operation about six constables came on with dogs.
                   ] i.pRd pi an_ma__obviously ge.axejL.~iQ hooliganism and pitch
This ve.ry .disci p.
invasion for the purpose of hooliganism of which I saw no evidence. The
ofre^ation 'was— eompletely irrelevant to wh^T^was 'happening~orT"tEe Leppings
Lane Terrace. At no time did I see the police break ranks in order to
assist in helping injured and dying people. One policeman did try to
prevent the tearing down of an advertising board for use as a stretcher.
This led to an altercation with people in the North Stand.

               I left the ground at about 4.30pm. Everybody was subdued
with bewilderment and anxious for the safety of friends and relatives
which many, including myself, had on the Leppings Lane Terrace. It has
occurred to me since that it would have been better for us to have had
ati alternative exit so that we did not interfere with the operations of
the emergency services.

               I hope I have succeeded in giving you,a dispassionate
acc'"int of happenings at Hillsborough. I can assure you that I feel-far
frc dispassionate about what happened and I am angry that I will have
to live with a feeling of guilt that I could have done more, had I known
what was required, for my fellow beings in distress.


               Yours sincerely,




                            (Age 64 . Retired


         Additional Information.

   ^ ^       My route to the ground was not the one suggested by the
police. I went via M62, M 6 to Knutsford, A 537 to Macclesfield, A 537/A 54
to Buxton, A6/B6049/A6013/A57/A6101 to Hillsborough. I left home at 11.15am
and arrived in Hillsborough at 1.30pm.

   (2)
             Shortly before the game started a number of people took
their seats near to us. They said what a struggle they had getting into
the ground, that a gate had been opened and they showed us their complete
tickets.
