MARK ADRIAN HONE                                                                 QOR 200

Police Constable 2041

Ecclesfield PS (D Group)




Semi Final Hillsborough 15.4.89




At 9.00 a.m. on Saturday 15th April 1989 I paraded for duty at Ecclesfield Police

Station along with other officers and was transported from there to the

Hillsborough Football Ground arriving there at 9-30 a.m. that day.       Then together

with several hundred other officers I sat in the North Stand at the ground for a

briefing at 10.00 a.m. that day.

At approximately 10.45 a.m. that day I resumed patrol in a transit van (Tango

three) in the Stocksbridge     area of Sheffield together with PS 1347   Hunt,   PC 3098

Warrilow, PC 1363 Smyk, PC 1639 Mackintosh and PC 3168 Trigg.       The area we were

patrolling was very quiet and at about 2.45 p.m. that day messages started to be

passed via the personal radio as to a large number of Liverpool fans trying to

get into the ground at the Leppings Lane turnstiles. Repeated requests were made

to have the gates in that area opened to avoid what the officer making this

request called     'a disaster.'   It was shortly after this after the requests were

becoming more and more urgent.       We started to travel from where we were,    it being

so quiet, to the ground to see if we could be of any assistance.

All the time that we were travelling to the ground the requests were becoming

more and more urgent to open the gate and as we arrived at the outside of the

Leppings Lane turnstile I saw that there were several thousands of fans in that

area and there was a lot of fans actually climbing over the wall of the

turnstiles as opposed to going through them.       It was obvious at that time that

the officers on the turnstiles were totally swamped by the crowd although they

could be seen maintaining their positions next to the turnstile entrances.
                                                                                   PAGE 2
     ADRIAN MARK HONE                                                   Q°R 2 °0

______For about five minutes after this we stayed in our transit van and could see______

     Superintendent Marshall who was standing on the end of a wall in Leppings Lane in

     order to obtain a view of what was happening.    On leaving our van we then made a

     cordon across the entrance to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane in order to stop

     any other fans with or without tickets to join in these scenes of chaos.      The

     officers in this cordon were met with abuse as they had to forcibly turn fans

     away from the ground who were making repeated attempts to force a way past to

     join the vast crowd already at the turnstiles and at one stage a police horse had

      to be deployed to assist this cordon.

     Some five minutes later the time now being about 3*15 pro it was obvious to me

      that something was seriously wrong and at that time two ambulances attended in

      that area and I was aware then that the main gates at the turnstiles had been

      opened.   I, together with other officers from my unit was sent to see if I could

      assist inside the ground and on the way to the gates I saw that the ambulance

      crews of both ambulances were attempting to resuscitate a number of people who

      were lying on the ground near to the gates.    On going through these gates I made

      my way to the tunnel where it leads to the rear of the goal and saw that a large

      number of Liverpool fans were standing at the entrance and as I made my way past

      these fans I was shoved and one fan said "this is your fault you murdering

      bastards". At this time I saw two fans being carried out of the tunnel who were

      obviously dead and I then went down the tunnel and into the pen and as I did so I

      saw a wave of fans move slowly towards the rear of the pen and as I got about

      half way down into the pen I then saw a wall of what were obviously bodies some

      three to four feet high against the front grill.

      I immediately approached the pile of bodies and saw that there were about ten

      other officers in that area at that time including PS 468 Whitlam.    I also saw

      that a youth was buried waist high in the pile of bodies but was alive and

      therefore all my efforts were concentrated on getting this youth out of the pile
                                                                               PAGE 3
ADRIAN MARK HONE                                                               QOR 200

as it was obvious that most if not all of the others were dead by this time.

After assisting with the aid of some fans and other officers to remove bodies

from around    this youth, he was able to get out and was in fact uninjured.    I then

assisted in    removing all the bodies to the trackside via a gate and a part of the

fence that officers had started to rip down to get the injured, dying and dead on

to the trackside to receive any medical treatment possible.     Towards the bottom

of the pile    of bodies I saw a youth that was alive but barely and efforts were

made to get    him out as soon as possible and whilst this was happening

(approximately ten bodies needing moving to get to this man) other officers were

frantically trying in vain to get some oxygen for this man but when we finally

got to him it was again evident that this man was dead and although attempts were

made by other officers to revive him without oxygen this was impossible.       When

the dead were finally all cleared there was a pile of jumpers, glasses, money,

false teeth etc strewn about the terracing and the fans still remaining in the

pen were becoming more and more hostile towards the officers, of which I was one,

who were still in the pen.     When one fan started to look for a friends jumper the

fans surged forwards him accusing him of grave robbing and this man had to be

protected by the officers in the pen as did the scenes of crime man who attended

at the scene and was mistaken as a press photographer.     As the feeling inside the

pen calmed down I moved onto the pitch with other officers awaiting further

instruction.

I can't recall what time it was by this time or how long I was in the pen.        I

then waited on the pitch and found PS Hunt and the remainder of our unit before

resuming patrol outside the ground and although there were reports of fighting

via personal radio it was impossible to attend anywhere due to the large volume

of traffic and I did not actually witness any scenes of the fighting reported.

I later went off duty.
