            .............




.




    .....
Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1108                                          Our Ref:       D&C/AMH/EMR
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate                               Date:          9 October 1997
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




RE: APPROACH BY GRANADA TELEVISION TO HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST JURY MEMBER

On Monday 22 September 1997, both you and I received telephone calls from
Her Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire (West) Mr Christopher Dorries, regarding an approach
made to a               a member of the Hillsborough Inquest Jury by Katy Jones, a researcher
for Granada Television. As I understood Mr Dorries, the approach was to a s k | i f        she
would be prepared to express her views on the "new evidence" and he was concerned that
Granada Television may be in breach of legislation.

When we met on 24 September 1997 we briefly discussed the above and you suggested that the
Juries Act 1974 might be an appropriate place to start. I have therefore researched that
legislation, but to my mind no offence is revealed by the actions described in my first paragraph.

Of far more interest is the Contempt of Court Act 1981, although it would require a detailed
interview with                   to establish whether an offence has been committed under
Section 8 of the Act. This covers the Confidentiality of Jury Deliberations and states that it will be
contempt of court to obtain, solicit or disclose any particulars of statements made, opinions
expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast by members of a jury in the course of their
deliberations in any legal proceedings. The prohibition against disclosure of deliberations made
by members of a jury extends to further revelation of that information by publication, where the
facts published were not already known. However on the information provided to us it is not
possible to establish if an offence has been committed under Section 8.




                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Superintendent Hepworth
                                                   (0114) 296 3084
From this point I have gone on to look at what would be the result of Granada Television
publishing comment by former jurors from the Hillsborough Inquests on the "new evidence", if
there were to be further legal proceedings as a result of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny.
In addition would publication prior to such proceedings tend to interfere with the course of justice,
or create a substantial risk that the course of justice would be seriously impeded or
prejudiced and thus be liable to be treated as Contempt of Court, within S2(2) of the
Contempt of Court Act 1981.

I have used the Police National Legal Data Base for this research and rather than trying to
summarise my findings, I enclose copies of the print outs as follows:-


1    Contempt of Court Act 1981          Section 1        The Strict Liability Rule

2    Contempt of Court Act 1981          Section 2        Limitations of the Strict Liability Rule

3     Contempt of Court Act 1981        Schedule 1        When Proceedings are Active
                                                          regarding Section 2

4     Contempt of Court Act 1981        Section 19        Definitions




I have also looked at a number of cases in the All England Law Reports, including:


Attorney General     - V-    MGN Ltd & Others 1997

Attorney General     - V-    Sport Newspapers Ltd & Others 1992

Attorney General     - V-    Hislop & Another 1991

Attorney General     - V-    News Group Newspapers Ltd 1988

Attorney General     - V-    News Group Newspapers Ltd 1986

Attorney General     - V-    English & Another 1982




                                                     The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                     Superintendent Hepworth
                                                     (0114) 296 3084
It is clear that the Contempt of Court is not committed until publication and that
Granada Television in merely researching material for a programme and possible publication has
not committed an offence.        Speaking hypothetically, if Granada were to publish prior to
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's findings and proceedings for Contempt of Court were commenced, I
think there would be some interesting legal arguments as to whether proceedings were imminent
or pending; in the case of a public enquiry does it constitute legal proceedings, did publication
pose a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the administration of justice and whether
publication was specifically intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice.

I have discussed my findings with Her Majesty's Coroner, Mr Dorries and as far as the approach
to               by Katy Jones of Granada Television is concerned, he neither wishes myself, nor
South Yorkshire Police to take any further action. Mr Dorries did ask me to convey my findings to
you in writing and this I have attempted to do, in what I hope is a not too convoluted manner.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




                                                 The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                 Superintendent Hepworth
                                                 (0114) 296 3084
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                        REF:           D&C/AMH/EMR

FROM:    Superintendent Hepworth                        DCU/DEPT:      Discipline & Complaints

TO:      Superintendent Gillian Bradford                EXT:           3084
         Training Centre
         Ecclesfield                                    DATE:          6 October 1997




SUBJECT:       PC


In connection with my work on the Hillsborough Scrutiny I have had occasion to investigate
whether an approach to a member of the Hillsborough Inquest Jury by the media constituted a
criminal offence. Following my own attempts to research the Juries Act in rather out of date legal
books, here at Heeley and a request for advice from CPS, where the response can
politely be described as unhelpful, I c o n t a c t e d ^ t the Training Department on
Thursday 24 September 1997.


Twenty-four hours after my initial contact,        had produced for me a comprehensive, well
documented piece of research, not on the Juries Act, which did not reveal any offence, but on
Contempt of Court, the Confidentiality of Juries' Deliberations, the Strict Liability Rule, details of
when proceedings are Active and copies of the relevant case law. His research has been
invaluable to me in the discussions I have subsequently had with Her Majesty's Coroner and the
legal clerk to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


I t h a n k e d | D e r s o n a l l y , but I would like to place on record my appreciation of his work, his
ability to think wider than the brief I gave him and for the speed of his response.




A M Hepworth
Superintendent
                Mr C Bone
                Hillsborough Scrutiny
                Room 1108                                         Our Ref:      D&C/AMH/EMR
                Home Office
                50 Queen Anne's Gate                              Date:         8 October 1997
                LONDON
                SW1H 9AT




                RE: REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION FROM HILLSBOROUGH ARCHIVES

                During the visit of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Chris Gatherall and yourself to. the
                Hillsborough Archives at Heeley on Wednesday 24 September 1997, you made a number of
                requests to us for information, which you agreed to put in writing, To date we have not received
                these.

                 Of the two requests we have already responded to, one on 24 September 1997 was to supply
.... ^       ,, transcripts of the main and mini inquests and the other was the provision of copies of the plans of
                 the Leppings Lane terrace reference C275 and C276, which we forwarded on
                 30 September 1937.

                If my memory serves me correctly the other requests were:-      .                               .

   ,,,       / Report on continued research into amendment of officers'recollections;

                Research and report on the suggestion that officers w e re : coached to-.-give -evidet
         2      Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry;

         J      Research and report on the provision of videt3 tapes to Yorkshire Television;

         }      Examine the copy video tape provided by . yourself via- Trevor Hicks and, identify wte
                                                                                                    •       "-.■■■■                 -
         *"<"   various shots are from;                                                                     ■




                                                                                                                               • •• -■

                                                                                                                                ■       \
                                                                                                •           -   .         --                .

                                                                                                        :           ••.                 v




                                                                 The person dealing with this correspond®

                                                                 (0114) 296 3084
                                                             -   2   -




            Research  any breach of the           law   by       Granada     Television   in   the   approach   to   a
_ _ _ _ _ Hillsborough inquest Jury Member;

           Prepare a report on policy and procedure for the release of Hillsborough Documentation to
         ^ interested parties;

        ,*£) Report to Lord justice Stuart-Smith on a number of outcomes from the civil actions.

            Incidentally, neither Ken Greenway nor myself has sufficient knowledge, nor the information to
            supply the details which you are likely to request about the civil actions, particularly.as most of
            them were confidential. The outcomes are not within the knowledge of the force solicitor,
            Alan Walker either. I therefore have in mind to write to Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards
            Solicitors at Empire House, 10 Piccadilly, Bradford BD1 3LR, who acted for
            South Yorkshire Police and our Insurers in these hearings, asking him if he will respond to your
            request once we receive it, unless of course you wish to write to him directly, I will not action this
            further until I hear from you.

            Work is progressing on the other requests and I shall soon be in. a position to start responding.

            Finally, I believe there was a suggestion that Chris Catherall should revisit Heeley to examine the
            police officers’ statements and the amendments made to them. Can you inform me if this is to
            take place and a likely date, please.




             A M Hepworth
             Superintendent




                                                                     The person dealing with this correspondence
                                                                     Superintendent Hepworth . ’ .' Z:-
                                                                     (0114)296 3084
Title    CONFIDENTIALITY OF JURY'S DELIBERATIONS
        CONTEMPT; OF; COURT; ACT; 1981; DISCLOSE; SOLICIT; PARTICULARS;
        STATEMENTS; OPINION; ARGUMENTS; VOTES; JURY; LEGAL; PROCEEDINGS;

Section 8 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 states that it will be contempt of
court to obtain, solicit, or disclose, subject to certain exceptions, any
particulars of statements made, opinions expressed, arguments advanced or votes
cast by members of a jury in the course of their deliberations in any legal
proceedings. [*A]

It is a contempt of court to obtain, disclose or solicit any particulars of
statements made, opinions expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast by
members of a jury in the course of their deliberations in any legal
proceedings.

NOTE
The prohibition against the disclosure of deliberations made by members of a
jury in the course of legal proceedings is not limited to the disclosure of
information by a « < ju r o r ,» > but extends to a further revelation of that inforn
 by publication in a newspaper where the facts published were not already known.

EXCEPTIONS
This section does not apply to any disclosure of any particulars -

(a) in the proceedings in question for the purpose of enabling the jury to
arrive at their verdict, or in connection with the delivery of that verdict, or

(b) in evidence in any subsequent proceedings for an offence alleged to have
been committed in relation to the jury in the first mentioned proceedings,

or to the publication [*A] of any particulars so disclosed.

Proceedings for a contempt of court under this section (other than Scottish
proceedings) shall not be instituted except by or with the consent of the
Attorney General or on the motion of a court having jurisdiction to deal with
it.

The absolute nature of this ban makes it difficult to investigate allegations
of jury misconduct or attempted "nobbling". It might be advisable to seek
permission from the trial judge if allegations do arise. In R v Mickleburgh
(1994) The Times 26 July it was stated-

To take statements from « < ju r o r s » > which might have the effect of breaching sn
8 was to run the risk of contempt of court. All solicitors would be well
advised, before embarking on such an exercise, to seek leave of the Court of
Appeal. Any approach to a jury or any member or it to discuss the case or
express views about it might well amount to a contempt, or even an attempt to
pervert the course of justice.

However, actions by « < ju r o r s » > which are clearly beyond the terms of their dus
(such as playing with ouji boards to determine guilt) are not protected. R v
Young {1995] 2 W.L.R. 430.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen ™
AUER 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)




                          Attorney General v Associated Newspapers Ltd and others
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
BELDAM LJ AND TUDOR EVANS J
5,6, 12 NOVEMBER 1992


Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Disclosure by newspaper o f secrets o f jury room - Jurors giving opinions
regarding trial to third party - Third party revealing information to journalist - Journalist writing article in newspaper using information -
Whether journalist, publisher and editor guilty o f contempt - Whether prohibition against disclosure o f jury's deliberations confined to
disclosure by members ofjury - Contempt o f Court Act 1981, s 8(1).

The respondents, the publishers and editor of a national newspaper and a journalist employed on the paper, published an article in the paper on
5 July 1992 referring to statements, opinions and arguments made by some members of the jury as they discussed their verdicts in a
well-publicised fraud trial. The article gave the thoughts of some jurors on the evidence and the opinion of one member of the jury that another
juror showed a complete lack of understanding of the case and only wanted to drag it out and had only agreed with the verdict because he
wanted to get home. The article also related comments made by another juror about the defendants and how his reluctance to believe in their
guilt had been overcome, and it recounted how certain other jurors had been persuaded to change their minds in the course of the deliberations.
  The respondents had not obtained the information directly from the jurors concerned but from transcripts of interviews with the jurors
conducted supposedly for the purpose of bona fide research by persons who had placed an advertisement in another newspaper offering a
reward to jurors who had taken part in the trial if they contacted a box number. The Attorney General brought proceedings for contempt under
 s 8(1 )a of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 against the respondents for publishing the information. Under s 8(1) it was a contempt of court to
 ‘obtain, disclose or solicit’ particulars of statements, opinions, arguments or voting which took place in the jury room. The respondents
contended that the prohibition against disclosure of the deliberations of a jury was confined to disclosure by members of the jury and did not
 apply where the information had been obtained indirectly from another source as the respondents had done.

a    Section 8(1) is set out at p 539 d, post



Held - Disclosure of the deliberations of a jury, even though the deliberations were obtained indirectly, nevertheless amounted to a contempt
of court under s 8(1) of the 1981 Act, since the free, uninhibited and unfettered discussion by the jury in the course of their deliberations was
essential to the proper administration of a system of justice which included trial by jury and s 8(1) was aimed at keeping the secrets of the jury
room inviolate in the interests of justice. In particular, the term ‘disclose’ in s 8(1) was not confined solely to disclosure by members of a jury
but was wide enough to encompass the revealing of the secrets of the jury room by a juryman to his friend or neighbour as well as the
disclosure of such knowledge to the public as a whole by someone to whom it had been revealed. It followed that the Attorney General had
proved a breach of s 8( 1) by the respondents, for which each would be fined (see p 543 b c h to p 544 g, post).
                                                                   c 535&

Notes
For disclosing particulars of a jury’s deliberations, see 37 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) para 1023, and for a case on the subject, see 37(3) Digest
(Reissue) 372, 5155.
    For the Contempt of Court Act 1981, s 8, see 11 Halsbury’s Statutes (4th edn) (1991 reissue) 192.

Cases referred to in judgm ent
A-G v Hislop [1991] 1 All ER 911, [1991] 1 QB 514, [1991] 2 WLR 219, CA.
A-G v Leveller Magazine Ltd [1979] 1 All ER 745, [1979] AC 440, [1979] 2 WLR 247, HL.
A-G v New Statesman and Nation Publishing Co Ltd [1980] 1 All ER 644, [1981] QB 1, [1980] 2 WLR 246, DC.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1991] 2 All ER 398, [1992] 1 AC 191, [1991] 2 WLR 994, HL.
Brind v Secretary o f State fo r the Home Dept [1991] 1 All ER 720, [1991] 1 AC 696, [1991] 2 WLR 588, HL.
Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985, Re an inquiry under [1988] 1 All ER 203, [1988] AC 660, [1988] 2 WLR 33, HL.
DPP v Channel Four Television Co Ltd [1993] 2 All ER 519, DC.
R v Jameson (1896) 12 TLR 551, DC.
Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, E Ct HR.
X Ltd v Morgan-Grampian (Publishers) Ltd [1990] 2 All ER 1, [1991] 1 AC 1, [1990] 2 WLR 1000, HL.

Cases also cited or referred to in skeleton arguments
A-G's Reference (No 1 o f 1988) [1989] 2 All ER 1, [1989] AC 971, HL.
Autronic AG v Switzerland (1990) 12 EHRR 485, E Ct HR.
Derbyshire CC v Times Newspapers Ltd [1992] 3 All ER 65, [1992] QB 770, CA.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)
Attorney General v A ssociated Newspapers L td and others

Garland v British Rail Engineering Ltd Case 12/81 [1982] 2 All ER 402, [1983] 2 AC 751, CJEC and HL.
Lingens v Austria (1986) 8 EHRR 407, E Ct HR.
Litster v Forth Dry Dock and Engineering Co Ltd [1989] 1 All ER 1134, [1990] 1 AC 546, HL.
Lonrho pic, Re [1989] 2 All ER 1100, [1990] 2 AC 154, HL.
McMonagle v Westminster City Council [1990] 1 All ER 993, [1990] 2 AC 716, HL.
Open Door Counselling Ltd v Ireland (1992) Times, 5 November, E Ct HR.
Thorgeirson v Iceland (1992) 14 EHRR 843, E Ct HR.

Application
By a notice of motion dated 27 July 1992 the Attorney General applied under RSC Ord 52, pursuant to the leave of the Divisional Court of the
Queen’s Bench Division (Leggatt LJ and Popplewell J) given on 15 July 1992, for orders for contempt against Associated Newspapers Ltd,
publishers of the Mail on Sunday, Stewart Steven, the editor of the Mail on Sunday, and Clive Wolman, a journalist on the Mail on Sunday, in
respect of an article in the issue of the Mail on Sunday for 5 July 1992 entitled ‘Common people ... common sense COMMON JUSTICE’ in
that the conduct of the first and second respondents in publishing and of the third in writing the article was in breach of s 8 of the Contempt of
Court Act 1981 in that the article disclosed particulars of statements made, opinions expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast by members
of a jury in the course of their % 5360 deliberations in legal proceedings. The facts are set out in the judgment of the court.

Philip Havers (instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service) for the Attorney General.
David Pannick QC and Dinah Rose (instructed by Mishcon de Reya) for the respondents.

                                                                                                                                      Cur adv vult

12November 1992. The following judgment of the court was delivered.

BELDAM LJ. Early in July 1992 the third respondent, a journalist and editor of a City section, wrote a newspaper article in which he
attributed to jurors ini? v NatWest Investment Bank, known as the ‘Blue Arrow’ trial, ‘accounts by three jurors about how they actually reached
their decision’. The article was shown to the second respondent, the editor of the Mail on Sunday, who decided to publish it in the ‘Money
Analysis’ section of the issue on 5 July. The article revealed the statements, opinions and arguments of some members of the jury as they
discussed their verdicts. It gave the thoughts of some jurors on the evidence and the opinion of one member of the jury that another showed a
complete lack of understanding, only wanted to drag the case out and had agreed with the verdict only because he wanted to get home; it
related comments made by another juror about the defendants and how his reluctance to believe in their guilt had been overcome and it
recounted how certain other jurors had been persuaded to change their minds in the course of the deliberations.
      How the respondents were able to reveal to the readers of the Mail on Sunday these confidential details of the jury’s deliberations has not
been disclosed to the court. It is, however, known that about two weeks after the conclusion of the trial an advertisement appeared in the
London Evening Standard offering a reward to jurors who had taken part in the trial if they contacted a box number. A woman posing as an
American researcher in Massachusetts was said to be seeking data for a comparative study. Two members of the jury answered the
advertisement. Other members were contacted by telephone by a woman who avowed that she was preparing a paper for university studies.
After preliminary meetings, the initial scruples of two of the jurors were overcome and they were persuaded to answer questions about the
confidential proceedings in the jury room. One was paid £200 and the other £100. The third respondent denies any knowledge of the
advertisement in the Evening Standard. He asserts that he later learnt from the ‘researchers’ of the interviews which had taken place and that
he received from those researchers ‘transcripts of their interviews’.
      He then telephoned and spoke directly to one of the jurors of whose interview he had a transcript. Although the third respondent does not
 accept the sworn evidence of the juror that he refused his agreement to publish the information which he had supplied under the clearest
 assurance that it was for research only and not for publication, the third respondent must have realised that the information had been supplied
 in confidence. One would have expected in these circumstances, as the juror asserted had happened, that a responsible journalist would have
 sought the consent of the juror to disclose information he had given to the professed researcher, and without that consent would have respected
 his confidence. It seems a rather plastic ethic which protects the deceiving source yet asserts a licence to betray the confidence of the deceived.
      However that may be, the third respondent was aware that he was including in the article statements made, opinions expressed and
 arguments advanced by        5370 members of the jury in the course of their deliberations in the Blue Arrow trial. In the same edition of the
 Mail on Sunday, in a column drawing attention to the main feature in the ‘Money Section’, the third respondent wrote:

          ‘THREE jurors in one of the biggest City fraud trials this century have given the full inside story of how they reached their decision.
      No one has ever previously investigated, let alone published, in any detail how jurors make their decisions because of the restrictions
      imposed by law. The jurors served for a year in the Blue Arrow trial which ended in February. Of the ten defendants, four were
      ultimately found guilty of conspiracy to defraud. ’

In the main article he said:

        ‘But in Britain the Contempt of Court Act 1981 makes it illegal for jurors to “disclose” what goes on in a jury’s deliberations.
      However, having received transcripts of the Blue Arrow interviews, we believe these edited extracts should be published

     The Attorney General, hearing of the publication, initiated these proceedings alleging that the respondents as publisher, editor and author
respectively are responsible for a deliberate breach of the secrecy of the jury room and are guilty of contempt of court. Presenting the case for
the Attorney General, Mr Havers contended that the words of s 8(1) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 are unambiguous and their meaning
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)
Attorney General v Associated Newspapers L td and others

clear. He relied upon the references in the published article to the statements, opinions and arguments attributed to the jurors during their
deliberations and upon the unqualified words of the section that it was a contempt of court to obtain, disclose or solicit such particulars.
     For the respondents, Mr Pannick QC stressed that the sole ground on which the Attorney General sought to condemn the respondents was
that they had disclosed particulars of statements made, opinions expressed and arguments advanced by members of the jury. He accepted that,
if the word ‘disclose’ in s 8 of the 1981 Act was to be given the unrestricted interpretation contended for by the Attorney General, a contempt
of court was established. But he submitted that the scope of the section could be widely or narrowly interpreted and in its context in the
section ‘disclose’ applied only to conduct of a member of the jury in revealing particulars of its deliberations to a third party and not the further
disclosure by that third party of details already revealed.
     As s 8 created a criminal offence, the court was bound to adopt this restricted meaning which, he contended, would be consistent with the
United Kingdom’s obligation as a signatory to the European Convention on Human Rights (Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms (Rome, 4 November 1950; TS 71 (1953); Cmd 8969)). He further argued that as Parliament had enacted the 1981 Act
following the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245 and with the purpose of meeting
criticism of the undue width of the United Kingdom rules on contempt of court, this court should construe s 8 so that it was compatible with art
 10 of the convention. Such an approach would lead to the adoption of the narrow construction he urged upon us that the section restrained
disclosure of the secrets of the jury room only by the members of the jury.
      Mr Havers countered by referring to Brind v Secretary o f State fo r the Home Dept [1991] 1 All ER 720 esp at 722-723, [1991] 1 AC 696
esp at 747-748 per Lord Bridge of Harwich:

          ‘It is accepted, of course, by the appellants that, like any other treaty obligations which have not been embodied in the law by statute,
      the      5380 convention is not part of the domestic law, that the courts accordingly have no power to enforce convention rights directly
      and that, if domestic legislation conflicts with the convention, the courts must nevertheless enforce it. But it is already well settled that,
      in construing any provision in domestic legislation which is ambiguous in the sense that it is capable of a meaning which either conforms
      to or conflicts with the convention, the courts will presume that Parliament intended to legislate in conformity with the convention, not in
      conflict with it. ’

     Since the words of s 8 are clear, it is only if the respondents could point to a meaning of ‘disclose’ equally credible in the context that the
court could have regard to the terms of the convention. He further argued that his interpretation was neither incompatible with nor
unnecessarily restrictive of the purpose of the convention to secure freedom of expression. So in this case whether the respondents are guilty of
a breach of s 8( 1) of the 1981 Act depends on the construction to be given to the words of the section.
     Section 8(l)ofthe 1981 Act provides:

         ‘Subject to subsection (2) below, it is a contempt of court to obtain, disclose or solicit any particulars of statements made, opinions
      expressed, arguments advanced or votes cast by members of a jury in the course of their deliberations in any legal proceedings.’

The exceptions in sub-s (2) are not relevant in this case.
     Mr Pannick contends that unless the word ‘disclose’ in the section is confined to members of the jury alone, the restrictions would so
interfere with the right of freedom of expression as to be incompatible with art 10 of the convention. Article 10 provides:

          ‘(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart
      information and ideas without interference by public authority ...
          (2)      The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions,
      restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society ... for the protection of the reputation or rights
      of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the
      judiciary.’

    Interpretation of the expression ‘for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary’ within the convention has to take into
account the different legal systems of the subscribing states and the fundamental principle of the rule of law. The European Court of Human
Rights held in the Sunday Times case (1979) 2 EHRR 245 at 274:

          ‘The term “judiciary” ... comprises the machinery of justice or the judicial branch of government as well as the judges in their official
      capacity. The phrase “authority of the judiciary” includes, in particular, the notion that the courts are, and are accepted by the public at
      large as being, the proper forum for the ascertainment of legal rights and obligations and the settlement of disputes relative thereto;
      further, that the public at large have respect for and confidence in the courts’ capacity to fulfil that function.’

      Under the common law the jury has traditionally played a unique role in the machinery of justice. No one described it better than Sir
 Patrick Devlin in this celebrated passage in Trial by Jury (Hamlyn Lecture, 1956) at 164:
                                                                        539Q
           ‘... no tyrant could afford to leave a subject’s freedom in the hands of twelve of his countrymen. So that trial by jury is more than an
       instrument of justice and more than one wheel of the constitution: it is the lamp that shows that freedom lives.’

      Today the jury still has vital roles to play in legal proceedings. First in deciding whether an accused tried on indictment has been guilty of
 a crime, it is the sole arbiter of fact. It decides whether the state has proved the accused guilty beyond reasonable doubt. Doubts which appear
 reasonable to three or more jurors will preclude his conviction in that trial. Secondly the jury plays an important function in protecting the
 reputation of a person claiming he has been defamed. It decides whether in the exercise of freedom of expression the bounds of a free press
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)
Attorney General v A ssociated Newspapers L td and others

have been exceeded and, by an award of damages, may not only compensate for the wounded reputation but make an exemplary award to deter
others.
     Thirdly a jury may be called on to decide whether an individual has been subjected to arbitrary or oppressive action by servants of
government and, if he has, what exemplary damages should be awarded.
     The background to the enactment of s 8 of the 1981 Act is in our view significant and illuminating.
     In 1955 in the Hamlyn Lecture, The Proof o f Guilt, Professor Glanville Williams devoted a substantial passage to the absence of
information on the working of the jury, the general arguments for the jury system and the general arguments against it. As one might expect,
this provided impetus to research into the workings of the jury system and an account of the research of this period can be found in ‘Jury
Trials' by John Baldwin and Michael McConville in the chapter headed ‘Jury Lore and Jury Learning’. The Hamlyn Lecture Trial by Jury was
given in 1956 by Sir Patrick Devlin. Of the obligation of secrecy of what passes in the jury room, he said (at p 46):

         ‘What goes on in the jury room is not only to be subject to no interference but it is also to be kept secret. It is doubtful whether there
     is any formal obligation upon a juror not to disclose what takes place in a jury room and it says a good deal for the sense of responsibility
     of the average juror that it never seems to have been necessary to decide the point. ’

    In 1963 under the chairmanship of Lord Morris of Borth-y-Guest a departmental committee considered jury service as a whole. In para
355 of its report published in April 1965 (Cmnd 2627) the committee said:

         ‘It has sometimes been suggested that there is no need to require jurors not to disclose what happened during their deliberations, and
     even that the requirement shows a lack of confidence in the jury system and implies that the system would break down if it were
     generally known what happens when a jury retires to consider its verdict. We recognise that it is impossible to make a proper assessment
     of the merits of trial by jury in the absence of the adequate knowledge of what does happen when the jury retires, but we agree with those
     of our witnesses who argued that if such disclosure were to be made, particularly to the Press, jurors would no longer feel free to express
     their opinions frankly when the verdict was under discussion, for fear that what they said later might be made public. In fact they might
     even fear reprisals from criminals for whose convictions they were responsible, and who had heard about their deliberations. We think
     there is much force in this argument, and we recommend that the notice mentioned above [a reminder of the solemn obligation not to
     reveal in any circumstances to any        5400 person either during the trial or after it was over anything which had occurred in the jury
     room while they had considered their verdict] should continue to be displayed in all jury retiring rooms. Gross breaches of the obligation
     to preserve secrecy might be treated as a contempt of court.’ (The committee’s emphasis.)

    Shortly after this report the Home Secretary asked the Criminal Law Revision Committee to consider—

         ‘whether statutory provision should be made to protect the secrecy of the jury room; and in particular whether, and, if so, subject to
     what exemptions and qualifications, it should be an offence to seek information from a juror about a jury’s deliberations or for a juror to
     disclose such information. ’

    In its report in 1968 (Cmnd 3750) the committee did not, at that time, think it necessary or desirable to reinforce the conventional and
accepted recognition of the need to protect the secrecy of the jury room by statutory sanction. They said (para 4):

          ‘We think it is as true today ... that it has been generally accepted by the public as a rule of conduct that what passes in the jury room
      during the discussion by the jury of what their verdict should be ought to be treated as private and confidential. We would affirm that
      rule of conduct and would in no way wish to undermine it. We are of opinion that secrecy has been well maintained and that such
      breaches or attempts to break it as have become known so far have not established a mischief so extensive or serious that it calls for
      legislation and punishment. ’

They further added (para 9):

          ‘There are two important reasons that may be advanced why things said during the jury’s deliberations should not be disclosed
      afterwards:—(i) the need to protect the jurors themselves, and (ii) the need to preserve the principle that the jury’s decision should be
      treated as final unless upset on appeal. As to (i), obviously jurors might feel inhibited from expressing their opinions freely during their
      deliberations if they knew that their fellow-jurors might disclose what they said, and they might be seriously embarrassed by pressure to
      give information about what any juror said or how he voted. As to (ii), whatever opinion one holds as to the merits of the jury system, the
      committee generally take the view that it is contrary to the public interest that the issue before the jury should be “retried” in public with
      the use of information supplied by one or more of the jurors. Such a discussion, without judicial control of its course and very likely with
      imperfect knowledge of the evidence given at the trial, might well give a false impression of the reasons for the verdict, especially as
      other members of the jury might feel inhibited by the obligation of secrecy or by dislike of publicity from coming forward and correcting
      mistaken statements by the juror who supplied the information. This might lead to unjustifiable dissatisfaction with the results of trials.’

     By 1979, however, the picture had changed and in ^-G v New Statesman and Nation Publishing Co Ltd [1980] 1 All ER 644, [1981] QB 1
this court was asked to consider whether publication in a magazine of an interview with a juror who came forward without reward to divulge
what had happened in the jury room constituted a contempt of court. In the circumstances of that case there was no <t, 5410 contempt but in
the course of his judgment Lord Widgery CJ said ([1980] 1 All ER 644 at 646-647, [1981] QB 1 at 7):

          ‘We were reminded that, until a few years ago, it was accepted that the secrets of the jury room had to be treated as secret. The
      solemn obligation by jurors to observe secrecy was well maintained and breaches of the obligation were kept at an acceptable level. It
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)
Attorney General v Associated Newspapers L td and others

     had never been necessary to invoke the law of contempt in respect of such breaches, but that law had always been available for use in any
     case in which the administration of justice would have been imperilled. Recently, however, the solemn obligation of secrecy has been
     shown to be breaking down; a considerable number of publications involving jury room revelations, some more objectionable than others,
     have occurred. Accordingly, in view of the apparently diminishing respect for the convention of observance of jury secrecy and the risk of
     escalation in the frequency and degree of the disclosures, it has become right for the Attorney-General to invoke the law of contempt in
     relation to this article in the New Statesman since it represents a departure from the norm and is a serious and dangerous encroachment
     into the convention of jury secrecy. ’

After considering the report of the Criminal Law Revision Committee to which I have referred, he said ([1980] 1 All ER 644 at 650, [1981] QB
1 at 11):

        ‘The evidence before us shows that for a number of years the publication of jury room secrets has occurred on numerous occasions.
     To many of those disclosures no exception could be taken because, from a study of them, it would not be possible to identify the persons
     concerned in the trials. In these cases, jury room secrets were revealed in the main for the laudable purpose of informing would-be jurors
     what to expect when summoned for jury service. Thus, it is not possible to contend that every case of post-trial activity of the kind with
     which we are concerned must necessarily amount to a contempt. ’

    It was against this background that Parliament enacted s 8 of the 1981 Act. If breaches of the secrecy of the jury room had escalated to a
degree that Parliament deemed a statutory sanction to be necessary, then its duty was to define clearly the circumstances in which an offence
would be committed so that criminal sanctions were restricted to those offences which in Lord Diplock’s words in A-G v Leveller Magazine Ltd
[1979] 1 All ER 745 at 749, [1979] AC 440 at 449:

        ‘... involve an interference with the due administration of justice, either in a particular case or more generally as a continuing
     process. ’

      Parliament, mindful of the decision in Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, also needed to ensure that the restrictions or penalties it
enacted were no greater than was necessary in a democratic society to prevent disclosure of information received in confidence and to maintain
the authority and impartiality of the jury as part of the administration of justice.
      Thus the historical and legislative background to the enactment of s 8 gives a clear guide to its purpose and to its proper interpretation but
Mr Pannick focused on the proposal in 1986 to replace trial by jury in complicated fraud cases as a stimulus to public interest in, and the
increased need for, research into the jury system, arguing that, unless a restricted interpretation was given to s 8, the public interest in
discussion of the value of the system would be unjustifiably curtailed.
      Lord Roskill’s Fraud Trials Committee Report 1986, App A, however, accepted rather than questioned the need for secrecy of the jury’s
deliberations by declining      5420 to ‘countenance any research in this field which would be against the spirit of the law’.
      Mr Pannick also emphasised the phrase ‘pressing social need’ repeatedly used in decisions of the European Court of Human Rights to
describe the circumstances which alone can justify restriction of the right to freedom of expression.
      The phrase invites an evaluation of the interference complained of, the purpose it seeks to achieve and whether the need is sufficiently
pressing to outweigh the public interest in freedom of expression within the meaning of the convention. In addition to the factors we have
already identified in the historical background to the legislation, other aspects of the practice and procedure of jury trial reflect the importance
attached to a verdict founded solely on the opinions, arguments and deliberations of a jury uninfluenced by fear of recrimination or ridicule,
improper pressure or undue influence. The accused is entitled to nothing less. Nothing less will command public confidence.
      We therefore refer to some of those aspects directed particularly at protecting the integrity of the jury’s discussions.
      Although in directing the jury a judge is entitled to express an opinion on the evidence, a verdict may be set aside if he fails to direct them
that it is only their judgment of the evidence that matters or if he comments excessively or unfairly.
      If the jury seems to have difficulty in reaching a verdict and has been in discussion for a long time, the judge may in further directions
 emphasise the importance of their reaching a verdict if they can but he must be careful to avoid any expression which could suggest that a
 minority should yield to the view of the majority and must not create the impression that they are under a legal duty to agree. Similarly, he
 must not suggest that the jury have only a limited time to reach agreement. In either case a verdict may be impugned.
      Further, if in the course of the trial it appears that a juror may have been threatened or influenced or have received information about the
 case, or those involved, outside the evidence, the accused has a right to ask for the discharge of the jury, which will not be refused if there is
 any risk of injustice.
      Next jurymen are entitled to full judicial immunity and are not accountable for anything said or done in the discharge of their office. Any
 threat or attempt to persuade or influence them in the discharge of their functions is punishable as a contempt of court.
      After they have returned their verdict, even if questioned by the judge, the jury are not bound to answer (see R v Jameson (1896) 12 TLR
 551 at 594 per Lord Russell CJ). So it has been held that after an unambiguous verdict the jury’s function is complete and the judge ought not
 to ask questions which could lead to confusion of the basis of the verdict. Exceptionally a judge may inquire the factual basis on which a
 defendant has been found guilty but still the jury may decline to answer without undermining the validity of their verdict. Thus we believe the
 law has long recognised the importance of complete freedom of discussion in the jury room. If a juror were to be deterred from expressing his
 doubt of the accused’s guilt because he feared subsequent recrimination or ridicule, the accused might be deprived of a persuasive voice in his
 favour. So too, a jury deciding a plaintiffs claim to damages for libel ought not to be exposed to interrogation by the erstwhile defendants or
 others who share an interest in avoiding liability for or reducing the consequences of defamatory publication. We consider that the free,
 uninhibited and unfettered discussion by the jury in the course of their deliberations is essential to the proper administration of a system of
 justice which includes trial by jury. The enacted provisions designed to maintain such discussion are confined to soliciting, disclosing or
 publishing the <t, 5430 particular aspects of the discussion in the jury room identified in the section. To that extent only do they restrain
 freedom of expression. There is no restriction, as Mr Pannick suggested, on the freedom to express opinions, advance arguments, advocate
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
A llE R 1993 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:20pm)
Attorney General v Associated Newspapers L td and others

changes or promote reform in comment upon the many aspects of jury trial which have already been the subject of public debate and which are,
and remain, proper objects of public concern and interest. In due course the European Court of Human Rights may be called upon to decide
whether the measures enacted by Parliament are disproportionate to the restriction imposed on freedom of expression. When it does so, it will
surely take full account of Parliament’s experience of trial by jury as an instrument of justice in the United Kingdom and its appreciation of the
need today to protect the secrecy of the jury room. We were invited to take these factors into account to guide our interpretation of s 8. To the
extent that it is permissible for this purpose, we have considered them.
     We now come to the words of the section itself, and can find no warrant for qualifying the meaning of the word “disclose’ by confining it
solely to disclosure by the members of the jury. On the contrary, the course of argument convinced us that Parliament intended no such
restriction. The word ‘disclose’, in origin to open up or uncover, has come to mean: ‘To open up to the knowledge of others’ (see Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary). It is a word wide enough to encompass the revealing of the secrets of the jury room by a juryman to his friend or
neighbour as well as the opening up of such knowledge to the public as a whole by someone to whom it has been revealed. And in the light of
the background to which we have referred, we see every reason why Parliament should have intended the word ‘disclose’ to cover both
situations. Nor do we regard it as significant that the secrets came into the hands of the respondents indirectly. The existence of a market for
the transcript of interviews with jurors containing prohibited details of their deliberations is as inimical to the interests of justice as the direct
solicitation for money which occurred in this case. The section is aimed at keeping the secrets of the jury room inviolate in the interests of
justice. We believe that it would only be by giving it an interpretation which would emasculate Parliament’s purpose that it could be held that
the widespread disclosure in this case did not infringe the section. By declaring such conduct to be a contempt, Parliament recognised the
exceptional discretion vested in a court to protect the process of justice and its ability to reflect the varying shades of infringement. In our
judgment the Attorney General has proved a breach of s 8( 1) of the 1981 Act by all three respondents.

Having given judgment on the application the court heard counsel for the respondents in mitigation before deciding on the appropriate penalty.
Counsel referred to DPP v Channel Four Television Co Ltd [1993] 2 All ER 517, where fines totalling £75,000 were imposed; Re an inquiry
under the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 reported on the merits [1988] 1 All ER 203, [1988] AC 660, where a fine of £20,000
was imposed; X Ltd v Morgan-Grampian (Publishers) Ltd reported on the merits [1990] 2 All ER 1, [1991] 1 AC 1, where a fine of £20,000
was imposed; A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd reported on the merits [1991] 2 All ER 398, [1992] 1 AC 191, where a fine of £50,000 imposed by
Morritt J had been discharged by the Court of Appeal; and^4-G vHislop [1991] 1 All ER 911, [1991] 1 QB 514, where fines totalling £20,000
were imposed.

BELDAM LJ. It now falls to the court to consider what, if any, penalty should be imposed for the infringement of s 8 of the 1981 Act which
we have found to have been proved. We accept Mr Pannick’s submission that in total any penalties imposed on the three respondents should
not exceed an amount which is necessary           544Q to emphasise the importance of the principle to which we referred and is commensurate
with the circumstances of its infringement. He urged us to impose one sanction only for all respondents. We have carefully considered
whether that would be appropriate in this case. We do not think it would.
     Although the decision to publish was a responsibility shared between the second and third respondents, taking into account the fact that
the first respondent has apologised to the court and has given assurances that, until our ruling is successfully challenged, there will be no
repetition, it is nevertheless necessary, as it seems to us, to impose a penalty on the publishers to deter what is in fact a deliberate and serious
breach of the law expressed, in our view, in clear and unambiguous terms in the 1981 Act.
     The article was published in a newspaper with a large circulation, with the obvious risk that potential jurors might receive the impression
that their obligation of secrecy was not of significance because it was an infringement of their right to freedom of expression. It was published
against a long tradition of respect by responsible journalists of a jury’s confidence and against the background which we have sought to set out
in our judgment. In the circumstances we consider that the appropriate penalty for the first respondent would be a fine of £30,000.
     Turning now to the responsibility of the second and third respondents, as in the case of the first respondent, we take into account the
apology tendered and the assurances we were given. We take into account that they sought legal advice before deciding to publish and that
they were, however, as the articles themselves indicate, aware of the clear terms of the 1981 Act and they took a calculated risk. They each
bear a responsibility for what we regard as a serious and dangerous encroachment on the jury’s functions and its confidentiality in deliberation.
     The second respondent must bear ultimate responsibility for the decision to publish, the third respondent for the use of the transcripts of
interview with the jury. We have, of course, taken into account the differences in the means of these respondents disclosed confidentially to
us. But for those differences, we would not have felt able to draw a distinction in the degree of their responsibility. The second respondent
will be fined £20,000 and the third respondent £10,000.

Conduct o f respondents declared to be contempt. First respondent fined £30,000, second respondent £20,000 and third respondent £10,000.
Leave to appeal to the House o f Lords refused.

 22 April 1993. The Appeal Committee o f the House o f Lords gave leave to appeal.

                                                                                                                  Dilys Tausz Barrister. % 545Q
          § 2 8 -1 1 5           O f f e n c e s A g a in s t P u blic J u st ic e
                                                                                     [C hap. 28

          Sand.Ch.Ord. 317; Finnerty v. Smith (1835) 1 Bing.N.C. 649; Bishot)
          Willis (1749) 5 Beav. 83n. To seek to mislead the court by commencing '
          action or pleading a defence known to be false is a contempt: Lord
          Thornton (1614) 2 Bulstr. 67; R. v. Weisz, ex p. Hector Macdonald Ltd f195 !]


                         (1 1 ) Publishing matter scandalising the court

28-116      It is a contempt to publish matter so defamatory of a judge or a court
         to be likely to interfere with the due administration of justice, by seriousJv
         lowering the authority of the judge or court: R. v. Gray [1900]’2 Q.B 36 v
         v. Editor of the New Statesman (1928) 44 T.L.R. 301. It would seem that an
         intention to bring the judge or court into disrepute must be shown- ti
         Almon (1770) 20 St.Tr. 803 at 839; McCleod v. St. Aubyn [1899] A.C. 54<j [,
         is only in a clear case that this jurisdiction will be exercised for any mar
         may criticise a decision of a court even in an outspoken manner.vlwAarrf
         Att.-Gen. for Trinidad and Tobago [1936] A.C. 322; Bahama Islands re 4
         special reference from the [ 1893] A.C. 138; McCleod v. St. Aubyn, ante, k t
         Metropolitan Police Commissioner, ex p. Blackburn [1968] 2 Q.B. 150Thn
         species of contempt was described as “virtually obsolescent" bv Loir'
         Diplock in Secretary o f Statefor Defence v. Guardian Newspapers Ud[19,4'


           (1 2 ) Publishing matter calculated to prejudice the fair trial of#
                             pending or imm inent cause

28-117       The following paragraphs contain a statement of the position *
         common law. This must be read in the light of the Contempt of Court Aft
          1981, ss.1-7: ante, §§ 28-52 et seq. At common law there is no requireints;
         that proceedings are “active”, but that the cause is pending or imminm
          (but see post, § 28-119). It must be established: (1) that publication of thr
         material created a real risk of prejudice to the due administration rf
         justice; and (2 ) that the material was published with the specific intrt <*
         causing such a risk: per Bingham L.J., Att.-Gen. v. Sport Newspapm 1st
          [1991] 1 W.L.R. 1194 at p. 1200, D.C. For the mens rea of common In
         contempt, see ante, §§ 28-102 et seq. Publication may be in any form, but t*
         publish to one person or to a small group of persons would not ordiranj*
         be calculated to cause sufficient prejudice to constitute a contfwj*
         McCleod v. St. Aubyn [1899] A.C. 549; R. v. Griffith [1957] 2 Q.B. 132
             A jury is more likely to be swayed by prejudicial matter than a judjfr &
         it is always a serious matter to publish material which may prejudicf
         against an accused; R. v. Bolam, ex p. Haigh (1949) 93 SJ. 220. * »
         Odham’s Press Ltd and others, ex p. Att.-Gen. [1957] 1 Q.B. 73. Topubfa**
         photograph of a person charged with an offence where it is rvasewto
         clear that the identity of the accused has arisen or may arise, may *i«
         amount to a contempt: R. v. Daily Mirror Newspapers, exp. Smith flSM *

                                                  2 /1 1 7 2
                                C o n tem pt    of   C ourt
                                                                                    § 28-119
      ‘.mi



■g                ^    ^    «       - o          r 5 ! S         S   £ S       S   ? S         ^


                                                                                                   28-118

p^dmg or did not Kn                             editors of newspapers are vicariously




Wand another [1969] 1 W L.R 1236.            commenced: Howitt v.
       is pending as soon as it
    A c a u s e                          . .. pi t->       However,
   n onfif19 t LR 426; Re Crown Bank (1890) 44 Ch.D . b4y. now evei,




Technically a cause                                                       U S 5f ^     B. 4 3 .
t       t     ^        a    r   e       -   ^

S S I tln t"                                                                       * * D“"“S‘
                                                                                                    28-119
Ut m S      ?m m G m upV  N ew ZpersP lc 11989] Q.B 110, D.C., it » a s
held tha^where a^Irosecutkm was virtually


s      e              ::s   ^           s   =                =        s        -           s

^                      ^            S                   f        S         S           b

convicted. Where, therefore, as in                           e            intended should be




                                                2 /1 1 7 3
              § 2 8 -1 1 9             O f f e n c e s A g a in s t P u blic J u st ic e   [C hap

            warrant was issued for E ’s arrest. Bingham LJ. said (at n 19 ()7 \
            court would not be justified in departing from the recent and unaiibh? ^
            th . h!?n 1X\ A tt- GT v- Ne™ Group Newspapers, ante, which S S S S
            the boundaries of contempt as previously understood. If a publirlr
            created a real nsk of prejudice to the due administration of justice anrf rtf
            alleged contemnor published with the specific intent o f c a u sin g 2
           contempt might be committed even though proceedings were nei>L ’
           existence nor imminent. Hodgson J. said that the News Group d e S ”
           wrong and the summary procedure for publication contempt s h S * *
           be widened (at pp. 1229, 1230). It should only be a contempt ^ ' T
           relevant proceedings were pending. His Lordship added: “If contemnt hf
          the Proteus of the common law then for mv D art I won 1,1 h , t P **
          repertoire will not be increased” (at p. 1230). In Coe v C entrafrlb^ ^
          and another, The Independent, August 11,1993, the Court of Appeal d ? *
          seek to resolve the above conflict (describing the two d £ f n
          pending or imminent as “strictly obiter’) but did recognise that c o n L ^
          at common law could occur where criminal proceedings “had not W
          begun However, one of the reasons for holding that the necessar^
         had not been proved was that no one had yet been chamed with 1 ?
 28-120
             It would appear that there are certain d e f e n c e s p S to t f f s f c
         contempt: (i) a fair and accurate report of proceeding Z " 1 1 £ *
                 Gas Co, Ltd v. Wilde (1880) 29 W.R. 43 and cf Lord l l l 'l
         MacDougallv. Knight (1889) 14 App.Cas. 194 a t 2 0 0 ; i ) a fair a
         report of proceedings of a public body: Felkin v. Herbert (1?64) 33 U ?
         294,R. v. Payne and Cooper [1896] 1 Q.B. 577; (iii) a temperate accourn 1
                     CaUSC pi, shed t0 persons having a direct interest in its
        outcome, e.g. circulars to the trade in patent or trade-mark cases- CariZem
        Stiftwig v. Raynej and Keeler [1970] Ch. 506; shareholders of a com fS
         he subject of litigation: Re London Flour Co. (1868) 17 LT 63fv AWW
        New Gold Coast Exploration Co. [1901] 1 Ch. 860. It may              a de!< £
        that the publication merely repeats an earlier truthful assertion or a
        S J n m T A C ^ R i 1 Pyblicd!scussion:^ - - ^ « . v. TimesNewspapm
                   4] A.C. 27.5H.L. The majority of the foregoing will be covered tw
         he p r o t o n s of the 1981 Act, in particular sections 3 to 5 . X S J
         ection 6(a) expressly saves any defence available at common law to «

          S L lT s S S J s,rict,iability""e-Fortep'wisiMs°(ih'
            (1 3 ) Publication of matter exempted from disclosure in court

28-121      See section 11 of the Contempt o f Court Act 1981, art's, §28-31.

                             (1 4 ) D isobedience to an order of the court

28-122     To disobey an order of the court properly made is a contempt. In the
         following instances orders have been held properly made and *

                                                    2 /1 1 7 4
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen ™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)




                                       Attorney General v MGN Ltd and others
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
SCHIEMANN LJ AND BRIAN SMEDLEY J
17, 18, 19, 31 JULY 1996


Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Substantial risk o f serious prejudice to fa ir trial - Extensive publicity being
given to accused’s violent behaviour and previous convictions prior to his arrest - Accused subsequently charged with wounding with intent
and respondents publishing articles concerning pending trial - Criminal proceedings subsequently stayed - Whether publications creating
substantial risk o f serious prejudice to trial —Contempt o f Court Act 1981, ss 1, 2.

Between May 1989 and March 1995 K and his girlfriend, T, who was a well-known television personality, were given saturation media
coverage about their relationship. During that time disclosures were made about K’s violent behaviour and his previous convictions. On 16
April 1995 K was arrested for assaulting T and another person and was charged the following day with wounding with intent contrary to s 18
of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861. On 18, 19 and 22 April newspapers owned by the first to fourth respondents published articles
about the incident; further articles were published on 12 and 13 May by the third and fifth respondents respectively. K was subsequently
committed to stand trial and a provisional trial date was fixed for 16 October 1995. However, he successfully applied for the proceedings to be
stayed on the ground that the pre-trial press coverage of the case made it impossible for him to have a fair trial. Thereafter the Attorney
General applied for orders against the respondents for contempt of court on the ground that the publication of the articles at that time had
created a ‘substantial risk that the course of justice [would] be seriously impeded or prejudiced’ within s 2(2) of the Contempt of Court Act
1981 and that therefore they were guilty, under the strict liability rule set out in s 1 of that Act, of conduct tending to interfere with the course
of justice in legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so.

Held - When deciding whether publications created a substantial risk that the course of justice in proceedings would be seriously impeded or
prejudiced, within the meaning of s 2(2) of the 1981 Act, the court had to look at each publication separately as at the date of publication and
consider the likelihood that it would be read by a potential juror, the likely impact of the article on an ordinary reader at the time of publication
and its residual impact on a notional juror at the time of the trial. Furthermore, the mere fact that there was already some risk of prejudice by
reason of earlier publications did not preclude a finding that the latest publication had created a further risk. In the instant case the saturation
publicity which had been given over the previous years to the relationship between T and K and in particular to the disclosures which had been
made as to K’s violent behaviour on previous occasions and his previous convictions had continued until a month before the April incident and,
in consequence, it could not be said that any one of the publications in April and May 1995 had created a greater risk of prejudice than that
which had already been created. It followed that the publications were not in contempt of court and the Attorney General’s applications would
accordingly be dismissed (see p 460 b to/ , p 463 h j and p 466/ j , post).
                                                                    c 456&

Notes
For publications intended or likely to prejudice fair trial or conduct of proceedings, see 9 Halsbury 's Laws (4th edn) paras 8-14.
    For the Contempt of Court Act 1981, ss 1,2, see 11 Halsbury's Statutes (4th edn) (1991 reissue) 186.

Cases referred to in judgment
A-G v BBC (11 June 1996, unreported), DC.
A-G v English [1982] 2 All ER 903, [1983] 1 AC 116, [1982] 3 WLR 278, HL.
A-G v Guardian Newspapers Ltd [1992] 3 All ER 38, [1992] 1 WLR 874, DC.
A-G v Independent Television News Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 370, DC.
A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1986] 2 All ER 833, [1987] QB 1, [1986] 3 WLR 365, CA.
A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276, [1988] Ch 333, [1987] 3 WLR 942, CA.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd (11 February 1983, unreported), DC.
Corbett v R (1988) 41 CCC (3d) 385, Can SC.
R v Cannon (1990) 92 Cr App R 16, CA.
R v Coughlan, R v Young (1976) 63 Cr App R 33, CA.
R v Lane [1970] 1 CCC 196, OntHC.
R v West [1996] 2 Cr App R 374, CA.
Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, ECT HR.
Telegraph pic. Ex p [1993] 2 All ER 971, [1993] 1 WLR 980, CA.

Cases also cited or referred to in skeleton arguments
Central Independent Television pic, Re [1991] 1 All ER 347, [1991] 1 WLR 4, CA.
Dagenais v Canadian Broadcasting Corp (1994) 94 CCC (3d) 289, Can SC.
D uffv R (1979) 28 ALR 663, Aust Fed Ct.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                                       books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General v M G N L td and others

Gisborne Herald Co Ltd v Solicitor General [1995] 3 NZLR 563, NZ CA.
Leary v BBC [1989] CA Transcript 905.
Phillips v Nova Scotia (1995) 98 CCC (3d) 20, Can SC.
R v Dixon (1989) 92 Cr App R 43, CA.
R v Evening Standard CoLtd, exp A-G [1954] 1 AllER 1026, [1954] 1 QB 578, DC.
R v Horsham Justices, ex p Farquharson [1982] 2 All ER 269, [1982] QB 762, DC and CA.
R v Kray (1969) 53 C rA ppR 412, CCC.
R v McCann (1990) 92 Cr App R 239, CA.
R vReade (1993) Independent, 19 October, CCC.
R v Savundranayagan and Walker (Note) [1968] 3 All ER 439, [1968] 1 WLR 1761, CA.
R v Taylor (1993) 98 Cr App R 361, CA.
R v Vermette (1988) 41 CCC (3d) 523, Can SC.
Stroble v California (1952) 343 US 181, US SC.
Victoria v Australian Building Construction Employees ’ and Builders Labourers ’ Federation (1982) 152 CLR 25, Aust HC.

Application
The Attorney General applied under RSC Ord 52 for committal orders against the respondents, MGN Ltd, Express Newspapers pic, News
Group Newspapers Ltd, News (UK) Ltd and Associated Newspapers Ltd, for contempt of court committed by the publication of various articles
pending the trial of Geoffrey Knights on the ground that they had thereby created a substantial risk that the % 457£2 course of justice would be
seriously impeded or prejudiced. The facts are set out in the judgment of the court.

Sir Derek Spencer QC, S-G, Philip Havers QC and Hugo Keith (instructed by the Treasury Solicitor) for the Attorney General.
David Pannick QC and Monica Carss-Frisk (instructed by Davenport Lyons) for the first respondent.
David Eady QC (instructed by the Simkins Partnership) for the second respondent.
Andrew Caldecott QC (instructed by Farrer & Co) for the third and fourth respondents.
Jonathan Caplan QC (instructed by D J Freeman) for the fifth respondent.

                                                                                                                                                          Cur adv vult

31 July 1996. The following judgment of the court was delivered.

SCHIEMANN LJ.

INTRODUCTION
     Before the court is an application by the Attorney General to punish various newspapers for alleged contempts of court committed by the
publication of various articles pending the trial of Geoffrey Knights. The background is as follows.
     On Simday, 16 April 1995, Geoffrey Knights was arrested for assaulting Martin Davies and Gillian Taylforth following an incident outside
Knights’ and Taylforth’s home address. On 17 April 1995 he was charged with wounding Martin Davies with intent contrary to s 18 of the
Offences Against the Person Act 1861. He appeared before Hendon Magistrates’ Court on Tuesday, 18 April and was granted bail. On 18, 19
and 22 April 1995 the first, second, third and fourth respondents published articles concerning him. On 12 and 13 May 1995 further articles
were published by, respectively, the third and fifth respondents. On 13 June 1995 Mr Knights was committed to stand trial at the Crown Court
at Harrow, and at a plea and directions hearing on 25 July 1995, a provisional trial date was fixed for 16 October 1995.
     Before Judge Sanders on 29 September 1995, counsel for Mr Knights successfully applied for a stay of proceedings against Mr Knights on
the basis that the pre-trial press coverage of the case made it impossible for Mr Knights to have a fair trial. In a judgment dated 3 October
 1995, Judge Sanders stayed the proceedings. The Attorney General does not allege intentional contempt in relation to any of these publications
but relies instead on the strict liability rule whereunder conduct may be treated as a contempt of court as tending to interfere with the course of
justice in particular legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so.
      The present application focuses, as these applications usually do, on the tension between two desiderata—(1) the desire that a person
facing trial should face a tribunal which is not prejudiced against him by reason of matters which have not been proved in evidence, and (2) the
 desire that newspapers should be free to publish what they please.
      This tension is particularly strong in cases which are of widespread public interest because of the notoriety of the persons or deeds
involved0. The problems posed by this tension are real and recuning. The Solicitor General has drawn our attention to no less than three
cases in the last six months where, to the Attorney % 4580 General’s knowledge, a prosecution has been stayed indefinitely because of
pre-trial publicity. Clearly that seriously prejudices the course of justice. There must be many others where a trial has had to be delayed or
moved to a less convenient place and where it could be submitted that the course of justice has been seriously impeded^.

a    In R v West [1996] 2 Cr App R 374 Lord Taylor CJ, delivering the judgment of the court, said that there was no doubt that the press coverage in advance of the
     trial was extensive and hostile to the Wests. He went on to say: ‘ . however lurid the reporting, there can scarcely ever have been a case more calculated to shock
     the public who were entitled to know the facts. The question raised on behalf o f the defence is whether a fair trial could be held after such intensive publicity
     adverse to the accused. In our view it could. To hold otherwise would mean that if allegations of murder are sufficiently horrendous so as inevitably to shock the
     nation, the accused cannot be tried. That would be absurd. Moreover, providing the judge effectively warns the jury to act only on the evidence given in court,
     there is no reason to suppose that they would do otherwise.’ (See [1996] 2 Cr App R 374 at 385-386.)
b    N o te in this co n tex t A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd (11 February 1983, unreported), where it was said: ‘The course of justice is not just concerned with the outcome
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                                           books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General v M G N L td and others

    of proceedings. It is concerned with the whole process of the law including the freedom of a person accused o f a crime to elect, so far as the law permits him to do
    so, the mode o f trial which he prefers and to conduct his defence in the way which seems best to him and to his advisers. Any extraneous factor or external pressure
    which impedes or restricts that election or that conduct, or which impels a person accused to adopt a course in the conduct of his own defence which he does not
    wish to adopt, deprives him to an extent of the freedom of choice which the law confers upon him and is, in my judgment, not only a prejudice but a serious
    prejudice.’

     The statutory provisions which govern liability for unintentional contempts are set out in the Contempt of Court Act 1981. That Act was
enacted in the wake of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, in which the court
found by a majority that the newspaper’s rights under art 10 of the European Convention of Human Rights (Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Rome, 4 November 1950; TS 71 (1953); Cmd 8969)) had been violated in that the restraint placed
on its freedom of expression in reporting the Thalidomide proceedings was not necessary and had not been proportionate to the legitimate aim
pursued. As Lloyd LJ observed in ^-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276 at 310, [1988] Ch 333 at 382:

              the statutory purpose behind the 1981 Act was to effect a permanent shift in the balance of public interest away from the
      protection of the administration of justice and in favour of freedom of speech. Such a shift was forced on the United Kingdom by the
      decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, and was in any event foreshadowed by the
      recommendations of the Phillimore Committee [Report of the Committee on Contempt of Court ((1974) Cmnd 5794)].’

The cnicial section in the present context is s 2, which states:

          ‘(1) The strict liability rule applies only to publications, and for this purpose “publication” includes any speech, writing, programme
      included in a service or other communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the public at large or any section of the public.
          (2) The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in
      question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
                                                                                <h 4590
          (3) The strict liability rule applies to a publication only if the proceedings in question are active within the meaning of this section at
      the time of the publication ... ’


THE PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE APPLICATION OF THE STRICT LIABILITY RULE
   These are as follows and are not the subject of serious dispute.
   (1) Each case must be decided on its own factsc.

c     See A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1986] 2 All ER 833 at 843, [1987] QB 1 at 18 per Parker LJ and A-G v BBC (11 June 1996, unreported), where Auld
     I J said: ‘The degree o f risk of impact of a publication on a trial and the extent of that impact may both be affected, in differing degrees according to the
     circumstances, by the nature and form of the publication and how long it occurred before trial. Much depends on the combination of circumstances in the case in
     question and the court’s own assessment of their likely effect at the time of publication. This is essentially a value judgment for the court, albeit that it must be sure
     of its judgment before it can find that there has been contempt. There is little value in making detailed comparisons with the facts o f other cases. ’

     (2)      The court will look at each publication separately and test matters as at the time of publication (see A-G v English [ 1982] 2 All ER 903
at 918, [1983] 1 AC 116 at 141 per Lord Diplock and A-G v Guardian Newspapers Ltd [1992] 3 All ER 38 at 48^49, [1992] 1 WLR 874 at
885); nevertheless, the mere fact that, by reason of earlier publications, there is already some risk of prejudice does not prevent a finding that
the latest publication has created a further risk^. [It was common ground that there was no room for reading the singular word‘publication’ in
s 2 of the 1981 Act as the plural in accord with s 6 of the Interpretation Act of 1978.]

d     See A-G v Independent Television News Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 370 at 381: ‘Mr Moses contended that it does not follow that because a risk had been created by the
     broadcast (on the night before) further publication in newspapers would not create fresh and added risk of prejudice. In other words, if several newspapers
     published prejudicial material, they cannot escape from liability by contending that the damage has already been done, because each affords its own additional risk
     of prejudice, or, as it might be said, each exacerbates and increases that risk. In my judgment, that submission is correct.’

     (3) The publication in question must create some risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will be impeded or
prejudiced by that publication.
     (4) That risk must be substantial6.

e     In A-G v BBC Auld LJ said: ‘... the threshold of risk is not high, simply of more than a remote or minimal risk of serious prejudice.’

     (5) The substantial risk must be that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will not only be impeded or prejudiced but
seriously so.
     (6) The court will not convict of contempt unless it is sure that the publication has created this substantial risk of that serious effect on the
course of justice.
     (7) In making an assessment of whether the publication does create this substantial risk of that serious effect on the course of justice the
following amongst other matters arise for consideration: (a) the likelihood of the publication coming to the attention ot a potential juror; (b) the
likely impact of the publication on an ordinary reader at the time of publication; and (c) the residual impact of the publication on a notional
juror at the time of trial. It is this last matter which is crucial.
     One must remember that in this, as in any exercise of risk assessment, a small risk multiplied by a small risk results in an even smaller
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                                               books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General v M G N L td and others

risl/!

      In A-G v Independent Television News Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 370 at 383 Leggatt LJ said: ‘During the nine months that passed after anyone had read the o(Tending
     articles, the likelihood is that he no longer would have remembered it sufficiently to prejudice the trial. When the long odds against the potential juror reading any
     of the publications is multiplied by the long odds against any reader remembering it, the risk of prejudice is, in my judgment, remote. ’

                                                                                    % . 46011
     (8) In making an assessment of the likelihood of the publication coming to the attention of a potential juror the court will consider amongst
other matters: (a) whether the publication circulates in the area from which the jurors are likely to be drawn, and (b) how many copies
circulated.
     (9) In making an assessment of the likely impact of the publication on an ordinary reader at the time of publication the court will consider
amongst other matters: (a) the prominence of the article in the publication, and (b) the novelty of the content of the article in the context of
likely readers of that publication.
     (10) In making an assessment of the residual impact of the publication on a notional juror at the time of trial the court will consider
amongst other matters: (a) the length of time between publication and the likely date of trial#, (b) the focusing effect of listening over a
prolonged period to evidence in a case^, and (c) the likely effect of the judge’s directions to a jury.

§    This was discussed both in A-G v Independent Television News Ltd [1995] 2 All ER 370 and in A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1986] 2 All ER 833 at 843,
     [1987] QB 1 at 17-18, where Parker LJ explained: ‘The imminence or remoteness o f the proceedings will still vitally affect both the existence o f a substantial risk
     of prejudice and the question whether, if there is such a risk, it is a risk that the course o f justice will be seriously impeded or prejudiced. Both the risk and the
     degree of prejudice will, as it seems to me, increase with the proximity of the trial but it is not possible, and indeed would be contrary to the Act, to say that no
     publication earlier than a certain number of months before trial could be subject to the application o f the strict liability rule. Each case must be decided on its own
     facts and a publication relatively close to trial may escape whereas another much further from trial will not do so by reason of the impact o f its content on the
     reader, listener or viewer, as the case may be.’ In the same case Donaldson MR had said ([1986] 2 All ER 833 at 841, [1987] QB 1 at 15): ‘Proximity in time
     between the publication and the proceedings would probably have a greater bearing on the risk limb than on the seriousness limb, but could go to both. ’
h        In E xp Telegraph pic [1993] 2 All ER 971 at 978, [1993] 1 WLR 980 at 987 Lord Taylor CJ said: ‘. . . a court should credit the jury with the will and ability to
         abide by the judge’s direction to decide the case only on the evidence before them. The court should also bear in mind that the staying power and detail o f publicity,
         even in cases of notoriety, are limited and that the nature of a trial is to focus the jury ’s minds on the evidence before them rather than on matters outside the
         courtroom ... ’

         This last matter in particular has been the subject of extensive judicial comment in two different contexts: in the context of a trial or an
appeal from a trial verdict and in the context of contempt proceedings. There have been many cases where, notwithstanding such prejudicial
publications, the convictions have not been quashed. However, undoubtedly there have also been occasions where convictions have been
quashed notwithstanding judicial directions to the jury to ignore prejudicial comments in the media.
         In the former category of cases what has been stressed is that the whole system of trial by jury is predicated upon the ability and
w i l l in gn e s s of juries to abide by the directions given to them by the judge and not to accept as true the content of a publication just because it

has been published*.

‘          In Corbett v R (1988) 41 CCC (3d) 385, a case which was concerned with the fairness o f permitting the accused to be cross-examined as to his previous
         convictions, Dickson CJC said (at 401-403): ‘It is o f course, entirely possible to construct an argument disputing the theory of trial by jury. Juries are capable of
         egregious mistakes and they may at times seem to be ill-adapted to the exigencies o f an increasingly complicated and refined criminal law. But until the paradigm
         is altered by Parliament, the court should not be heard to call into question the capacity of juries to do the job assigned to them. The ramifications o f any such
         statement could be enormous ... There are many situations where the jury is permitted to hear and use evidence relevant to one issue, but not to another. In these
         situations, all that is required is a clear direction to the jury indicating what is permissible use and what is not. For example, in some cases, similar fact evidence is
         admissible to show some particular trait or design ... In the joint trial of co-accused, the confession of one accused is admissible against that accused only, and the
         jury must be instructed that such evidence cannot be taken into account in determining the guilt o f the co-accused: see, e.g. ... R v. Lane and Ross ([1970] 1 CCC
          196 at 201), where Addy J. stated as follows: “ I do not feel that, in deciding a question of this kind, one must proceed on the assumption that jurors are morons,
         completely devoid of intelligence and totally incapable of understanding a rule of evidence of this type or o f acting in accordance with it. If such were the case there
         would be no justification at all for the existence o f juries, and what has been regarded for centuries as a bulwark of our democratic system and a guarantee o f our
         basic freedoms under the law would in fact be nothing less than a delusion.’”

     In libel cases where the issue is justification that is peculiarly the case. Confidence in a jury’s capacity’s to abide by judicial direction is
reflected in the fact that they commonly have to consider evidence for one purpose, though not another, as in relation to joint offenders or
multiple counts on one indictment. It has been pointed out that juries frequently acquit of some charges whilst convicting of others. Even in
relation to sexual offences, where the risk of prejudice is self-evidently greater, Lord Taylor CJ commented on not under-estimating a jury’s
ability to do justice in such a context (se e R v Cannan (1990) 92 Cr App R 16). As Lawton J put it ini? v Coughlan, R v Young (1976) 63 Cr
App R 33 at 37:

                                                                                    <h. 4610
              ‘Juries are capable of disregarding that which is not properly before them. They are expected to disregard what one accused says
           about another in his absence. If they can do that, which is far from easy, they can disregard what has been said in a newspaper.’

      It can fairly be asked in this context, why, given the constraints on discovering the cogitations of a jury, should the courts be trusted to
 form a view as to what is going on or may go on in the jury’s mind? A partial, but not wholly satisfactory, answer to that is that judges preside
 over very many trials; they see what seems to stick in witnesses minds; they watch jurors’ reactions; they receive jurors questions and observe
 their verdicts: and so they do obtain some feel of what appears to stick in the mind and what appears to be influencing, at any event, a number
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                        books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General v M G N L td and others

of jurors. Another answer, different in kind, is to side-step the question and assert that, judging by the absence of legislation to the contrary,
society is content to let judges make these judgments doing the best they can in what are undoubtedly difficult circumstances. Society requires
a judgment to be made between conflicting desiderata and the judges are given the task of making it in individual cases. It is to be noted in
this context that the admission into evidence at a trial of the accused’s previous convictions has always been regarded as a potent ground of
appeal and yet the courts have regularly maintained that, where previous convictions were properly admitted into evidence—for instance in
order to do justice to a co-defendant—this will not form a potent ground of appeal. This is an example of the courts having to make a
judgment between different desiderata.

THE PRESENT APPLICATIONS
     The background to the present applications is that before the publications complained of, which start in April 1995, the lives of Mr
Knights and his erstwhile girlfriend, Miss Taylforth, had long been of interest to the general public. This was in part the result of her having a
major role in a popular television programme, with a consequential public interest in her love life, in part because of their activities together on
the A l, where a police officer had made an arrest alleging activities of a sexual nature between them there, which arrest had been followed by
a libel action concerned with the same activities, and in part because of Mr Knight’s own colourful past.
                                                                     <k 4620
     It is important to set out the dates of the previous publicity. In the exhibited documents there are many newspaper reports of incidents
concerning these two. They start as long ago as 1989 when the News of the World published a report of Knights having been jailed for assault.
 In May 1989 there were further articles about the two and in December 1989 the People newspaper published an article referring to the fact
that Knights had been charged with causing grievous bodily harm to an Australian businessman with whom he had been involved at the West
End club, Stringfellows.
      In January 1994 there was extensive reporting of the libel action brought by Miss Taylforth against the Sun newspaper in respect of the Al
incident. There was in the course of the reporting of that case a frequent reference to the fact that Knights had a prison record for violence. On
Friday, 14 January 1994 the Sun published a banner headline with the words ‘VIOLENT PAST’ and a reference, chronologically, to the
convictions of Mr Knights dating back to 1969. There was saturation coverage of that libel action for over two weeks including a report in The
Times for Wednesday, January 26 detailing, with a photograph, the criminal record of Mr Knights dating back to 1969.
      There was further reference in October 1994 in the People newspaper to the fact that Mr Knights was living in Spain, including a front
page article on 9 October with banner headlines referring to Knights’ violent past.
      On 29 October in the Daily Mirror there was a further reference to Knights having been arrested for allegedly assaulting a police officer.
In November there was a reference in the Sun newspaper to the fact that Miss Taylforth had had surgery after she had been beaten up by
Knights.
      In January 1995 Miss Taylforth was charged with driving under the influence of drink. That inevitably brought a further reference back to
the libel action.
      The publicity continued into March 1995 when Knights was convicted of assaulting a police constable and was fined £2,000. This was a
month before the alleged assault which led to the publicity of which complaint is presently made.
      It is not surprising in the light of that massive publicity over a period of some two years that Judge Sanders, when he was considering the
question of abuse of process in October 1995, concluded: ‘There could not be one member of the jury who had notread something about them.’
  He, of course, was considering the position in October, just before the trial was to begin and had to take into account more recent references in
the press to the two principal participants—namely in August 1995—of which the Attorney General does not complain. We have to look
 mainly at the situation as it existed on 17 and 18 April 1995 and in the case of the Daily Mail the situation as it existed when Lynda
 Lee-Potter’s article was published on 13 May. At that stage the trial was several months ahead. In deciding whether the publication of any
 particular article created a substantial risk of serious prejudice it has to be judged as at the date of the publication in the light of the saturation
 publicity given over previous months, indeed years, to the relationship between Miss Taylforth and Mr Knights and in particular to the
 disclosures which had been made previously of Mr Knights’ violent behaviour on previous occasions and his previous convictions.
      In some cases where there has been reference to previous convictions in the press the passage of time may result in those references being
 forgotten but nevertheless a subsequent reference to them may result in the recollection in the mind of a potential juror of those convictions and
 the incidents on which they were based. In this case it is to be remembered that the publicity given to Miss Taylforth and Mr Knights
 continued until a month before the incident in April 1995.
                                                                      % . 4630


THE PUBLICATIONS OF WHICH COMPLAINT IS MADE
     We have to look at each of these in the light of the principles outlined above and in the light of the foregoing history of publicity. We look
at the respondents one by one.
     The first respondent publishes the Daily Mirror. Complaint is made of the issues published on 18 April 1995 and that published on the
following day.
     The second respondent publishes the Daily Star. Complaint is made similarly of the contents of that newspaper in each of three editions
published on 18 April 1995 and 19 April 1995.
     The third respondent publishes the Sun and the fourth respondent published a newspaper called Today. Complaint is made of the edition
of the Sun and that of Today published on 18 April. On 19 April Today published another article of which complaint is made and on 22 April
and 12 May the Sun contained other material the subject of complaint.
     The fifth respondent published the Daily Mail. That newspaper on 13 May contained a feature article written by Miss Lynda Lee-Potter
after an interview with Gillian Taylforth, Knights’ girlfriend.
     We now turn to the individual articles of which complaint is made.

 DAILY MIRROR
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General v M G N L td and others

18 April 1995
     The front page headline in letters one inch high reads ‘KNIGHTS BEAT ME TO A PULP’. A statement attributed to the victim with a
photograph of Knights and Miss Taylforth. On page 2 there was what purported to be a further quotation from Mr Davies, the victim, and a
description of his injuries as described by a police officer and a suggestion by the writer that doctors feared that he might be blinded. Page 3
was entirely given over to the account of the incident with large photographs of Knights, Miss Taylforth and photographs of the scene. The
article referred to the libel case brought by Miss Taylforth in 1994.

19 April 1995
     On page 5 there was a photograph of Mr Knights in handcuffs arriving at court. Included in the article is a statement of his solicitor
denying that he caused the injuries to Mr Davies.
     As it seems to us, at any trial evidence would be bound to be given or agreed as to the extent of injuries. In those circumstances we do not
believe that whatever remained in any juror’s mind of this description of the injuries would be likely to affect his assessment of the evidence
he would hear.
     Applying the principles set out earlier in this judgment we do not consider that either of these publications created a substantial risk that
the course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

DAILY STAR

18 April 1995
     On the front page of the second edition there is a reference in the main headline to Davies having been ‘battered with iron bar’, repeated
in the text of the article. That was repeated on pages 2 and 3. Knights, it is said, ‘went berserk with an iron bar’. The suggestion is made that
the motive was Knights’ jealousy over the relationship between Miss Taylforth and Mr Davies. There was a further reference to Knights
‘wielding the bar above his head like a sword’ and ‘pounding his head with a hard-edged weapon, the iron bar’. This was wholly inaccurate:
there was no weapon used. In the third edition the account has been <t, 464Q toned down. Purporting to quote a neighbour the article
contained the words ‘A hard-edged weapon’, the reference to the iron bar being deleted from the headline and the article itself. It refers to the
possibility that Davies might lose an eye.
     Having regard to the evidence of the number and location of the distribution of the first and second editions we regard the chance of these
coming into the possession of someone who would turn out to be a juror at the Harrow Crown Court as very remote. So far as the third edition
is concerned this is not so. However, applying the principles set out earlier in this judgment, we do not consider that this publication created a
substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

19 April 1995
     The Daily Star contained an article almost full page on page 7 referring to the fact that Knights had been granted bail with a condition that
he should not contact Miss Taylforth or the ‘alleged victim’, Davies. His solicitor read out a statement to the press denying charges. That was
also reported. On the same page a report of Davies’ condition in hospital again referred to the possible loss of an eye. Applying the principles
set out earlier in this judgment we do not consider that this publication created a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings
would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

THE SUN

18 April 1995
    The newspaper described the incident as ‘a bust up’ beneath a banner headline referring to the incident on the front page. On pages 4 and
5 there was a reference to Mr Davies being ‘scarred for life’ and looking like the Elephant Man. There were accounts allegedly given by
neighbours who had been eye witnesses to the incident and who were therefore potential witnesses in any proceedings.

22 April 1995
    There was a large photograph of Mr Davies, Mr Knights and Miss Taylforth, showing Davies’ black eyes. This article reported both the
charge and Knights’ denial.

12 May 1995
    There was an article on pages 26 and 27 reporting an interview with Miss Taylforth, which in fact is a somewhat sympathetic article,
albeit m ak in g reference to Knights’ and Miss Taylforth’s stormy relationship.
    Applying the principles set out earlier in this judgment we do not consider that any of these publications created a substantial risk that the
course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

TODAY

18 April 1995
    The headline on page 1 gives a relatively short account of the incident but much material about the libel action which Miss Taylforth had
brought against the Sun newspaper in January 1994.
                                                                   %. 465Q
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1997 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:32pm)
Attorney General vM G N L td and others

19 April 1995
    On the front page there is a reference to ‘bust up’ and on page 5 the solicitor’s statement of denial was published. There was a graphic
description of what were said to be Mr Davies’ injuries.
    Applying the principles set out earlier in this judgment we do not consider that any of these publications created a substantial risk that the
course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

THE DAILY MAIL

13 May 1995
     The article by Lynda Lee-Potter purports to be based on an interview given by Miss Taylforth in which she described the stormy and
violent relationship between herself and Mr Knights. There were, in that article, references to the fact that he had previously been convicted of
an offence of violence and in particular a reference to the evidence which he had given in the libel action when he had been asked about his
previous convictions. Despite the fact that the article occupied two pages with large photographs of Miss Taylforth and Knights, the reference
to the incident on the night of the 17/18 April was really only one short paragraph with no detail as to how Mr Davies had received his injuries.
 The inference, however, from the context of the remainder of the article is that Knights had caused them and caused them unlawfully.
     Applying the principles set out earlier in this judgment we do not consider that this publication created a substantial risk that the course of
justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

CONCLUSION
     There is no doubt that the so called ‘news items’ or ‘articles’, excluding for the moment the article on 13 May in the Daily Mail, were all
written in typical graphic tabloid style. They include large banner headlines, large photographs of all three of those involved in the incident.
There is a measure of exaggeration in the description of the injuries sustained by Mr Davies and the language used is undoubtedly emotive.
However, all in all it is difficult to see how any one of the publications in April and May 1995 created any greater risk of serious prejudice than
that which had already been created.
     We are not called upon to rule upon the correctness of Judge Sanders’ decision to stay the proceedings in front of him and nothing in this
judgment should be taken as doing so. A consequence of the need in contempt proceedings, in which respondents face imprisonment or a fine,
to be sure and to look at each publication separately and the need in trial proceedings to look at risk of prejudice created by the totality of
publications can be that it is proper to stay proceedings on the ground of prejudice albeit that no individual is guilty of contempt. One may
regret that situation or one may take the view that this is the best answer to a difficult problem. We are not called upon to express our view on
that matter.
     What however clearly follows from our findings is that each of these applications by the Attorney General is dismissed.

Application dismissed.

                                                                                                                           Dilys Tausz Barrister.
                                                                       466Q
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen ™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)




                                Attorney General v Sport Newspapers Ltd and others
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
BINGHAM U AND HODGSON J
29, 30 APRIL, 1, 24 MAY 1991


Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Substantial risk o f serious prejudice to fa ir trial - Imminent or pending
proceedings - Common law contempt - Police requesting newspapers not to publish suspect's details - Respondents publishing article about
suspect's previous convictions - Criminal proceedings not pending at time o f publication - Criminal proceedings subsequently commenced
and suspect convicted - Whether publication creating risk o f prejudice to administration ofjustice - Whether publication specifically intended
to impede or prejudice administration ofjustice - Whether respondents liable fo r common law contempt - Contempt o f Court Act 1981, s 6(c).

Following the disappearance of a 15-year-old schoolgirl the police suspected that she might have been abducted by a man who had previous
convictions for rape and assault. The police held a press conference to solicit public help in finding the suspect at which they revealed the
wanted man’s name and gave details of his description but made it clear that details of his previous convictions, which were readily
ascertainable, were not to be published since to do so might prejudice future legal proceedings. The police also asked the Press Association to
pass on to all editors the fact that the police did not want the suspect’s convictions to be published as publication might jeopardise the girl’s
safe return. The first respondent, a tabloid newspaper specialising in stories with a sexual slant written in a sensational style, did not receive
the message directly although it was a subscriber to the Press Association’s news service, but the paper’s editor, the second respondent, was
aware that the police were anxious to trace the suspect, that he had a criminal record and that the police did not want information about his
previous convictions published. Two days later the paper carried an article describing the suspect, who was named, as a ‘vicious evil rapist’
and ‘sex monster’ and described in detail how he had previously attacked and raped a 17-year-old girl, for which he had been convicted and
sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment. Two days later magistrates issued a warrant for the arrest of the suspect for the murder of the
 15-year-old schoolgirl. The suspect was later apprehended and convicted of the murder of the girl. No application was made by his counsel to
hold the trial elsewhere or to stay the trial on the ground of prejudicial publicity. Following the trial the respondents’ article was referred to
the Attorney General, who instituted proceedings for contempt against the respondents, alleging that <t, 503Q they were liable at common law,
as preserved by s 6(c)a of the Contempt of Court Act 1981, for contempt for publishing an article ‘intended to impede or prejudice the
administration of justice’. The Attorney General contended that a common law contempt could be committed by publication before a criminal
defendant had been arrested or a warrant for his arrest issued, whether or not criminal proceedings were imminent, provided the publication
created a real risk of prejudice to the administration of justice and the publisher specifically intended to cause such risk. The respondents
contended that a common law contempt could not be committed by publication before criminal proceedings had been instituted.

     Section 6 is set out at p 531 g h, post



Held - A publication intended to prejudice criminal proceedings was contemptuous and punishable as such under common law if it gave rise to
a risk of prejudice to the administration of justice and the publisher specifically intended to cause such risk in regard to criminal proceedings
which were pending or (Hodgson J contra) even if the criminal proceedings were neither in existence nor imminent. In proving specific intent,
however, although such intent could be inferred from all the circumstances, including the foreseeability of the consequencesof publication, the
probability of the consequences being foreseen had to be little short of overwhelming before it sufficed to establish thenecessaryintent and on
the facts it had not been shown beyond reasonable doubt that at the date of publication the paper’s editor had the specific intention to prejudice
the fair conduct of proceedings, whose existence he regarded at that time as being speculative and remote. The application would therefore be
dismissed (see p 514 j to p 515 a c d g j to p 516 a g h ,p 517 e to h ,p 51% c ,p 523 g and p 536 d e h j, post).
     A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906 considered.

 Notes
 For publications intended or likely to prejudice a fair trial or the conduct of proceedings, see 9 Halsbury's Laws (4th edn) paras 8-9, and for
 cases on the subject, see 16 Digest (Reissue) 19-33,193-342.
     For the Contempt of Court Act 1981, s 6, see 11 Halsbury's Statutes (4th edn) (1991 reissue) 191.

Cases referred to in judgments
A-G v Butterworth [1962] 3 All ER 326, [1963] 1 QB 696, [1962] 3 WLR 819, CA.
A-G v Hislop [1991] 1 AllER 911, [1991] 1 QB 514, [1991] 2 WLR 219, CA.
A-G v Leveller Magazine Ltd [1979] 1 All ER 745, [1979] AC 440, [1979] 2 WLR 247, HL.
A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906, [1989] QB 110, [1988] 3 WLR 163, DC.
A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276, [1988] Ch 333, [1987] 3 WLR 942, CA.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, [1973] 3 WLR 298, HL.
Crown Bank, Re, Re O'Malley (1890) 44 Ch D 649.
Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1979 JC 1, HC of Just.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

James vRobinson (1963) 109 CLR 593, Aust HC.
Porter v R, exp Yee (1926) 37 CLR 432, Aust HC.
R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd [1962] N I 15, NI DC.
                                                                      504H
R v Clarke, exp Crippen (1910) 103 LT 636, [1908-10] All ERRep 915, DC.
R v Daily Mirror, ex p Smith [1927] 1 KB 845, [1927] All ER Rep 503, DC.
R v Davies [1906] 1 KB 32, [1904-7] All ER Rep 60, DC.
R v Greater Manchester Coroner, ex p Tal [1984] 3 All ER 240, [1985] QB 67, [1984] 3 WLR 643, DC.
R v Horsham Justices, exp Farquharson [1982] 2 All ER 269, [1982]QB 762, [1982] 2 WLR 430, CA.
R v Odham's Press Ltd, exp A-G [1956] 3 All ER 494, [1957] 1 QB73,[1956] 3 WLR 796, DC.
R v Parke [1903] 2 KB 432, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721, DC.
R v Payne [1896] 1 QB 577, [1895-9] All ER Rep 521, DC.
R v Savundranayagan [1968] 3 All ER 439, [1968] 1 WLR 1761, CA.
R v Sharpe, R v Stringer [1938] 1 All ER 48, CCA.
R v Tibbits [1902] 1 KB 77, [1900-3] All ER Rep 896, CCR.
St James's Evening Post Case, Roach v Garvan (or Hall) (1742) 2 Atk 469, 26 ER 683, LC.
SkawvDPP [1961] 2 All ER446, [1962] AC 220, [1961] 2 WLR 897, HL.
Skipworth’s Case (1873) LR 9 QB 230.
Stirling v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1960 JC 5, HC of Just.

Cases also cited
A-G v BBC [1979] 3 All ER 45, [1981] AC 303, CA.
A-G v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2) [1988] 3 All ER 545, [1990] 1 AC 109, Ch D, CA and HL.
R v D [1984] 1 All ER 574, [1984] AC 778, CA.
R v Kellett [1975] 3 All ER 468, [1976] QB 372, CA.
R v Secretary o f State fo r the Home Dept, ex p Brind [1990] 1 All ER 469, [1991] 1 AC 696, CA; affd [1991] 1 All ER 720, [1991] 1 AC 696,
     HL.
R v Selvage [1982] 1 All ER 96, [1982] QB 372, CA.
R v Walker (John) (1989) 90 Cr App R 226, CA.

Application
The Attorney General applied for an order against the respondents, Sport Newspapers Ltd, the publishers of the Sport newspaper, Peter John
Whinfrey Grimsditeh, the editor of the newspaper, and Andrew Leatham a journalist, (i) that the respondents be fined for their several
contempts of court in publishing in an issue of the Sport on 16 November 1988 an article entitled ‘Evans was given 10 years for rape’ and (li)
that the editor be committed to prison for his several contempts in publishing the article on the ground that the respondents’ conduct in
publishing or writing the article was intended or calculated to impede, obstruct or prejudice the administration of justice in that the article was
likely to prejudice the fair trial of David John Evans in criminal proceedings which were at the time of publication of the article imminent.
The proceedings against the third respondent for writing the article were withdrawn. The facts are set out in the judgment of Bingham LJ.

Philip Havers (instructed by the Crown Prosecution Service) for the Attorney General.
Andrew Collins QC and Nigel Peters (instructed by Kaye Tesler & Co) for the respondents.

                                                                                                                                      Cur adv vult

24 May 1991 The following judgments were delivered.
                                                                    %. 505Q

BINGHAM LJ. The Attorney General as applicant moves that the first respondent be fined and the second respondent committed to prison or
otherwise punished for publishing an article intended to prejudice the administration of justice.
    The first respondent is the publisher of the Sport, a tabloid newspaper which at the material time carried some sporting news but also
some general news stories, many of them with a sexual slant and generally written in a sensational style. It was published once a week, on
Wednesdays. There was a small editorial team based in Manchester. The second respondent, an experienced journalist and editor, was and
remains the editor of the paper. Proceedings have been withdrawn against the third respondent, the journalist who wrote the article which has
given rise to these proceedings.
     On Tuesday, 8 November 1988 Anna Louise Humphries, a 15-year-old schoolgirl, disappeared on her way home from school at Penley,
Clwyd. Police inquiries were made. It became clear that she might have been abducted. Two days later it was leamt that David Evans had
disappeared from his home in a neighbouring village in suspicious circumstances the day before. He became the focus of police attention. His
details were circulated to other police forces and to the authorities at places of embarkation. The police were very anxious to find him.
     Evans had a criminal record. In 1978 he had been sentenced to a total of five years’ imprisonment for offences of attempted rape, assault
and indecent assault on a female. In 1981 he had been sentenced to a consecutive term of 10 years’ imprisonment for rape. Some at least of
these details were known to representatives of the media who were reporting on the disappearance of Anna Humphries.
     On Friday, 11 November the North Wales Police, who were conducting the investigation into the case, held a press conference at Penley.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                  books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

Their object was to solicit public help in tracing Evans. To that end a description of his appearance and clothing was given, with some details
of his disappearance, and an urgent plea for information was made. Before this statement was made, an oral warning was given by the police
to those attending the press conference:

        ‘Most of you will be aware of certain matters relating to the background of the man we’re about to name. Can I warn you here and
     now that if anything is published or broadcast about these matters then it is likely to prejudice any future legal proceedings.’

About two dozen journalists attended the press conference. None represented the first respondent.
     On Saturday, 12 November the police faxed a letter to the weekend editor of the Press Association in London. The letter included this
passage:

         ‘It has come to the notice of the North Wales Police that daily and Sunday newspapers intend to publish what purports to be the
     convictions of a suspect in the case of the missing girl, Anna Louise HUMPHRIES. The police strongly disapprove of this course of
     action as its publication may jeopardise the safe return of Anna, the enquiry generally and also any possible proceedings which may
     follow. ’

The police asked that this information should be passed to all editors and that they should be told of the police disapproval of publication. On
Sunday, 13 November the police faxed another letter to the weekend editor in similar terms, stressing the prejudicial effect that release of the
information would have on the inquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings.
     The weekend editor of the Press Association acted promptly on receipt of each <t, 506Q letter from the police. On the Saturday and again
on the Sunday he circulated to subscribers a message which quoted the police advice to editors that nothing should be published concerning
Evans’s convictions. The message also quoted the police spokesman’s reference to the risk that publication ‘might jeopardise the safe return of
Anna, the enquiry generally and also any possible proceedings which may follow’.
     The first respondent was a subscriber to the Press Association’s news service, but did not receive these messages over the weekend of
 12-13 November because the office was unmanned and the teleprinter machine accordingly switched off. It is not, however, in doubt that on
Monday, 14 November the second respondent learnt that the police were anxious to trace Evans, that Evans had a criminal record of rape and
indecent assault and that the police did not want anything published about Evans’s previous convictions. At or about this time the second
respondent also knew that Evans had, at an earlier date, been questioned about a murder with which he had not been charged.
     By this time Evans was attracting considerable media interest. On this same day, Monday, 14 November, The Times carried a story
running to some 20 column inches (including a photograph) which described his disappearance in considerable detail. It was reported that he
was thought to have taken £200 and his passport with him. It was also reported that his appearance might have been changed. Reference was
not made to his convictions in this article, but no one reading it could have doubted that the police suspected commission of a serious crime
and suspected Evans of having committed it. The second respondent (who had seen The Times article) asked for a reporter to prepare a piece
on this event which would include Evans’s criminal record. The third respondent duly wrote the first draft of what, with some editorial
emendation, was published on Wednesday, 16 November.
     The Sport of Wednesday, 16 November carried on its front page, under the heading 'Exclusive’ and inside a red frame, the legend ‘Anna;
man on run is vicious rapist. Full story Page 2’. Beside this was a photograph of Evans described as a ‘sex monster’. On page 2 were a
photograph of Anna and a further photograph of Evans, together with the article complained of which was in these terms:

                                                  ‘EVANS WAS GIVEN 10 YEARS FOR RAPE
          The man police want to quiz about missing schoolgirl Anna Humphries is a vicious, evil rapist, The Sport can reveal exclusively
      today. Britain’s most wanted man, farm labourer David Evans, has a horrific history of sex attacks. In November, 1980, he was
      sentenced to ten years’ jail for brutally raping a 17-year-old girl. And at the time, Evans was on parole for previous sex attacks. At his
      rape trial, the judge told him: “I suspect you can’t control your own urges. It is my paramount duty to protect the public.” And the judge
      told the court: “He is an extremely dangerous man who could strike again.” Evans, now 31, was released earlier this year and went back
      to live with his parents in the Welsh border village of Bettisfield—three miles from where 15-year-old Anna was last seen. He was just
      23 when he viciously raped the screaming 17-year-old girl in his car after driving to a quiet lane in Oswestry in November, 1980.

                                                                      Snared
          He snared his victim as she walked home late at night after visiting her fiance’s home. Rape-crazy Evans cruised slowly behind her
      as she walked alone along a quiet road. At first the girl thought it was her father—then Evans struck. A hushed Shrewsbury Crown
      Court heard how the girl claimed Evans called to her by name although she couldn’t see his face in the dark. % 507QBut she made the
      mistake of believing it was someone she knew—and fell into his clutches. He drove towards her home—but when she pointed out her
      house, he raced away and took her to an unlit country lane where he stopped the car. A violent struggle took place—and she was brutally
      raped. Then, dazed and distressed she actually helped another motorist push-start Evans’ car when it wouldn’t start. Evans had been
      jailed for five years for a series of sex attacks in the late 70’s. He had been on parole for just five months when he struck again. A
      nationwide hunt, including port and harbour alerts, have failed to find any trace of Evans. Helicopters, more than 100 soldiers and RAF
      mountain rescue teams joined with police dog handlers yesterday to continue the search around the Shropshire market town of Much
      Wenlock, 40 miles from Penley where Anna’s shoe was found on a grass verge. Police have already said the chances of finding her alive
       are slim. ’

 Publication of this article caused the police to write to the Press Association again, and to refer the article for the Attorney General’s
 consideration.
     On 18 November Wrexham magistrates issued a warrant for the arrest of Evans for the murder of Anna Humphries. He was arrested in
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers Ltd and others

France three days later and Anna’s body was recovered from the River Severn on 27 November. On 9 January 1989 Evans was extradited from
France. He was charged with Anna’s murder the next day and in March committed for trial in the Crown Court at Mold. In July Evans was
tried for murder and convicted. He did not deny responsibility for the killing, but unsuccessfully raised an issue on intent. No application was
made to hold the trial elsewhere or to stay it on the ground of prejudicial publicity. But his counsel asked that the respondents’ article and
three other articles be referred to the Attorney General for consideration of contempt proceedings. The respondent’s article was already under
consideration. The other articles (one before the warrant for Evans’s arrest and two after) were referred to the Attorney General by the trial
judge but no proceedings followed.
     It is plain from the narrative I have given that when the respondents’ article was published the criminal proceedings against Evans were
not ‘active’ within the meaning of s 2(3) of and Sch 1 to the Contempt of Court Act 1981. The respondents cannot therefore be liable for
contempt under the strict liability rule laid down in ss 1 and 2 of the 1981 Act so as to make them liable regardless of intent. The applicant's
case is that they are liable at common law, such liability being preserved by the proviso in s 6(c) of the 1981 Act that—

          ‘Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act ... (c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede
      or prejudice the administration of justice.’


The law
     Mr Philip Havers, making this application on behalf of the Attorney General, submitted that a contempt at common law is established if it
is shown, on the criminal burden of proof and with reference to the date of publication, (1) that publication of the material complained of
created a real risk of prejudice to the due administration of justice and (2) that the alleged contemnor published the material with the specific
intent of causing such risk. This common law offence could be committed, Mr Havers argued, if proceedings were imminent and even if they
were not.
     Mr Andrew Collins QC for the respondents accepted the substance of this proposition (although he would have expressed it slightly
differently) but subject to one vital qualification: even if (1) and (2) were established he submitted that there could be no contempt even at
common law until proceedings had begun (i e when a defendant was arrested or charged or came within the custody of the <t, 50813 court). If
(1) and (2) were established with reference to a time before proceedings had begun a publisher might be liable for perverting, or attempting to
pervert, the course of justice, but he could not be liable for contempt of court. Thus the legal issue joined between the parties was whether, as
the law now stands, a contempt may be committed at common law by a party who publishes material creating the risk in (1) while having the
intention in (2) before a criminal defendant has been arrested or a warrant for his arrest issued.
     In arguing that a contempt may in law be committed in such circumstances, Mr Havers relied on principle, judicial and other dicta of high
persuasive authority, statute, decided authority and the opinion of textbook writers.
     The principle contended for by Mr Havers is this. The courts’ power to punish for contempt exists not to vindicate the dignity of the court
or the self-esteem of judges but to safeguard the integrity of legal proceedings for the benefit of those using the courts and so indirectly for the
benefit of the public whose interest it is that legal proceedings, civil or criminal, should be fairly tried and justly determined. Thus civil
litigants are not to be subjected to extraneous pressure to act in this way or that, nor the tribunal itself subjected to extraneous pressure to
decide this way or that. In criminal proceedings also the parties, particularly defendants, are entitled to a fair trial by a tribunal whose
judgment has not been affected by extraneous pressure or inadmissible evidence. This principle applies as well before as after the initiation of
proceedings, although the existence or imminence of proceedings may be very relevant to the risk of prejudice and the intent of the alleged
contemnor.
      Mr Havers began his citation of authority with, and drew support for his statement of principle from, R v Parke [1903] 2 KB 432, [1900-3]
All ER Rep 721 and in particular the much-quoted observation of Wills J ([1903] 2 KB 432 at 438, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721 at 723): ‘It is
possible very effectually to poison the fountain of justice before it begins to flow.’ In R v Odharn s Press Ltd, ex p A-G [1956] 3 All ER 494 at
497, [1957] 1 QB 73 at 80 Lord Goddard CJ considered the legal position ‘if a person does not know that proceedings have begun or are
 imminent ... ’ In R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd [1962] NILR 15 the Queen’s Bench Division in Northern Ireland held that a publisher could
 be guilty of contempt if proceedings were imminent even though there had at the time of publication been no arrest and no step taken towards
 commencing proceedings. In R v Savundranayagan [1968] 3 All ER 439 at 441, [1968] 1 WLR 1761 at 1764 Salmon LJ said:

         ‘It must not be supposed that proceedings to commit for contempt of court can be instituted only in respect of matters published after
      proceedings have actually begun.’

In A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273 three of their Lordships envisaged the possibility of contempt before the
issue of proceedings. Lord Reid said ([1973] 3 All ER 54 at 65, [1974] AC 273 at 301):

        ‘There is no magic in the issue of a writ or in a charge being made against an accused person. Comment on a case which is imminent
      may be as objectionable as comment after it has begun.’

Lord Diplock referred to litigation in a court which ‘is actually proceeding or is known to be imminent’ (see [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 71, [1974]
AC 273 at 308). Lord Simon spoke to similar effect (see [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 83, [1974] AC 273 at 321-322). hi A-G v Leveller Magazine
Ltd [1979] 1 All ER 745 at 749, [1979] AC 440 at 449 Lord Diplock said:

         ‘Of those contempts that can be committed outside the courtroom the most familiar consist of publishing, in connection with legal
      proceedings <t. 509Q that are pending or imminent, comment or information that has a tendency to pervert the course of justice

     The Phillimore Committee in its Report on Contempt o f Court (Cmnd 5794 (1974)) pp 37-38 commented on the uncertainty of the law as
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

to whether there could be contempt before proceedings had begun and recommended that the law give more certain guidance. The Salmon
Committee in its Report o f the Interdepartmental Committee on the Law o f Contempt as it affects Tribunals o f Inquiry (Cmnd 4078 (1969)) pp
9-10, acknowledged that differences of opinion existed on this subject but reported that—

        ‘The better view seems to be that as far as criminal proceedings are concerned the law of contempt bites when such proceedings are
     imminent. ’

    Mr Havers relied on s 11(1) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 as supporting his submission. That subsection provided:

         ‘A person shall not be guilty of contempt of court on the ground that he has published any matter calculated to interfere with the
     course of justice in connection with any proceedings pending or imminent at the time of publication if at that time (having taken all
     reasonable care) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the proceedings were pending, or that such proceedings were
     imminent, as the case may be.’

That was, it was argued, clear statutory recognition that a contempt could be committed when proceedings were not pending but only
imminent, as was held in the Northern Irish case already referred to. Section 6(c) of the 1981 Act, already cited, was intended to preserve a
publisher’s common law liability for contempt where the publication was intended to pervert the course of justice even though proceedings had
not begun, since once they had begun (ie become ‘active’) the publisher was liable irrespective of his intention.
     At the forefront of his argument Mr Havers put the recent decision of this court in^4-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER
906, [1989] QB 110. In that case the prosecuting authorities had decided, for lack of evidence, not to prosecute a doctor for allegedly raping a
child. The defendant newspaper gave prominent and specific publicity to the child’s allegations, identifying the doctor as the rapist, and at the
same time offered financial help to fund a private prosecution. The Attorney General made application against the newspaper for contempt,
although no proceedings had of course begun. It was argued on his behalf that proceedings were, on the facts, imminent, but also that (if they
were not) common law contempt nonetheless extended to cover the publication provided the other ingredients of contempt were established.
The court found against the newspaper. It concluded that on the facts proceedings were imminent and the necessary intention and risk were
established. But it also held, as its primary conclusion, that a contempt can be committed even though proceedings are not pending or
imminent at the date of publication. In a judgment with which Mann LJ agreed, Watkins LJ said ([1988] 2 All ER 906 at 920, [1989] QB 110
at 133):

         ‘The circumstances in which a criminal contempt at common law can be committed are not necessarily, in my judgment, confined to
     those in which proceedings are either pending or imminent, “an imprecise word by which to mark out a period of time,” per Windeyer J
     in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593 at 618. The common law surely does not tolerate conduct which involves the giving of
     encouragement and practical assistance to a person to bring about a private prosecution accompanied by an intention to interfere % 510Q
     with the course of justice by publishing material about the person to be prosecuted which could only serve to and was so intended to
     prejudice the fair trial of that person. This is especially so where the publisher of them makes it plain that he believes the person
     referred to in the articles is guilty of serious crime, that he is deserving of punishment for that and that he has committed some other
     similar crime. The common law is not a worn out jurisprudence rendered incapable of further development by the ever increasing
     incursion of Parliamentary legislation. It is a lively body of law capable of adaptation and expansion to meet fresh needs calling for the
     exertion of the discipline of law.’

This authority, Mr Havers argued, should be followed, unless we were convinced (which we should not be) that the decision was wrong (see R
v Greater Manchester Coroner, ex p Tal [1984] 3 All ER 240 at 248, [1985] QB 67 at 81).
    Lastly, Mr Havers relied on academic authority. In Borrie and Lowe Law o f Contempt (2nd edn, 1983) p 167 a review of the authorities
leads to the conclusion that—

         ‘Although there is no binding English decision that the law of contempt applies to “imminent” proceedings there would therefore
      seem to be overwhelming support for saying that it does.’

Miller on Contempt o f Court (2nd edn, 1989) p 169 similarly states:

          ‘There is substantial support for the view that a contempt may be committed at common law even though the relevant proceedings are
      not pending at the time of publication but are only imminent. ’

Sir Arthur Goodhart and, it would seem, Lord Parker CJ extra-judicially, favoured the view that contempt could be committed even though
proceedings were not yet in existence (see ‘Contempt of court when proceedings imminent’ (1964) 80 LQR 166).
     Mr Collins’s primary submission on behalf of the first and second respondents was that no contempt may be committed by publication at
common law before there are proceedings in existence. Until that time a publisher may be prosecuted for perverting or attempting to pervert
the course of justice, but is not liable for contempt.
     In support of his submission Mr Collins referred to a number of cases. The earliest was Skipworth’s Case (1873) LR 9 QB 230 at 232,
234 where Blackburn J explained contempt of court as a summary remedy to punish obstruction of the administration of justice in pending
cases where the ordinary processes of the criminal law would be too slow. In Re Crown Bank, Re O'Malley (1890) 44 Ch D 649 at 651 North J
expressed the view obiter that a publication made before presentation of a winding-up petition might be libellous but could not be
contemptuous. R v Tibbits [1902] 1 KB 77, [1900-3] All ER 896 showed that a criminal offence of perverting the course of justice could be
committed by publishing inadmissible evidence prejudicial to an accused during his trial, and R v Sharpe, R v Stringer [1938] 1 All ER 48
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

showed that the offence of conspiring to pervert the course of justice could be established even though no proceedings had begun. In R v Parke
[1903] 2 KB 432, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721 committal proceedings were already in progress at the time of the offending publication and the
only question was whether in these circumstances there could be a contempt of the assize court. In R v Davies [1906] 1 KB 32 at 35, [1904-7]
All ER Rep 60 at 63, Wills J stated the ratio o fR vParke in a restricted way. Ini? v Clarke, e x p Crippen (1910) 103 LT 636, [1908-10] All
ER Rep 915 it was held that a <£, 51 IQ publication could be contemptuous if an accused was at the time held in custody under a warrant, but
the authority did not support the view that there could be liability at any earlier stage. Mr Collins contended that most of the observations
relied on by Mr Havers were obiter, and the Northern Irish decision rested on an unwarranted construction of the 1960 Act. Mr Collins
accepted that the recent A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906, [1989] QB 110 was, on its face, against him but he pointed
out that the present argument had never been advanced: counsel for the newspaper had not sought to argue that no charge of contempt would
lie because no proceedings were in existence at the time of publication but had instead limited himself to the argument that, on the facts,
proceedings were not imminent. Impliedly, therefore, he had accepted potential liability if, contrary to his submission, proceedings were held
to have been imminent.
      Mr Collins relied in particular on two decisions, one Australian and one Scottish neither of them binding on us but both of strong
persuasive authority. In James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593 a newspaper published articles which, it was conceded, were such as to tend
to prejudice the fair trial of one Robinson who was, at the time of publication, being actively sought by the police in connection with two
killings. The Supreme Court of Western Australia convicted the publishers of contempt. On appeal to the High Court of Australia the main
issue was whether contempt could be committed before any proceedings were in existence. Having considered a large number of authorities,
including almost all the British cases, the High Court concluded that it could not. The majority held (at 607):

        ‘A publication antecedently to the commencement of proceedings may, as we have already said, constitute a libel or offence
     punishable under and in accordance with the general law, but it is not contempt of court. ’

In a separate but concurring opinion Windeyer J held (at 618):

        ‘Here the law, as I understand it, is that matter published in a newspaper concerning a person against whom no proceedings are
     pending cannot be contempt of court. ’

Mr Collins commended the reasoning of these judgments which, although referred to in A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd, were not relied on
for their ratio.
     In Scotland it had been thought following dicta in Stirling v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1960 JC 5, that the court’s jurisdiction in cases of
contempt by prejudicial publication might run from the date at which a crime was suspected and investigation by the criminal authorities had
begun. The correctness of these dicta fell for consideration by the High Court of Justiciary in Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1979 JC 1.
That case concerned a prejudicial publication made at a time when the subject of it was in police custody in connection with a murder inquiry
but before he was charged. The competing submissions of the parties and the Lord Advocate were summarised in the opinion of the court (at
7-8):

          ‘In the search for the terminus a quo of the court’s jurisdiction to treat as a contempt of court the publication of matter which is likely
      to prejudice the fair and impartial trial of an accused person and thus to be prejudicial to the interests of the administration of justice, we
      had the benefit of well researched submissions on both sides of the argument covering the whole field of commentary on this branch of
      the law in text books and in decided cases from the institutional writers down to the decision in Stirling. For the respondents the
      submission was, as it had been at the earlier hearing, that the decision in Stirling did not represent the Law of Scotland, and that not only
       512Q was there no trace in any previous discussion of the law of any suggestion that the publication of prejudicial material in relation
      to the case of a particular individual before full committal on petition could be held to be contempt of court, but also there was clear
      authority that it could not. In short the submission was that the Court’s jurisdiction in the matter of alleged contempt of court by
      prejudicial publication does not emerge until full committal of the person who is the subject-matter of the publication. The alternative
      submission for the respondents was that, in any event, the Court’s jurisdiction in this branch of the law of contempt could not emerge at
      any time before the individual concerned had at least been committed on petition for further examination. The competing submission for
      the petitioner which was adopted by the Lord Advocate who appeared in the public interest was that there was no reason in logic or
      expediency, and no warrant in authority, for selecting full committal or committal for further examination as the terminus a quo of this
      important jurisdiction. The object of the jurisdiction vested in the criminal courts is to prevent injury to the administration of justice
      from the earliest moment when proceedings in which the Court has become involved have begun, and when a citizen who is the subject
      of these proceedings is entitled to the Court’s protection. That moment in the administration of justice under the criminal law is the
      moment when a person has been arrested on a criminal charge or when, in solemn procedure, a petition has been presented to the Sheriff
       and a warrant for his arrest has been granted. In the case of summary procedure the starting point of the Court’s jurisdiction is, for the
       same reasons, the moment of arrest or, if there has been no arrest, the moment of citation on summary complaint.’

The court expressed two intermediate conclusions (at 9-10):

          ‘From what we have said so far two conclusions may be drawn. In the first place it is of vital importance that the Court should guard
      jealously, in the interests of justice, its inherent jurisdiction to vindicate the fair and impartial administration of justice and, as a
      corollary, to protect persons charged with crime and liable to be tried for such crime or other as may be libelled against them, from
      actions on the part of others which may prejudice their prospects of fair and impartial trial. In the second place it is just as important that
      this indispensable and special jurisdiction which exposes offenders to summary punishment should be confined within proper and
      necessary limits.’
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                           books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others


Having reviewed a number of authorities, the court substantially adopted the petitioner’s submissions and the court said (at 14):

         ‘We have no doubt that it can be said that from the moment of arrest the person arrested is in a very real sense under the care and
     protection of the Court and we are quite unable to see any relevant or material distinction between the situation vis a vis an accused
     person created by arrest and that which clearly exists at the time when an accused person is committed on petition for further
     examination. From the moment of arrest the process of apprehending, charging and bringing a person to trial has begun and the
     beginning of that process is one of two points of time at which relevant proceedings have commenced so as to bring into play the
     contempt jurisdiction of the court where prejudicial publication is concerned.’

While approving the decision in Stirling’s case, the court expressly disapproved the dicta suggesting that liability in contempt could run from
the time a crime was suspected and investigation by the criminal authorities had begun. The court believed its starting point for contempt to be
identical to that adopted by the  513Q High Court of Australia in James v Robinson and ‘not very different’ from that recognised by the law
of England in^4-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273. The court concluded (1979 JC 1 at 15):

          ‘It is, of course, perfectly obvious, as has been pointed out repeatedly in earliir cases and, indeed, in other jurisdictions that the
      administration of justice may suffer just as much injury as the result of publication or other conduct by the Press or by any other person or
      agency before the Court’s jurisdiction in contempt can be invoked, as it may suffer by publication or other conduct thereafter. The
      avoidance of such injury prejudicial to the course and interests of justice before the Court’s special jurisdiction arises is, however, left to
      the control of the general criminal law and if there is any reason to believe that the power of our criminal law as it is may not, in practice,
      be a wholly effective mechanism for that purpose then it is for consideration whether it should not be strengthened by legislation. ’

Mr Collins urged that this decision contained a correct statement of English as well as Scottish law, reflecting the recommendation of the
Phillimore Committee (at p 32). It would be a dangerous anomaly if the law of contempt were different on each side of the border.
      The purpose of s 6(c) of the 1981 Act was not, Mr Collins argued, to create a liability at common law which had never existed, but to
preserve the right to proceed for deliberate contempt after proceedings were in existence, as had been done (for instance) in A-G v Hislop
[1991] 1 A llER 911, [1991] 1 QB514.
      Lastly, Mr Collins relied on the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Rome, 4 November
 1950; TS 71 (1953); Cmd 8969). Article 10 protected the right to freedom of expression. Qualifications could only be justified for certain
purposes, of which maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary was one, and then only if they were shown to be necessary in a
democratic society. The law of contempt, if of the scope contended for, could not be shown to satisfy that latter test, and in case of doubt it
should be assumed that Parliament intended to comply with the United Kingdom’s international obligations.
      Such, in brief, were the competing legal submissions before us.
      I have no doubt that Mr Havers correctly identified the rationale of this part of the law of contempt. It exists to vindicate and protect the
rights of litigants, not the rights of courts or judges save in so far as their task is to vindicate and protect the rights of litigants. It is obvious, as
the High Court of Justiciary observed, that a litigant’s right to a fair trial by an impartial tribunal may be prejudiced as much by a publication
just before proceedings are begun (whether by issue of civil proceedings or arrest or the laying of a charge or information) as just after. I do
not think it advances the argument to point out, however correctly, that conduct deliberately prejudicial to the administration of justice
committed before the beginning of proceedings may be punished under the general criminal law, since so it may afterwards: it is, indeed, plain
that there is considerable overlap between the crime of perverting the course of justice and the court’s jurisdiction to punish for contempt. I do
not, furthermore, think that the European convention can avail Mr Collins, since if the law of contempt offends against the convention so also
must the general criminal law, which he relies on as the proper procedure to punish deliberately prejudicial publications before proceedings. It
would seem to me that the law in both fields, if clear and certain, is directed to what the convention would accept as a legitimate objective.
      Although many of the judicial observations to which Mr Havers referred us were obiter and tentative, they do in my judgment point
 towards a growing % 514Q consensus that a publication could be contemptuous if proceedings were at the time of publication imminent
 although not in existence. The draftsman of s 11(1) of the 1960 Act must, I think, have intended to recognise this consensus. Imminence is, as
Windeyer J pointed out in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593 at 618 ‘an imprecise word by which to mark out a period of time’, and this-
 no doubt influenced the Phillimore Committee to recommend that a dear line of demarcation be drawn. In part that recommendation was
 accepted when the 1981 Act introduced the strict liability rule, although the line of demarcation was drawn at an earlier stage than the
 committee recommended. But the 1981 Act also contained the saving provision already noted in s 6(c). I am for my part quite unable to read
 that provision as preserving liability for intentionally prejudicial publications after proceedings are in existence since it was quite unnecessary
 for that purpose: liability could be established irrespective of the publisher’s intention, and intention could therefore be relevant only to the
 gravity of the offence and thus to penalty, matters which could obviously be relied on even in the absence of a saving provision. In my view s
 6(c) was intended to preserve what was understood to be the existing law, that a publisher was liable in contempt for an intentionally
 prejudicial publication made at a time when proceedings were imminent. I cannot otherwise see what sensible purpose this provision could
 have been intended to serve.
       To read the Act in this way is to accept that the law of England on this point differs from that of Australia, as declared in James v
 Robinson although in most cases the practical results would probably not be very different. It also differs from Scottish law, as declared in
 Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1978 SLT 241. That was, however, a decision made before, and necessarily without reference to, the 1981
 Act and it introduced the concept (that a prospective defendant, once in the custody of the court, was entitled to the court’s protection) which,
 however attractive, is not (I think) to be found in the English cases. I accept Mr Collins’s argument that there should not be different laws on
 this subject north and south of the Tweed, but in practice the difference would be more apparent than real if the English test were imminence
  since once the Scots test is, to the knowledge of the publisher, satisfied it is hard to think he could regard proceedings as other than imminent
  and proceedings would not be imminent very long before the Scots test was satisfied. Despite Mr Collins’s cogent argument, I accordingly
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

have no doubt that a publication made with the intention of prejudicing proceedings which, although not in existence, are imminent may be
contemptuous and punishable as such if they give rise to the required risk.
     If the question were at large, I would be much more hesitant whether that proposition could hold if proceedings were not imminent. A-G v
News Group Newspapers Ltd is, however, a very clear decision on the point, and in making it this court expressly recognised that it was
extending the boundaries of contempt as previously understood. It is a decision with very serious implications in those cases, perhaps
increasingly common, where reporters are concerned to highlight an alleged crime, to point an accusing finger at an identified culprit and to
stimulate a demand for prosecution. It also has the effect of enlarging a quasi-criminal liability in a field very recently considered by
Parliament. Whether the decision would have been reached had the present point been taken and argued, had the ratio of James v Robinson
been relied on and had Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd been cited, it is idle and would be wrong to speculate. In a matter of this nature it is
very highly desirable that the law should be clear so that it may be understood and observed. I am quite satisfied that we should not be
justified in departing from the rule so recently and unambiguously laid down in this court. It must in my judgment follow that, if the risk and
the intention referred % 515Q to as (1) and (2) at the outset of this section are established, contempt may be committed even though
proceedings are neither in existence nor imminent. In short, I accept Mr Havers’s submission.

The facts
     For the applicant it was contended that both the risk and the intention were made out on the facts. The respondents contended that neither
of them was established. Both these crucial ingredients were accordingly in issue.

(1) The risk
      In submitting that the respondents’ publication did not create a real risk of prejudice to the due administration of justice Mr Collins relied
on a number of matters, including the climate of opinion independently created by the urgent request of the police for help in tracing Evans, the
very small circulation of the paper in the area of Mold, the generally sensational character of articles in the paper, the shortness of public
memory, the likely delay before proceedings, if there ever were any, came to court and the absence, in the event, of any application to abort the
trial or move it elsewhere. These are all matters for consideration but they are in my judgment of little weight compared with the one simple
fact that the respondents’ publication gave sensational publicity to information which may never, in the ordinary way, be disclosed to jurors in
a criminal trial. I do not doubt that most readers of the Sport would very quickly forget most of what they read in it. But the disappearance of
Anna Humphries was an event of great notoriety, particularly in the area where it occurred. Very considerable publicity was given to the hunt
for Evans. The fact that Evans had a record of serious sexual violence was simple, easy to grasp and likely to be remembered, or to be
recalled, by anyone who read the paper (or was informed of its contents) and later came to try the case. It would of course be highly
improbable that all the jurors, or even a majority, would have read the paper or learned of its revelation, but the risk would exist if only one
had done so, because he or she would be very likely to pass on the information to other members of the jury. The applicant cannot, I accept,
show a certainty of prejudice, and in the event there may have been none. But the law of contempt is concerned with a real risk of prejudice to
the due administration of justice, and that such a real risk existed on the facts here I am in no doubt at all. I would reject Mr Collins's
submission on this point.

(2) The intent
      The parties were agreed that the applicant must show that the respondents’ publication was specifically intended to impede or prejudice
the due administration of justice. Such an intent need not be expressly avowed or admitted but can be inferred from all the circumstances,
including the foreseeability of the consequences of the conduct, although the probability of the consequence taken to have been foreseen must
be little short of overwhelming before it will suffice to establish the necessary intent. But this need not be the sole intention of the contemnor,
and intention is to be distinguished from motive or desire. I base this brief, and I hope uncontroversial, summary on the valuable discussion of
this question in A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906 at 914-916, [1989] QB 110 at 125-127 and the citations there made.
      Mr Havers submitted that the necessary specific intent should be inferred on the facts of this case. The second respondent knew that Anna
Humphries was probably dead and that she had probably been murdered. He knew that Evans was the prime suspect and that the police were
mounting a massive manhunt to track him down. He believed that Evans was probably responsible for Anna’s c, 516Q disappearance. He
knew before publication of the police request that Evans’s convictions be not disclosed and appreciated that one of the reasons for their request
was that they did not want a fair trial to be prejudiced. He must have appreciated that it was only likely to be a short time before a warrant was
issued or an arrest made. He knew that the convictions of a defendant may not ordinarily be disclosed to a jury. As an experienced editor the
second respondent must have known that the article would create a risk of prejudice to a fair trial because it so obviously did. This was a
powerful submission, much of it based on answers given by the second respondent in evidence.
      Having heard the second respondent give evidence, I think it is possible to reconstruct his state of mind at the time of publication. He
 said, as is obvious, that a newspaper is written for its readers, and I have no doubt that his main (although unadmitted) aim was to publish a
 story of a kind which his readers could be expected to relish. According to him, his main aim was to alert the public to the danger of this
 violent and habitual sexual predator, which he felt the police had been wrong to conceal, and thereby perhaps increase the chance of his
 apprehension. I doubt if this concern was uppermost in the second respondent’s mind, but I see no reason to doubt that it played a part in his
 thinking. I accept his evidence that he gave consideration to the police request not to reveal Evans’s previous convictions, and also his
 evidence that he wondered whether the police were seeking to cover up their own failure to question a rather obvious local suspect before he
 slipped through the net. The second respondent’s belief, as he made plain in evidence, was that there could be no liability in contempt before a
 warrant had been issued or an arrest made. That belief, although perhaps understandable in 1988, was (as we have held) incorrect. But I
 accept the second respondent’s evidence that at the date of publication he regarded the commencement of criminal proceedings against Evans
 as speculative and remote. With the benefit of hindsight, of course, we know that a warrant was issued shortly after publication and an arrest
 marlf shortly after that. But these facts were not known when the newspaper was published. At that time all that was known was that Evans
 had disappeared, with some reason to think he had gone abroad. There was nothing to suggest that he had been sighted or that the police were
 on his scent or that his early apprehension was expected. It was wholly uncertain whether he would be found and, if so, where or when, and
A ll England Law Reports 1936-199 7                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:35pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

uncertain when, if at all, proceedings might follow.
     I have not found this factual issue easy to resolve, and I regard it as finely poised. But on balance I conclude that the application has not
shown beyond reasonable doubt that at the date of publication the second respondent had the specific intention which must be proved against
him. If proof of recklessness were enough, the answer might be different, but it is not. On the facts here I cannot be satisfied that the second
respondent intended to prejudice the fair conduct of proceedings, the very existence of which he regarded as speculative and remote. It follows
that I would, on this ground, refuse this application against both respondents.

Imminence
     On the legal ruling already given, it makes no difference whether legal proceedings were imminent or not. But since we heard argument
on the point I should express my conclusion briefly.
     With the benefit of hindsight, I would hold that at the time of publication the issue of a warrant was in fact imminent. But in considering
a common law contempt based on intention, it would seem to me that what would matter (if imminence were relevant at all) would not be the
factual record of what actually % 517Q happened but what appeared to the alleged contemnor as being likely to happen. Thus an event might
appear to be imminent and turn out not to be, or appear not to be but turn out to be so. If, contrary to the opinion expressed above, imminence
is any longer an appropriate test at all, the test must (I think) relate to what is apparently imminent and not to what turns out to be so.
Applying that test to the facts of this case, I would conclude (if a conclusion were called for) that the issue of a warrant was not at the date of
publication apparently imminent, although in the event it turned out to be so.

HODGSON J. I too would refuse this application against both respondents. Having heard the second respondent give evidence I too am not
satisfied so that I am sure that he had the necessary intention; indeed, had I to decide the issue on the balance of probabilities, I would arrive at
the same conclusion. However, applying the criminal standard to the question of risk and, taking into account the prejudice caused by the
police-inspired publications and the length of time it takes nowadays for a charge of serious crime to reach a jury, I am not satisfied so that I
am sure that a real risk was created by the publication of the article.
     I have however reached a different conclusion from Bingham LJ on the law and, not only in deference to the careful argument of counsel,
but also because I believe the question raised is one of considerable importance, I think it right to attempt to justify the conclusion I have
reached. Needless to say I do so with diffidence.
     Mr Collins QC argued that contempt by publication of material which creates a real risk to the fair trial of particular proceedings cannot
be committed before those proceedings are pending. He concedes that for us so to find either generally or on the facts of this case would
involve either refusing to follow the decision of the Divisional Court in^4-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906, [1989] QB
 110 or distinguishing that case. It is therefore necessary to examine in some detail the state of the law before that case was decided.
     Before I begin my examination of the law it will, I think, be helpful to clarify some things. We are here dealing with the type of contempt
which involves a real risk to the fair trial of proceedings; we are not directly concerned with the many other forms of conduct which can be
treated by the judges as contempts and made liable to the summary proceedings available to punish contempts. Many such contempts amount
also to offences of perverting the course of justice.
     The distinction between what I shall call ‘publication contempts’ and other contempts was clearly drawn in the judgment of four of the
judges of the High Court of Australia in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593, a case which, in my judgment, is of considerable importance
when considering what the position at common law was before A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd. The passage in the judgment is (at 602):

          ‘Interference with the due administration of justice is of the essence of all contempts of court but, where the contempt consists of
      interference with the administration of justice generally different considerations apply from those which apply in a case where what has
      been said or done has only a tendency to interfere with the fair trial of a particular case. Scandalizing the court is typical of the former
      species and we are disposed to think that Attorney-General v. Butterworth ([1962] 3 All ER 326, [1963] 1 QB 696) is an instance of this
      sort of contempt for, although to punish a witness for giving evidence in a case which has been decided would not interfere with the
      administration of justice in that case, such conduct would by discouraging witnesses tend to interfere with the due administration of
      justice in other cases. It is only with the narrower kind of contempt that we are concerned here. ’
                                                                     <^518Q
     The second thing to remember is that, prior to the Contempt of Court Act 1981, the courts did not distinguish between criminal and civil
proceedings when considering the time at which they became under risk from the publication of prejudicial matter. If the proceedings were
criminal proceedings the publication could amount to a criminal contempt; if civil, to a civil contempt.
     Publication contempt (when not falling within the strict liability rule created by the 1981 Act) consists of the usual two elements, actus
reus and mens rea (or external elements and mental element). I do not understand there to be any dispute as to the mental element required. It
is that the alleged contemnor must be proved to have intended to prejudice the fair trial of legal proceedings. In their draft Administration of
Justice (Offences) Bill (Criminal Law: Offences relating to Interference with the Course o f Justice (1979) (Law Com no 96)), cl 14 the Law
Commission suggested the following as the mental element for the proposed offence of ‘Publication and distribution of statements intended to
produce a miscarriage of justice’: ‘intending thereby to achieve a miscarriage of justice in any ... judicial proceedings.’
     It is in the definition of the external elements or actus reus that Mr Collins and Mr Havers differ sharply.
     Mr Havers advances alternative proposals. First, he submits the external ingredients should be that the publication of material should
create a real risk that it would prejudice a fair trial of future proceedings which were then contemplated: the imminence of the contemplated
proceedings should be a factor, but only a factor, to be taken into account in considering the question whether there was a real risk created. His
alternative formulation of the external ingredients is that the material published was likely to prejudice the fair trial of future proceedings
which, at the time of publication, were then imminent.
     Mr Collins suggests that the external elements include and are restricted to proceedings which are pending at the date of publication. In
his formulation for the court Mr Havers has restricted himself to criminal proceedings but, if one is considering the position at common law
without reference to the 1981 Act, civil proceedings must, in my judgment, be included and be subject to the same time limit as criminal
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

proceedings.
      What I propose to do is to consider the authorities in English law, in the jurisprudence of other common law countries, in particular
Australia, and in Scotland prior to the passing of the 1981 Act. I shall then look at the recommendations for reform which were made in
particular by the Phillimore Committee (Report o f the Committee on Contempt o f Court (Cmnd 5794 (1974)) and the Law Commission. I shall
then consider the Act itself and the changes it has effected. Finally, I shall examine the decision in A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd itself.
It is a decision the full impact of which has perhaps not yet been appreciated, particularly by the media.

English authorities prior to 1981
    The earliest authority cited to us was Skipworth’s Case (1873) LR 9 QB 230. In that case (which arose out of the Tichbome case)
Blackburn J said, after considering various forms of contempts (at 232):

           'But there is another, and a much more important purpose, for which proceedings for contempt of Court become necessary. When a
       case is pending, whether it be civil or criminal, in a Court it ought to be tried in the ordinary course of justice, fairly and impartially. In
       the present case there has been an indictment preferred against one of the persons now before us for perjury, <t. 519Qand that indictment
       stands to be tried, and will come on in due course of trial at law to be tried, and it ought to be tried fairly and impartially, the judge and
       jury deciding on the evidence produced, subject to cross-examination in the presence of both parties, each party making his comments in
       the presence of each other and the presence of the judge and the case should be then fairly and properlytried in that way. ’

     It is clear that what the court was there considering was a case which, in lay terms, had started.
     In Re Crown Bank, Re O'Malley (1890) 44 Ch D 649 is a decision to which I attach importance. This case concerned a contempt by
publication prejudicing the fair trial of a winding-up petition. The petition was presented by a shareholder. Prior to presentation the
shareholder ‘put in motion’ a series of articles in a newspaper, containing statements ‘unfavourable to the Company and its directors’. After
the presentation of the petition a further article was published. The bank moved to commit the publisher for contempt. North J found that
there had been a ‘gross contempt of Court’. In his judgment he said (at 651):

          ‘So far, however, as the earlier paragraphs published before the petition was presented are concerned, their publication might be the
       subject of an action for libel, but could be no contempt of Court.’

     This is the only English decision which has been cited to us where the comparison between pending proceedings and proceedings which
are merely imminent has had to be precisely drawn: the distinction was emphatically made. And this was a case where the shareholder caused
prejudicial comment to be made in relation to proceedings which he plainly intended himself later to put in motion. It is difficult to imagine
proceedings which, in the language used later, were more ‘imminent’; and they were obviously ‘contemplated’.
     It is unclear whether North J was invited to treat the earlier articles as contempts but they were clearly before him and, had he considered
them to be published in contempt, he would of his own motion have treated them as such and imposed punishment in respect of them. I do not
myself think that the dictum cited above can be categorised as obiter.
     R v Payne [1896] 1 QB 577, [1895-9] All ER Rep 521 is another case where the judges dealt with alleged contempt in a newspaper. In it
Lord Russell CJ said ([1896] 1 QB 577 at 580, [1895-9] All ER Rep 521 at 523):

            ‘I am of opinion that the application is unfounded, and the order ought to be discharged with costs; but I wish to express the view
        which I entertain, that applications of this nature have in many cases gone too far. No doubt the power which the Court possesses in such
        cases is a salutary power, and it ought to be exercised in cases where there is real contempt, but only where there are serious grounds for
        its exercise. Every libel on a person about to be tried is not necessarily a contempt of Court; but the applicant must show that something
        has been published which either is clearly intended, or at least is calculated, to prejudice a trial which is pending.’

       It seems to me clear from the facts of that case that, had the trial not been pending, the judges would not have considered the application at
a il
     The origin of the view that publication could amount to contempt in relation to specific proceedings which were not yet pending can be
traced to the decision of Wills J in R v Parke [1903] 2 KB 432, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721. The judgment contains a passage frequently
thereafter cited. It is important to state the particular facts of that case.
                                                                      <^520Q
       The headnote reads ([1903] 2 KB 432):

            ‘Where, a person having been charged before the petty sessions with an indictable offence triable only at the assizes, matter is
        published in a newspaper tending to interfere with the fair trial of the charge, the High Court has jurisdiction to attach the publisher of
        such matter for contempt of Court, notwithstanding that at the time of the publication the person charged has not yet been committed for
        trial.’

    On 19 March the defendant had been brought up before petty sessions and remanded without any evidence being taken. He was again
brought up on 2 April. Between those dates articles appeared in a newspaper on seven different occasions. They were ‘very much to the
disadvantage’ of the defendant. Proceedings for contempt were brought against the editor. The passage in the judgment of Wills J to which
has been attached great importance is:

           ‘Great stress has been laid by Mr. Danckwerts upon an expression which has been used in the judgments upon questions of this
        kind—that the remedy exists when there is a cause pending in the Court. We think undue importance has been attached to it. It is true
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

     that in very nearly all the cases which have arisen there has been a cause actually begun, so that the expression, quite natural under the
     circumstances, accentuates the fact, not that the case has been begun, but that it is not at an end. That is the cardinal consideration. It is
     possible very effectually to poison the fountain of justice before it begins to flow. It is not possible to do so when the stream has ceased.’

(See [1903] 2 KB 432 at 437, [1900—3] All ER Rep 721 at 723.)
     It is, however, clear that, in that case, the curial process had begun and the defendant was already within the protection of the courts when
the articles were published. The ‘fountain of justice’ began to flow when the defendant was brought up before Petty Sessions.
     Ini? vDavies [1906] 1 KB 32, [1904-7] All ER Rep 60 a slightly different question arose. The headnote reads ([1906] 1 KB 32):

         ‘Where, a person having been charged at the petty sessions with an indictable offence triable either at the assizes or at quarter
     sessions, matter is published in a newspaper tending to interfere with the fair trial of the charge, the King’s Bench Division has
     jurisdiction to attach the publisher of such matter for contempt of Court, notwithstanding that at the time of the publication it is uncertain
     whether the person charged, if committed at all, will be committed to the assizes or to the quarter sessions.’

    Wills J gave the judgment of the court. Having referred to the Court of King’s Bench being the ‘custos moram of all the subjects of the
realm’, he said ([1906] 1 KB 32 at 40, [1904-7] All ER Rep 60 at 65):

         ‘What then is the principle which is the root of and underlies the cases in which persons have been punished for attacks upon Courts
     and interferences with the due execution of their orders? It will be found to be, not the purpose of protecting either the Court as a whole
     or the individual judges of the Court from a repetition of them, but of protecting the public, and especially those who, either voluntarily
     or by compulsion, are subject to its jurisdiction, from the mischief they will incur if the authority of the tribunal be undermined or
     impaired. ’

     i? v Parke and R v Davies are authorities for the proposition that proceedings are pending whenever a case is before magistrates, regardless
of when the charge may      521Q eventually be tried. They are not, in my judgment, authority for ‘publication contempt’ to be possible before
the curial process has begun at all.
     Ini? v Clarke, ex p Crippen (1910) 103 LT 636, [1908-10] All ER Rep 915 a warrant had been issued for the arrest of Dr Crippen; he was
arrested on board a ship in Canadian waters and was taken before a judge in Quebec under the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881. The article was
published when Crippen was being brought back to England but before he had been formally charged. The court held that contempt applied to
comments made after arrest but before a formal charge. Darling J commented (103 LT 636 at 639, [1908-10] All ER Rep 915 at 918):

         ‘... to say that after a magistrate has performed a judicial act upon sworn information laid before him there are no proceedings against
     the accused person and where the person has been arrested upon a warrant and is in custody that there are no proceedings against the
     accused person in the sense that anybody is at liberty to say whatever he pleases concerning the case ... would be gravely to narrow the
     jurisdiction of this court

Lord Coleridge J said (103 LT 636 at 641, [1908-10] All ER Rep 915 at 921):

         ‘... after an information has been laid before the magistrate and he has issued a warrant ... all comments after that, tending to
      prejudice the administration of justice, are in the nature of contempt. The issue of the warrant is an act of a magistrate not merely
      ministerial but involving the exercise of a judicial discretion. It is therefore the first step in the criminal proceedings.’

     Once again the curial process had plainly begun and Crippen was within the protection of the court before the publication of the article.
     The first suggestion that publication contempt might be possible before proceedings were pending may be traced to an observation of Lord
Hewart CJ in i? v Daily Mirror, ex p Smith [1927] 1 KB 845, [1927] All ER Rep 503. That case held that it was contempt to publish a
photograph of a person charged with a criminal offence where a question as to his identity had arisen or might arise. The defendant had been
arrested, charged and brought before the justices. The photograph appeared on the very morning that an identity parade was to be held.
     Lord Hewart CJ said ([1927] 1 KB 845 at 851, [1927] All ER Rep 503 at 505):

        ‘Some matters were discussed during the argument which do not strictly arise here. We are not called upon to consider the question
      whether there may be contempt of court when proceedings are imminent but have not yet been launched. ’

He then referred to the already cited passage from the judgment of Wills J in R v Parke. However, Talbot J in a short judgment said ([1927] 1
KB 845 at 852, [1927] All ER Rep 503 at 506):

         ‘I have had grave doubts whether the facts here call for the exercise of our jurisdiction. On the whole I am prepared to concur in the
      judgment just delivered, understanding as I do that it is dealing only with the question in relation to proceedings actually pending.’

     i? v Odham's Press Ltd, ex p A-G [1956] 3 All ER 494, [1957] 1 QB 73 was a case concerned with the mental element. The offending
article was published at a time when the defendant had been brought before a magistrate and charged; the editor and reporter contended that
because they did not know of the pending criminal proceedings they could not be guilty of contempt. It was therefore a case <t, 522Q where no
question arose as to whether the proceedings were pending. However, Lord Goddard CJ said ([1956] 3 All ER 494 at 497, [1957] 1 QB 73 at
80):

          ‘It is obvious that if a person does not know that proceedings have begun or are imminent, he cannot ... be said to intend to influence
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

     the course of justice or to prejudice a litigant or accused person, but that is no answer if he publishes that which in fact is calculated to
     prejudice a fair trial.’

     The Administration of Justice Act 1960 contained a number of sections dealing with contempt of court. There had not at that date been a
single decision in English law which extended liability for publication contempt further back them ‘pending’. However, s 11(1) provided:

         ‘A person shall not be guilty of contempt of court on the ground that he has published any matter calculated to interfere with the
     course of justice in connection with any proceedings pending or imminent at the time of publication if at that time (having taken all
     reasonable care) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that proceedings were pending, or that such proceedings were imminent,
     as the case may be.’

     Of course, that section could not itself widen the time limit for publication contempt, although, in an Irish case, R v Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd [1962] NI 15, the court seems to have decided that it did.
     After 1960 there was a good deal of judicial and extra-judicial dicta stating that publication contempt applied to imminent proceedings,
     hi R v Savundranayagan [1968] 3 All ER 439, [1968] 1 WLR 1761 Savundra appealed against his conviction to the Court of Appeal,
Criminal Division. One of his grounds of appeal was that the fairness of his trial had been prejudiced by pre-trial publicity when he was
interviewed by David Frost on television. The court was clearly appalled by this interview which took place shortly after Savundra’s return to
England. Salmon LJ in the course of giving the judgment of the court said ([1968] 3 All ER 439 at 441, [1968] 1 WLR 1761 at 1764-1765):

         ‘The court, however, takes a very different view of the television programme of February, 1967, in which the appellant Savundra was
     interviewed shortly after his return to England. At this time it must surely have been obvious to everyone that he was about to be
     arrested and tried on charges of gross fraud. It must not be supposed that proceedings to commit for contempt of court can be instituted
     only in respect of matters published after proceedings have actually begun. No-one should imagine that he is safe from committal for
     contempt of court if, knowing or having good reason to believe that criminal proceedings are imminent, he chooses to publish matters
     calculated to prejudice a fair trial. On any view the television interview with the appellant Savundra was deplorable. With no
     experience of television, he was faced with a skilled interviewer whose clear object was to establish his guilt before an audience of
     millions of people. None of the ordinary safeguards for fairness that exist in a court of law were observed, no doubt because they were
     not understood. They may seem prosaic to those engaged in the entertainment business, but they are the rocks on which freedom from
     oppression and tyranny have been established in this country for centuries—as one well-known journalist subsequently pointed out in an
     evening paper. On the other hand, surprisingly and regrettably, virtually the whole interview was reproduced verbatim in one of the
     Sunday newspapers. This court hopes that no interview of this kind will ever again be televised. The court has no doubt that the
     television authorities and all those producing <t, 523Q and appearing in televised programmes are conscious of their public responsibility
     and know also of the peril in which they would all stand if any such interview were ever to be televised in the future. Trial by television
     is not to be tolerated in a civilized society. ’

    hi a letter to The Times of 18 July 1967 Mr Frost pointed out:

          ‘There had been no police action in the seven months following the initial newspaper coverage and there was no official indication
      that there would be. Nevertheless, we checked privately with the Board of Trade and elsewhere and were informed: “We have nothing
      on Dr. Savundra. Go ahead”.’

    For myself, I doubt whether there would today be the same horrified reaction to investigative journalism of this sort. We are treated
weekly to television programmes wherein the most serious allegations are made, frequently of crime. The ‘target’ is nearly always given the
opportunity of replying, which is sometimes taken, though more usually the journalist is presented with a dramatic photo-shot of a door being
slammed in his face or an attempt being made to break the camera.
    Thereafter in A-G v Leveller Magazine Ltd [ 1979] 1 All ER 745 at 749, [ 1979] AC 440 at 449 Lord Diplock, obiter, said:

         ‘Of those contempts that can be committed outside the courtroom the most familiar consist of publishing, in connection with legal
      proceedings that are pending or imminent, comment or information that has a tendency to pervert the course of justice

     Prior to the Contempt Act 1981 there were therefore many judicial dicta to the effect that, whenever either civil or criminal proceedings
were imminent, publication of prejudicial matter in respect of those proceedings was a contempt of court. But there was no decision to that
effect in English law nor had any attempt been made to commit for contempt when the publication was not in respect of pending proceedings.
Therefore not only had the courts never had to decide the issue but they had also never had an opportunity of considering what, in this context,
‘imminent’ meant.
     In June 1971 the Lord Chancellor appointed a committee under the chairmanship of Phillimore LJ to consider whether any changes were
required relating to contempt of court. It was during the time when the committee was in being that the decision of the House of Lords in A-G
v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273 was given (July 1973). That case had very important implications for the
committee. Lord Reid made this observation ([1973] 3 All ER 54 at 65, [1974] AC 273 at 301):

         ‘There is no magic in the issue of a writ or in a charge being made against an accused person. Comment on a case which is imminent
      may be as objectionable as comment after it has begun.’

    There can be no doubt that one of the greatest causes for anxiety, particularly on the part of the press, expressed to the committee was the
uncertainty as to when the law relating to publication contempt applies.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

    The committee expressed this concern in its Report on Contempt o f Court (Cmnd 5794 (1974)):

     ‘Uncertainty as to when the law applies
         84. A particular cause for anxiety on the part of the press is the uncertainty as to the time when the law of contempt applies. In
     relation to criminal proceedings, in particular, this anxiety has increased in England and Wales % 524Q since the opinions expressed in
     the Court of Appeal in R. v. Savundranayagan ([1968] 3 All ER 439 at 441, [1968] 1 WLR 1761 at 1764 per Salmon LJ) suggested that
     the strict law of contempt might apply before proceedings begin, provided they appear to be imminent: and in Scot land since the opinion
     of the High Court of Justiciary in Stirling v. Associated Newspapers Ltd (1960 JC 5), which suggested that publication could be a
     contempt once the criminal authorities had started to investigate a crime. In R. v. Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd ([1962] NI 15), a
     Northern Irish case, publication before proceedings had begun was held to be a contempt on the ground that proceedings were
     “imminent”; this is the only case of which we are aware where this opinion has actually been applied. If it is right that the law of
     contempt can apply when proceedings are “imminent”, what period does that cover? hi the Second Reading debate on the Administration
     of Justice Bill in 1960, the Lord Chancellor said the word “imminent” covered the situation where “an arrest is hourly expected”, but that
     expression of opinion was not authoritative, and the remarks in the Savundranayagan and Stirling cases suggest that it covers a much
     longer period. The view was pressed on us that these uncertainties have an unfortunately inhibiting effect upon the press and that it is of
     great importance to those who are concerned with public communication to be given more definite guidance. The bulk and weight of
     evidence we have received leave us in no doubt that this is so. ’

     The committee recommended that there should be a clear definition as to what comment should give rise to strict liability and when it
should apply. Radically different periods were suggested for criminal and civil proceedings. In criminal proceedings the period should begin
to run when an accused person was charged, in civil proceedings when the case had been set down for trial. The committee also recommended
that publication intended to pervert or obstruct justice in particular proceedings should be capable of being dealt with as a contempt of court,
but ‘only if the proceedings in question have started and have not yet been finally settled or concluded’: see the summary of conclusions and
recommendations in the report. The committee reported in December 1974.
     What then was the position in other common law jurisdictions and in Scotland.

Northern Ireland
     I have briefly referred to the Irish case R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd [1962] NI 15. Prior to 1981 it was the only decision that for
proceedings to be imminent was enough. It is clear that the court arrived at that decision because they concluded that s 11 of the 1960 Act
obliged them so to find. The court did not consider what without s 11 the law was. The reasoning of the court seems to me therefore to be
flawed, and I do not find its persuasive authority great.

Australia
    In 1963 the High Court of Australia (on appeal from the Supreme Court of Western Australia) was presented with the problem of
imminence of proceedings in stark form.
    The facts which give rise to the issue appear from the judgment of Kitto, Taylor, Menzies and Owen JJ in James v Robinson (1963)109
CLR 593 at 599:

         ‘The company was at the material time the publisher, and the appellant Toop the printer, of the “Sunday Times”, a weekly newspaper
     which was published in Perth and which had a circulation throughout Western Australia. The appellant James was the editor of the
     paper. It was proved that in two issues thereof on Sunday 10th February 1963 there was published an account <t, 525Q of two killings by
     a “wild gunman” in Perth. The articles clearly identified Robinson as the gunman and it was related that after killing two named persons
     in public places and threatening others he had secreted himself in a pine plantation some twenty square miles in area not far from Perth.
     The articles purported to report the accounts of various eye witnesses and it was said that an intensive “manhunt” was in progress at the
     time of the publication of the newspapers. Each account commenced with a banner headline, the first being “TWO MURDERED BY
     GUNMAN AT BELMONT” and the second, in even larger type, “2 MURDERED”. Each account featured some photographs and in the
     latter issue was a photograph of the respondent as the “hunted” man. It is, we think, unnecessary to refer to the reports in detail for
     subject to one question of law which was debated they were clearly contempts as was frankly admitted.’

It was not suggested that the gunman was arrested before the publication.
     After dealing with an issue of jurisdiction which is not relevant to this case the judgment set out the ‘second contention’ (at 602):

         ‘ [It] is of more substance and goes to the question whether the reports appearing in the newspapers can ... be regarded as constituting
      contempts of court. ’

    The judgment goes on to distinguish the two different forms of contempt in the passage I have already cited and continues, after citing a
passage in the judgment of Lord Hewart CJ (at 602):

          ‘And since the gravamen of the offence of contempt by means of such publications is prejudice to the fair trial of issues between
      “parties in causes” (to use Lord Hardwicke's expression in the St. James Evening Post Case ((1742) 2 Atk 469, 26 ER 683)) it has been
      said in innumerable cases that there is no contempt unless proceedings are pending. Thus in Skipworth's Case ((1873) LR 9 QB 230 at
      232) Blackburn J. described as a purpose more important than vindication of the dignity of the Court itself for which contempt
      proceedings become necessary, that “When a case is pending, whether it be civil or criminal, in a Court it ought to be tried in the
      ordinary course of justice, fairly and impartially”.’
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A ll ER 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others


    There then followed an extensive examination of the authorities including all those English cases to which I have referred in my judgment.
Included was a citation from the judgment of Isaacs J in Porter v R ,e x p Yee (1926) 37 CLR 432 at 443 (at 603):

         ‘... Isaacs J. in Porter v. The King, Ex parte Yee was of the opinion that an appeal against an order imposing a penalty for contempt
     of court should be allowed “on the ground that, there being no proceedings pending, the summary process of attachment for contempt of
     court is wholly inapplicable”. He added that “it would be an unprecedented and unwarranted stretch of curial authority, and an undue
     limitation of the right of free speech, to fine or imprison for a mere conjectural impediment to a non-existing proceeding”.’

    The judgment states its conclusion in emphatic and unambiguous terms (at 607-608):

         ‘We do not think that the very general considerations based upon the notion of poisoning the stream of justice before it begins to flow
     provide any sound or adequate test for determining what is and what is not contempt of court. A publication antecedently to the
     commencement of proceedings <t, 526Q may, as we have already said, constitute a libel or offence punishable under and in accordance
     with the general law, but it is not contempt of court. We think that in order to constitute contempt of court it must, for the reasons which
     we have indicated, be concerned with proceedings which are pending in a court in the sense in which that expression has been applied in
     the cases to which we have referred. Indeed, if the imminence of proceedings were to be regarded as sufficient foundation for
     applications for attachment for contempt in matters of this character—which would, of course, introduce many difficulties and much
     uncertainty—then there was no reason why the courts should have taken the trouble, as they have done in the many cases mentioned, to
     examine the significance of the laying of an information or the making of a charge and subsequent arrest. The present case is unusual,
     inasmuch as it seems that the alleged crimes were committed in public places with attendant publicity and the respondent was pursued by
     a large body of police officers with a view to his apprehension. Nevertheless, these circumstances provide no foundation for a departure
     from the rule that publications of the character in question here are not contempts punishable summarily in the Supreme Court unless at
     the time when the publications are made a Court is in some way or other seised of the subject-matter and the Supreme Court is thereby
     vested with a power to protect its authority, or the authority of the court concerned, to determine the relevant proceedings without
     obstruction or interference. That being so we are of the opinion that the appeal should be allowed. ’

    Windeyer J delivered a separate judgment. He dealt at length and in highly unflattering terms with the publication of the article and then
with the question of jurisdiction. He continued (at 614-615):

         ‘I turn to the next argument for the appellants: that contempt of court by the publication of matter likely to affect a trial can only occur
     when the trial is pending. In case after case in England it has been said that the offence is committed when matter is published, with
     intent to affect or influence, or which is calculated to affect or influence, pending proceedings. Persuasive support for this proposition,
     with its requirement that proceedings must be pending, may be found also in American cases. The word “pending”, in this context, is
     used in its ordinary legal sense as meaning that the trial or proceedings have been commenced and not completed. This rule applies
     equally to civil and to criminal proceedings. Once a matter becomes sub judice, and while it remains sub judice, comment that could
     influence judgment is unlawful. That is the basis of the rule. ’

    Having further examined the authorities, he addressed the decision of the Supreme Court of Western Australia (at 616-617):

         ‘And the learned judges of the Supreme Court, impressed by the fact that the mischief was the same if the publication was made
     shortly before arrest as if it were afterwards, held that they had and should exercise power to punish for contempt in this case. Their
     Honours said that where “the apprehension of the accused and the taking of criminal proceedings against him on a particular charge were
     not merely conjectural but were a matter of virtual certainty, and were in fact imminent, and where the publication is clearly calculated to
     prejudice his fair trial on that charge, this court should not shrink from invoking the jurisdiction to punish those responsible”. I
     appreciate the force of this. I certainly would not suggest that the Supreme Court, or this Court, should shrink from invoking any
     jurisdiction that it has <t, 527Q to put down a mischief. But I have come to the conclusion—not, I hope, the result of shrinking or
     timidity—that the power to punish for contempt of court could not properly be exercised in respect of these articles at the time they were
     published. That Robinson had been arrested before the application for an attachment of the newspaper was instituted is, in my view,
     immaterial: there is no such thing, I think, as “contingent contempt


Scotland
     In Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1979 SC 1 the publication was made at a time when the criminal had been arrested and charged with
an offence of possession of stolen property; he was in police custody but had not yet been charged with two murders which he was known to be
suspected of committing. The petition was, because of its evident importance, remitted to a bench of five judges.
     It was not, however, contended by the Lord Advocate that the terminus a quo of the court’s jurisdiction was earlier than—

         ‘the moment when a person has been arrested on a criminal charge or when, in solemn procedure, a petition has been presented to the
      Sheriff and a warrant for his arrest has been granted. ’

However, it is clear from the reasoning of the court’s judgment that no earlier period would have been contemplated and their conclusion was
stated to be ‘identical to that adopted by the High Court of Australia’ in James v Robinson (see 1979 SC 1 at 14).
     In my judgment the great importance of this decision is the reasoning which led, in the case of criminal contempt, to its conclusion.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

Reflecting a submission made by the Advocate General this was said (at 14):

         ‘We have no doubt that it can be said that from the moment of arrest the person arrested is in a very real sense under the care and
     protection of the Court and we are quite unable to see any relevant or material distinction between the situation vis a vis an accused
     person created by arrest and that which clearly exists at the time when an accused person is committed on petition for further
     examination. From the moment of arrest the process of apprehending, charging and bringing a person to trial has begun and the
     beginning of that process is one of two points of time at which relevant proceedings have commenced so as to bring into play the
     contempt jurisdiction of the Court where prejudicial publication is concerned. ’

    hi two passages also the court marked the distinction between contempt procedures and the criminal law (at 9):

         ‘It was common ground, too, that the publication of prejudicial material of the kind which might constitute the offence itself might
     form the subject-matter of a criminal charge of attempting to pervert or interfere with the course of or the administration of justice. It
     was agreed, too, that the peculiar and special jurisdiction of the Court to treat and deal with such publication as a contempt of court was,
     however, not unlimited in time, and that the critical question in this case was when does that special jurisdiction first arise in the
     administration of criminal justice? Publication of prejudicial material before that special jurisdiction arises, by the Press or by anyone
     else, may be just as damaging to the interests of justice as publication thereafter, but it is left to the control of the general criminal law
     and cannot constitute contempt of court which is a matter sui generis.’
                                                                   <^528H
And again (at 15):

         ‘It is, of course, perfectly obvious, as has been pointed out repeatedly in earlier cases and, indeed, in other jurisdictions that the
     administration of justice may suffer just as much injury as the result of publication or other conduct by the Press or by any other person or
     agency before the Court’s jurisdiction in contempt can be invoked, as it may suffer by publication or other conduct thereafter. The
     avoidance of such injury prejudicial to the course and interests of justice before the Court’s special jurisdiction arises is, however, left to
     the control of the general criminal law and if there is any reason to believe that the power of our criminal law as it is may not, in practice,
     be a wholly effective mechanism for that purpose then it is for consideration whether it should not be strengthened by legislation. ’


Textbooks
     Although no English judge has had to face the problem of deciding precisely what is meant by ‘imminence’, the writers of textbooks and
articles have not been able to avoid this task. The difficulties of definition and the problem of uncertainty become in my judgment very clear
from the relevant passages.
     Borrie and Lowe Law o f Contempt (2nd edn, 1983) p 168 deals with the question of imminence:

         ‘ “Imminence” is an elusive concept, and while it would seem clearly to cover cases where “a man is helping police with their
     inquiries” or the situation in Beaverbrook Newspapers where the publication appeared while the police were surrounding a suspect’s
     house, it appears to go beyond that. Are proceedings “imminent” when there is a massive man-hunt in operation for a named man? The
     answer might well depend on how quickly the suspect is arrested after the publication. Are proceedings “imminent” when a suspect is
     arrested abroad and extradition proceedings are in progress or about to begin? Again the answer might depend on how quickly the case
     comes before the English courts. While it is difficult to defend a law which operates so arbitrarily it is worth making the point that the
     greater the time lag between publication and trial the less the risk that the ensuing proceedings will be prejudiced.’

    It seems to me that, in trying to cope with the obvious difficulties of such an imprecise term, the learned authors were plainly, in this
passage, suggesting some form of what Windeyer J in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593 at 616 called ‘contingent contempt’ the
quasi-criminality of which has to await upon events. But it is surely obvious that a publication either is or is not a contempt of court at the
moment of publication.
    In Miller Contempt o f Court (2nd edn, 1989) p 171 the problems of uncertainty are stated but no suggestion made as to how they can be
overcome.

          ‘Assuming, therefore, that conduct prejudicial to imminent proceedings may be punished as a contempt at common law the question
      remains as to when this limited requirement will be satisfied. The word “imminent” does not lend itself to precise definition though
      various suggestions have been made over the years. Thus during the House of Lords debates on the Administration of Justice Bill in
       1960 Viscount Kilmuir L.C. suggested that (222 HL Official Report (5th series) col 252): “Proceedings may be imminent for example,
      when no one has yet been charged with a crime but an arrest is hourly expected.” No doubt this test would be satisfied on the facts of
      such     5290 cases as James v Robinson ((1963) 109 CLR 593) (where the suspect was being pursued within the limited area of a pine
      plantation) and R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd ([1962] NI 15) (where the police had surrounded the suspect’s house to carry out an
      arrest). In this latter case Sheil J suggested that the word “imminent” means “impending” or “threatening”, which is indeed the standard
      dictionary definition. This case was cited in Horsham Justices, ex p. Farquharson ([1982] 2 All ER 269 at 278, [1982] QB 762 at 773)
      where Forbes J said: “Criminal proceedings are ‘imminent’ if it must be obvious that a suspect is about to be arrested.” Viscount
      Kilmuir’s test would be satisfied also where a person whose trial was prejudiced was “helping the police with their inquiries” at the time
      of publication.’
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                        books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

The Contempt o f Court Act 1981
    The Contempt of Court Act 1981 in part implemented the recommendations of the Phillimore Committee.
    Sections 1 and 2 made provision for a new ‘strict liability rule’:

         ‘1. The strict liability rule, hi this Act “the strict liability rule” means the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as a contempt
     of court as tending to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so.
         2. Limitation o f scope o f strict liability.—(1) The strict liability rule applies only in relation to publications, and for this purpose
     “publication” includes any speech, writing, broadcast or other communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the public at large
     or any section of the public.
         (2) The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in
     question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
         (3) The strict liability rule applies to a publication only if the proceedings in question are active within the meaning of this section at
     the time of the publication.
         (4) Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which proceedings are to be treated as active within the meaning of this section. ’

    The starting points for proceedings becoming active are set out in Sch 1. For criminal proceedings they are:

         ‘... 3. Subject to the following provisions of this Schedule, criminal proceedings are active from the relevant initial step specified in
     paragraph 4 until concluded as described in paragraph 5.
         4. The initial steps of criminal proceedings are:—(a) arrest without warrant; (b) the issue, or in Scotland the grant, of a warrant for
     arrest; (c) the issue of a summons to appear, or in Scotland the grant of a warrant to cite; (d) the service of an indictment or other
     document specifying the charge; (e) except in Scotland, oral charge ...
         11.      Criminal proceedings against a person which become active on the issue of the grant of a warrant for his arrest cease to be active
     at the end of the period of twelve months beginning with the date of the warrant unless he has been arrested within that period, but
     become active again if he is subsequently arrested. ’

    That accords with the law in Australia and Scotland. There is no extension beyond warrant.
                                                                     <^5300
    Civil proceedings have a very much more restricted starting point, radically altering the position at common law:

         ‘12. Proceedings other than criminal proceedings and appellate proceedings are active from the time when arrangements for the
     hearing are made or, if no such arrangements are previously made, from the time the hearing begins, until the proceedings are disposed of
     or discontinued or withdrawn; and for the purposes of this paragraph any motion or application made in or for the purposes of any
     proceedings, and any pre-trial review in the county court, is to be treated as a distinct proceeding.
         13.     hi England and Wales or Northern Ireland arrangements for the hearing of proceedings to which paragraph 12 applies are made
     within the meaning of that paragraph—(a) in the case of proceedings in the High Court for which provision is made by rules of court for
     setting down for trial, when the case is set down; (b) in the case of any proceedings, when a date for the trial or hearing is fixed.'

    The 1981 Act repealed s 11 of the Administration of Justice Act 1960. In its place was enacted s 3, which reads:

        ‘Defence o f innocent publication or distribution.—(1) A person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule as the
     publisher of any matter to which that rule applies if at the time of publication (having taken all reasonable care) he does not know and
     has no reason to suspect that relevant proceedings are active.
        (2) A person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule as the distributor of a publication containing any such
     matter if at the time of distribution (having taken all reasonable care) he does not know that it contains such matter and has no reason to
     suspect that it is likely to do so.
        (3) The burden of proof of any fact tending to establish a defence afforded by this section to any person lies upon that person. ’

     It is to be noticed that s 3 only applies to contempt ‘under the strict liability rule’ so that the protection, if any, previously afforded by s 11
to publications intended to create a risk of prejudice to the fair trial of proceedings no longer applies.
     Section 6 provides:

         ‘Savings.—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act—(a) prejudices any defence available at common law to a charge of
      contempt of court under the strict liability rule; (b) implies that any publication is punishable as contempt of court under that rule which
      would not be so punishable apart from those provisions; (c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to
      impede or prejudice the administration of justice.’

     Whether s 6(c) was intended to retain the availability of summary contempt procedures in the case of publications prejudicing specific
proceedings may be in doubt. But that, on the plain meaning of the words, it does so retain them cannot be in doubt either (see A-G v His lop
[1991] 1 AllER 911, [1991] 1 QB514).
     Nor can it be in doubt that the certainty as to the beginning of proceedings provided in respect of strict liability contempt does not apply to
publications intended to prejudice trials. And, in respect of civil proceedings, intervention in the case of intentional conduct can still be made
at least as soon as proceedings are pending and, if^ -G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906, [1989] QB 110 is held to apply to
civil proceedings, even before that.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

                                                                      5310

The relationship between contempt and the criminal law
     There is clearly an extensive overlap between contempt of court and the criminal offence of perverting the course of justice. But they are
not coterminous. Strict liability publication contempt could not have been made the subject of a prosecution for perverting the course of justice
(although it might have been possible to prosecute it as a contempt: see R v Tibbits [1902] 1 KB 77, [1900-3] All ER Rep 896).
     The Phillimore Committee drew a very clear distinction between conduct which is intended to pervert or obstruct particular proceedings
and conduct which may unintentionally create a risk of prejudice or obstruction (see para 70 of the report). Their recommendation as to the
limit of time was (para 72):

         ‘As Mr. Justice Windeyer pointed out in the passage we have just quoted, conduct before proceedings begin may be harmful, and may
     be unlawful, but it is not (or should not be) punishable by summary procedure as a contempt. The question of the period of application of
     the law is of much greater importance in relation to the stricter form of contempt discussed in the next chapter, where we will return to it.
      We recommend here that the law should be clarified so that conduct intended to pervert or obstruct the course of justice should only be
     capable of being dealt with summarily as a contempt of court if the proceedings to which the conduct relates have started and have not
     been completed. ’

     The Law Commission in its Working Paper no 62 agreed with this recommendation and, in their report Criminal Law: Offences relating to
Interference with the Course o f Justice (1979) (Law Com no 96) para 3.79 and in cl 14 of their draft Administration of Justice (Offences) Bill
proposed a criminal offence, in these terms (at p 144):

          ‘(1) ... if a person, intending thereby to achieve a miscarriage of justice in any current or future judicial proceedings, publishes or
      distributes a statement whose publication or distribution creates a risk of a miscarriage, he is guilty of an offence

     Giving the best consideration I am able to the question, I would, absent the decision of the Divisional Court in A-G v News Group
Newspapers Ltd, hold, without hesitation, that the time when the summary jurisdiction of the judges over intentional publication contempts
begins should be when the relevant proceedings are pending. I believe this to be right in principle, on the balance of authority, as reflecting
legislative intent, also as reflecting the recommendations of those bodies who have given the matter consideration, and as leading to comity.

Principle
     It seems to me that the principle underlying the arrogation to themselves by the judges of a right to deprive a person of the right he would
otherwise have to trial by jury and, by a summary procedure, punish him, lies in the need for them to have available machinery by which,
speedily and effectively, they can protect the proceedings over which they have control. In respect of criminal proceedings they should be able
to protect the right to a fair trial of those who have entered their jurisdiction and protection. In respect of civil proceedings the litigants are
entitled to have their proceedings likewise protected.
     This rationale seems to me to find expression in the judgments to which I have referred. In James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 5 93 at 617,
in a passage cited by the Phillimore Committee (at para 71), Windeyer J said:
                                                                    <^532H
           ‘Mr. Wilson, appearing for the Crown as amicus curice, supported the view taken in the Supreme Court, and pointed to the
      desirability of defining this form of contempt solely by the character of the publication and its likely effect on expected curial
      proceedings, rather than by the fixing of a point of time before which words published would not be a contempt and after which they
      would be. But we are concerned with a criminal offence, and one triable otherwise than by the ordinary processes of the criminal law.
      Its limits are not at large. That the harmful consequences of a publication made before proceedings are commenced may be no less than
      if it were made afterwards does, naturally, seem a ground for saying that it too should be unlawful. And it well may be. But it is not
      punishable by summary procedure as a contempt: that is all that I mean to decide. Contempt of court is historically, and by its name and
      nature, concerned with the position of courts, with proceedings in court and with the protection of parties to proceedings in court.
      Whatever view one may hold on the question—much discussed since the decision of the House of Lords in Shaw v. Director o f Public
      Prosecutions ([1961] 2 All ER 446, [1962] AC 220)—of the province of judges as custodes morum, it seems to me, with respect, that the
      decision of the Supreme Court involved not merely the making of a new precedent, but a departure from old principle, already extended
      to its utmost limit. The distinction may seem illusory; but I do not think that it is. The judgments in this Court in Porter v. The King', Ex
      parte Yee ((1926) 37 CLR 432) are against the view taken in the Supreme Court. Higgins J. said (at 448) “I am not at all sure that under
      modem developments of journalism the principle is satisfactory”. It may be even less satisfactory today than it was when his Honour
      spoke. But, if it is to be altered, that must, I consider, be done by the legislature.’

     The reasoning is also very apparent in the judgment of the court in the Scottish case, Hall v Associated Newspapers Ltd 1978 SLT 241, to
which I have already referred. See also the passage from the judgment of Wills J ini? v Davies [1906] 1 KB 32 at 40, [1904-7] All ER Rep 60
at 65 to which I have also referred.

Authority
    On the only two occasions other than the Irish case where a court has been faced with a case which actually raised the question whether
publication contempt could be committed in respect of imminent proceedings the answer has been an emphatic No (see Re Crown Bank, Re
O'Malley (1890) 44 Ch D 649 and James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593).
    The dicta, eminent the sources from which they have come, have all been in cases where the issue has been a long way away from arising,
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                        books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

and no English judge has considered the problems and difficulties of an ‘imminent’ starting point.

Legislative intent
     The 1981 Act was passed, at least in part, to implement the recommendations of the Phillimore Committee. By laying down strict (and to
some extent artificial) rules as to when proceedings should be ‘active’ Parliament was clearly accepting the recommendations of the Phillimore
Committee as to certainty. It seems to me highly desirable that the same certainty should be achieved for intentional publication contempt. It
is to be noted that in s 4(2) when the court is given the power to limit the publication of reports of proceedings the test needed is ‘pending or
imminent’.
                                                                        533Q

Recommendations
    The recommendations of the Phillimore Committee and the Law Commission have found favour in respect of strict liability contempt. I
would think that, other things being equal, importance should be attached to their recommendations as to the interrelationship between
publication contempt and the criminal law.

Comity
    It seems to me highly undesirable that the law in this respect should be different in England and Scotland. In Scotland the second
respondent would have been in no peril from summary contempt proceedings.

A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd
    A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd [1988] 2 All ER 906, [1989] QB 110 is the only English authority for the first of Mr Havers’s two
propositions. The facts, as in a number of the cases at which we have looked, were such as, understandably, to raise judicial hackles. The
family of an 8-year-old girl alleged that she had been raped by a doctor but it was decided not to prosecute him. Articles appeared in the Sun
newspaper, under screaming headlines, alleging that the girl had been raped and the paper’s editor also arranged for financial help to be
provided by News Group if the solicitors instructed by the child’s mother brought a private prosecution. A private prosecution was brought
and the doctor was acquitted.
     The headnote reads ([1989] QB 110):

          ‘... Held, allowing the application. (1) that conduct with the specific intention of interfering with the administration of justice
      constituted contempt of court at common law; that the articles published in the newspaper, the affidavits and the financial support of the
      girl’s mother in bringing a private prosecution showed that the respondent had the necessary intention to prejudice a fair trial by bringing
      to the attention of the newspaper’s readers, including potential jurors, damaging matters affecting the doctor which would be
      inadmissible evidence in criminal proceedings ...
          (2) That at common law there could be contempt to interfere with the course of justice even if the conduct did not relate to pending or
      imminent proceedings; that, although proceedings had not been brought at the time of the publication of the articles, the respondent’s
      conduct in publishing the articles at the same time as it was encouraging and assisting the mother to bring a private prosecution was
      sufficient to constitute a contempt at common law; but that, in any event, proceedings were imminent since it was virtually certain that
      there would be a prosecution following after the publication of the articles ... Dictum of Donovan LJ. in Attorney-General v. Butterworth
      ([1962] 3 All ER 326 at 332-333, [1963] 1 QB 696 at 724-725) and Attorney-General v. Newspaper Publishing Pic. ([1987] 3 All ER
      276, [1988] Ch 333) applied.
          Per curiam. The conduct of the respondent in publishing the article was in fact reckless. Recklessness without an intent to interfere
      with the administration of justice is not contempt of court albeit that recklessness of the seriousness committed in this case could only
      lead to the creation of a real risk of the course of justice being interfered with

    Despite the fact that James v Robinson was cited by counsel for the respondent company it does not seem to have been argued that
publication contempt was limited to pending proceedings. No reference was made to the early cases which I have cited save R v Parke nor was
mention made of the Scottish case of Hall v <b 534Q Associated Newspapers Ltd and Watkins LJ was persuaded that the vagueness of the
concept of imminence was a merit rather than a disadvantage (see [1988] 2 All ER 906 at 919, [1989] QB 110 at 132). If I am correct in my
view that the dictum of North J in Re Crown Bank, Re O'Malley (1890) 44 Ch D 649 at 651 was not obiter then the court would, had the case
been cited to them, have had to overrule that decision.
     The ratio decidendi upon which Mr Havers bases his first proposition appears where Watkins LJ first set out the argument ([1988] 2 All
ER 906 at 919, [1989] QB 110 at 132-133):

          ‘Junior counsel for the Attorney General most impressively submitted that “imminent proceedings” is a vague and uncertain phrase
      which cannot be confined to any particular length of time as a matter of principle. Its application depends on all the circumstances of the
      case. The concept is necessarily imprecise because it is intended to be applied by reference to its purpose. There are cases, he said,
      where although proceedings are not yet active, they are likely to be commenced in the near future. Some proceedings are imminent when
      there is a likelihood or a real risk that they will be instituted in the near future and when there is a real risk that the kind of publication as
      here would interfere with the course of justice. In the present case, he submitted, proceedings were imminent, the respondent intended
      they should be commenced at their expense as soon as possible and actively pursued that goal because they were determined to see Dr B
      charged, tried and convicted. The possibility of counsel advising against proceedings did not remove the likelihood or real risk that
      proceedings would be instituted in the near future. Alternatively, he argued, that if the proceedings here could not be said to be
      imminent, common law contempt applies nonetheless in the whole of the circumstances of this case. This is because the purpose of the
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1992 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:36pm)
Attorney General v Sport Newspapers L td and others

     contempt jurisdiction is to prevent interference with the course of justice. The more distant the commencement of proceedings, the less
     likely such interference. But here, he said, the contents of the articles created a real risk that a fair trial would be impeded. There is, he
     contended, no authority which states that common law contempt cannot be committed where proceedings cannot be said to be imminent,
     but where there is a specific intent to interfere with the course of justice accompanied by a real risk that the published matter will impede
     a fair trial, the occurrence of which is in contemplation. The authorities are not concerned with the scope of common law contempt
     where such an intent exists in relation to proceedings in the contemplation of a respondent who deliberately assists a private prosecutor
     to prosecute as soon as possible. I have found that a formidable contention. The circumstances in which a criminal contempt at common
     law can be committed are not necessarily, in my judgment, confined to those in which proceedings are either pending or imminent, “an
     imprecise word by which to mark out a period of time”: per Windeyer J in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593 at 618. The common
     law surely does not tolerate conduct which involves the giving of encouragement and practical assistance to a person to bring about a
     private prosecution accompanied by an intention to interfere with the course of justice by publishing material about the person to be
     prosecuted which could only serve to and was so intended to prejudice the fair trial of that person. This is especially so where the
     publisher of them makes it plain that he believes the person referred to in the articles is guilty of serious crime, is deserving of
     punishment for that and that he has committed some other similar crime. ’
                                                                   <^535H
    Watkins LJ appreciated that he was extending the common law of contempt ([1988] 2 All ER 906 at 920, [1989] QB 110 at 133):

         ‘The common law is not a worn out jurisprudence rendered incapable of further development by the ever increasing incursion of
     Parliamentary legislation. It is a lively body of law capable of adaptation and expansion to meet fresh needs calling for the exertion of
     the discipline of law.’

    Watkins LJ concluded his judgment with the passage upon which Mr Havers bases his second proposition ([1988] 2 All ER 906 at 921,
[1989] QB 110 at 135):

         ‘The respondents here had very much in mind particular proceedings which they were determined, as far as it lay within their power
     and influence, to ensure took place. If it is necessary for the Attorney General to establish that proceedings were imminent, he has, I
     think, done so. In my judgment, where a prosecution is virtually certain to be commenced and particularly where it is to be commenced
     in the near future, it is proper to describe such proceedings as imminent. Such was the case here. ’

     A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd was undoubtedly complicated by the fact that there was not only publication of material but also active
support given to the proceedings which the newspaper’s editor wanted to happen. But it is plain authority for the proposition that publication
of material prior to proceedings being pending can amount to publication contempt. In my judgment, as I have tried to show, that was a wrong
decision.
      It is also a decision which has implications for the media which I am not sure have yet been appreciated. It is almost a daily occurrence
that investigative journalism, whether by television, radio or the press, will target some wrongdoer, publish damning material about him or it
and seek, expressly or impliedly, to have instigated criminal proceedings or to urge those who have suffered to seek compensation by civil
litigation; such proceedings would clearly be contemplated. The actus reus of the kind of contempt punished in A-G v News Group
Newspapers Ltd is committed time and time again. Mr Havers meets this by pointing to the fact that it is the Attorney General who usually
brings publication contempt proceedings but his consent is not required for common law contempt proceedings; s 7 of the 1981 Act only
requires his consent for ‘proceedings for a contempt of court under the strict liability rule’. Many of the ‘targets’ of investigative journalism
are rich and powerful and who is to say that they, when attacked, will not respond by seeking leave to move for contempt.
      I do not think that the ambit of the summary procedure for publication contempt should be widened. The criminal law should be left to
deal with offences of perverting the course of justice. Judges should not find guilt and punish unless it is necessary for the effective control of
active proceedings. If contempt be the Proteus of the common law then for my part I would hope that his repertoire will not be increased.
      Despite what Robert Goff LJ said in R v Greater Manchester Coroner, ex p Tal [1984] 3 All ER 240 at 247-248, [1985] QB 67 at 8 0-81,1
am convinced that the decision in A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd was wrong and, were it necessary to do so, I would refuse to follow it.

Application refused.

                                                                                                               Dilys Tausz Barrister. <*, 536ffl
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen ™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)




                                                Attorney General v Hislop and another
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

COURT OF APPEAL, CIVIL DIVISION
PARKER, NICHOLLS AND MCCOWAN LJJ
16, 17, 26 JULY 1990


Contempt o f court - Appeal - Court o f Appeal - Jurisdiction - Appeal by applicant - Application fo r committal or attachment - Application
by Attorney General fo r company and editor to be fined fo r contempt - Judge dismissing application - Attorney General appealing to Court o f
Appeal - Attorney General intimating that he did not intend to press fo r committal o f editor - Whether Court o f Appeal having jurisdiction if
application not fo r committal or attachment —Administration o f Justice Act 1960, s 13(2).

Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Pending proceedings - Publication o f matter calculated to prejudice fa ir
trial - Substantial risk that course o f proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced - Improper pressure on plaintiff to abandon
claim - Plaintiff suing defendant magazine fo r libel - Magazine publishing articles containing allegations about matters on which it intended
to cross-examine plaintiff at trial by way o f justification - Whether articles amounting to improper pressure on plaintiff to abandon claim
against magazine - Whether risk that potential jurors at trial o f action might be prejudiced by articles - Whether articles giving rise to
substantial risk that course o f proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced - Whether articles amounting to contempt.

Three months before the trial of a libel action brought by S, the wife of a notorious mass-murderer, against a well-known satirical magazine the
magazine published two articles the import of which was that S had known what her husband was doing at the time of the murders and either
did nothing about it or lied to the police to give him an alibi and that she was defrauding the Department of Social Security. The Attorney
General applied to the court for orders that the editor be committed to prison and the company which published the magazine be fined for
contempt, on the ground that the articles had been published with the intention of either dissuading S from pursuing her libel action against the
magazine or of prejudicing potential jurors in the action and that in either event the publication of the articles had created a real and substantial
risk of serious prejudice to the fair trial of the libel proceedings and therefore constituted a contempt of court under the Contempt of Court Act
1981. The judge dismissed the application on the grounds that although the articles were intended to deter S from pursuing her claim it had
not been established that there was substantial risk that the course of the libel proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced by
improper pressure. The Attorney General appealed to the Court of Appeal but intimated to the defendants that he would not be seeking an
order of committal against the editor. The defendants contended (i) that the court had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal because under s 13(2)a
of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 an appeal lay in contempt proceedings at the instance of the applicant only in the case of ‘an
application for committal or attachment’ and there was no such application against the company which published the magazine or against the
editor in view of the Attorney General’s decision not to press for his committal, and (ii) that the articles were intended to do no more than
point out the matters on which S would be cross-examined if she persisted with her action. <*, 910C3

     Section 13(2), so far as material, is set out at p 916 c, post



H eld - (1) For the purposes of s 13(2) of the 1960 Act the right of appeal in contempt proceedings at the instance of the applicant was not
qualified by whether ‘committal or attachment’ was available as a penalty for the contempt since the purpose of the phrase ‘an application for
committal or attachment’ was merely to identify the fact that the application to punish for contempt had been made by the applicant and not by
the court of its own motion, and the fact that the particular punishment referred to was not applicable to a company was irrelevant. In any
event the appeal was in respect of an application for committal or attachment, namely the committal or attachment of the editor, as well as the
punishment of the company. Furthermore, the fact that the Attorney General had chosen to inform the defendants that he would not press for
the committal of the editor did not change the nature of the application or affect the court’s jurisdiction or its power to commit the editor if it
thought fit. Accordingly, the court had jurisdiction to hear the Attorney General’s appeal (see p 916 e to;', p 917 a j, p 918 c to e, p 922 d and
p 924 j to p 925 d g to p 926 a, post).
      (2)      The articles went beyond fair and temperate criticism or a private warning before trial of possible cross-examination. Instead they held
S up to public obloquy and were untrue, defamatory and designed to deter S from proceeding with her action by what amounted to threats to
expose her to cross-examination on her knowledge of her husband’s murderous activities and her fraud on the social security authorities. They
accordingly amounted to improper pressure on S to abandon her claim against the defendants, notwithstanding the defendants’ belief at the
time of publication that the articles were true or that they would be entitled to cross-examine S on the matters contained in them by way of
justification. There was also a risk that potential jurors at the trial of the action might be prejudiced by the articles. In those circumstances the
articles gave rise to a substantial risk that the course of the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced and amounted to a contempt
both at common law and under the Contempt of Court Act 1981. The Attorney General’s appeal would accordingly be allowed and the
defendants each fined £10,000 (see p 919 g h, p 920 b to e j to p 921 e, p 922 f g j to p 923 a d to j, p 924 g to j, p 927 c d g to j and p 928 g,
post); A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54 applied.

 N otes
 For appeal to the Court of Appeal in cases of contempt of court, see 9 Halsbury 's Laws (4th edn) paras 107-108, and for cases on the subject,
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

see 16 Digest (Reissue) 115-118,1194—1217.
    For the Administration of Justice Act 1960, s 13, see 11 Hals bury's Statutes (4 th edn) 176.
    For the Contempt of Court Act 1981, see ibid 181.

C ases referred to in ju d g m en ts
A-G v English [1982] 2 All ER 903, [1983] 1 AC 116, [1982] 3 WLR 278, HL.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, [1973] 3 WLR 298, HL.
Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269, [1891—4] All ER Rep 965, CA.
R v J G Hammond & Co Ltd [1914] 2 KB 866, DC.
R v Thomson Newspapers Ltd, exp A-G [1968] 1 All ER 268, [1968] 1 WLR 1, DC.

C ases also cited
A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276, [1988] Ch 333, CA.
Comptroller o f Customs v Western Lectric Co Ltd [1965] 3 All ER 599, [1966] AC 367, PC.    911Q
Lenton v Tregoning [1960] 1 All ER 717, [1960] 1 WLR 333, CA.
Lonrho pic, Re [1989] 2 All ER 1100, [1990] 2 AC 154, HL.
R v Blumenfeld, exp Tupper (1912) 28 TLR 308, DC.
R v Daily Mail (editor), ex p Factor (1928) 44 TLR 303, DC.
R v Duffy, exp Nash [1960] 2 All ER 891, [1960] 2 QB 188, DC.
R vM achin [1980] 3 All ER 151, [1980] 1 WLR 763, CA.
Savings and Investment Bank Ltd v Gasco Investments (Netherlands) B V (No 2) [1988] 1 All ER 975, [1988] Ch 422, CA.
Vine Products Ltd v Mackenzie & Co Ltd [1965] 3 All ER 58, subnom Vine Products Ltd v Green [1966] Ch484.
William Thomas Shipping Co Ltd, Re [1930] 2 Ch 368.

A p p eal
The Attorney General appealed against the judgment of Popplewell J given on 11 April 1990 whereby he dismissed the Attorney General’s
application by motion dated 2 February 1990 that the first respondent, Ian David Hislop, the editor of the magazine Private Eye, be committed
to prison and/or fined and that the second respondent, Pressdram Ltd, the proprietors and publishers of Private Eye, be lined for contempt of
court in publishing articles on 3 and 17 February 1989 in Private Eye with the intention of causing Sonia Szurma Sutcliffe to abandon a libel
action against the magazine. The facts are set out in the judgment of Parker LJ.

Alan Moses QC and J Richard McManus for the Attorney General.
Gavin Lightman QC and Adrienne Page for the respondents.

                                                                                                                                      Cur adv vult

26 July 1990. The following judgments were delivered.

P A R K E R L J. On 2 February 1990 Her Majesty’s Attorney General gave notice of motion to the respondents, Ian Hislop, the editor of the
magazine Private Eye, and Pressdram Ltd, its proprietors and publishers, seeking orders (1) that Ian Hislop be committed to Her Majesty’s
prison and/or be ordered to pay a fine for his contempt as specified in the notice, (2) that Pressdram Ltd be ordered to pay a fine for its
contempt as so specified, (3) that both Ian Hislop and Pressdram Ltd do pay the costs of and incidental to the application and any orders made
thereon and (4) that such further or other orders be made as may to the court seem just.
     The contempt specified concerned the publication in the issues of Private Eye 3 and 17 February 1989 of two articles relating to Mrs
Sutcliffe, the wife of Peter Sutcliffe widely known as ‘the Yorkshire Ripper’.
     It was alleged in the notice of motion (a) that the articles were published with the intention of seeking to dissuade Mrs Sutcliffe from
pursuing a pending libel action against Private Eye, (b) alternatively that they were published with the intention of prejudicing potential jurors
against Mrs Sutcliffe, (c) in either event that the publications individually and cumulatively created a real risk of prejudice to the fair trial of
the proceedings (ie the libel action), (d) further and alternatively that the publications individually and cumulatively created a substantial risk
of serious prejudice to the said proceedings and so constituted a contempt of court under the strict liability rule within the meaning of the
Contempt of Court Act 1981.         912Q
     The motion was heard by Popplewell J, who on 30 March 1990 dismissed the application for reasons to be delivered later. They were so
delivered in a judgment dated 11 April 1990.
     By notice of appeal dated 2 May 1990 the Attorney General now appeals to this court seeking an order that the judgment be set aside
and—

            ‘that the said Ian David Hislop and Pressdram Limited be adjudged in contempt of court and be committed and/or ordered to pay fines
        for contempt of court and ordered to pay the applicant the costs of these proceedings and of the appeal to be taxed.’

      Notwithstanding the terms of the notice of appeal the Crown Prosecution Service on behalf of the Attorney General wrote on the same day
 to the solicitors for Mr Hislop and Pressdram Ltd (to whom I shall hereafter refer collectively as ‘Private Eye’ save where some distinction is
 necessary) in the following terms:
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

         ‘The appeal is brought because it is considered that the judgment leaves the law in this area in an unsatisfactory state. However, in
     all the circumstances, the Attorney General does not propose to seek to persuade the Court of Appeal that an order of committal against
     Mr Hislop should be made, although other penalties may well be appropriate.’

     The foregoing recital of the history of the Attorney General’s application has been necessary because Mr Lightman QC for Private Eye
submits that it results in this court, by virtue of the provisions of s 13(2) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960, having no jurisdiction to
entertain the appeal.
     Before considering this point however, I shall set out the principal facts relating to the substantive appeal.
     Peter Sutcliffe was arrested on 2 January 1981 and on 30 January there appeared in the magazine an allegation that Mrs Sutcliffe had sold
her story to the Daily Mail for £250,000. Peter Sutcliffe was convicted of murder on 22 May 1981. The foregoing allegation was repeated in
the issue of the magazine for 11 February 1983.
     It was not until 23 January 1987 that Mrs Sutcliffe took action in respect of these two allegations both of which Private Eye has accepted
were untrue.
     That action took its normal course up to January 1989 when Private Eye made a late amendment to plead justification. Also in that month
the action came into the warned list and was likely to come to trial in London in about three months. I shall hereafter refer to this action as
‘the first action’. Very shortly thereafter came the two articles of 3 and 17 February, the subject of these proceedings. The first article was in
these terms:

        ‘Mrs Sonia Sutcliffe, wife of the Yorkshire Ripper, Peter Sutcliffe, has sued the Eye for libel nearly six years after a story about her
     appeared. The case should bring up some of the more curious aspects of the hunt for Peter Sutcliffe such as the question of his alibi. The
     former Chief Constable of Yorkshire, Ronald Gregory, outlines in his book how on many occasions his men had interviewed Sonia
     Sutcliffe and how she provided an alibi for her husband when he was out on his murderous adventures by “telling the [police] officer that
     her husband rarely went out at night—and, if he did, she went with him“. No doubt this explanation, subsequently proven to be false,
     can be adequately dealt with by Mrs Sutcliffe during cross-examination at the libel hearing.’

As to this the judge said:    913Q

         ‘It is not in dispute that what that article alleged was that the plaintiff knew before her husband’s arrest that he was killing and that
      she had lied to the police to provide him with a false alibi.’

The second article was considerably longer. I find it unnecessary to cite it. It is sufficient to set out the judge’s observations upon it. He said:

         ‘It is not in dispute that the words meant that Mrs Sutcliffe knew what her husband was doing at the time of these killings and did
      nothing about it; that her protestation to the contrary was a lie; and that she was defrauding the Department of Social Security.’

     As a result of these articles (a) Mrs Sutcliffe’s solicitors wrote to the Attorney General complaining that they constituted a contempt of
court and (b) Mrs Sutcliffe’s pleadings in the first action were amended to set them up in aggravation of damages.
     That action resulted on 24 May 1989 in judgment for Mrs Sutcliffe for £600,000. By that time the Attorney General had given notice to
Private Eye of the possibility of contempt proceedings in respect of the two articles. It was apparently unsuccessfully contended at the trial that
in view of the possibility of contempt proceedings the two articles should not be taken into account in assessing damages.
      On 26 June 1989 Private Eye gave notice of appeal against the judgment and on 7 July 1989 Mrs Sutcliffe issued a writ claiming damages
for libel in respect of the two articles of 3 and 17 February. I shall refer to this action as ‘the second action’. In that action Private Eye pleaded
justification in their defence, which was delivered on 29 September. One week later the Attorney General informed Private Eye that contempt
proceedings would be taken in respect of the two articles.
      On 6 November, a little over a month later, the second action was settled on payment to Mrs Sutcliffe of substantial damages and all her
costs and a statement in open court.
      The material parts of that statement are as follows:

          ‘Plaintiff's counsel ... The Defendants now accept that there is no truth in the allegation that the Plaintiff lied to the police to
      provide her husband with a false alibi. Moreover they accept that she had no idea, before her husband’s arrest, of what he had been
      doing ... I have already stated that the Defendants now accept that the Plaintiff had not known of her husband’s criminal activity prior to
      his arrest. They also now accept that she has never defrauded the social security authorities and that they had no cause to come knocking
      on her door ...
          Defendants ’ counsel ... on behalf of the Defendants, I accept everything that my learned friend has said. The Defendants do now
      recognise that the Plaintiff knew nothing prior to her husband’s arrest of the actions which led to his convictions. They further accept
      that she has not deceived the social security authorities which have no cause to come knocking on her door. ’

     Two further facts should be recorded. Private Eye’s appeal from the judgment for £600,000 was allowed as to quantum by the Court of
Appeal and was thereafter disposed of by a consent order which provided, inter alia, that judgment be entered for Mrs Sutcliffe for £60,000.
The figure of £60,000 was not, as has sometimes been suggested, a figure indicated, much less decided by this court. It was a matter dealt with
entirely by the parties.   914Q
     I now turn to consider Mr Lightman’s submission that this court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.
     Section 13 of the Administration of Justice Act 1960, so far as immediately material, provides:

          ‘(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an appeal shall lie under this section from any order ordecision of a    courtin the exercise
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

     of jurisdiction to punish for contempt of court (including criminal contempt); and in relation to any such order or decision the provisions
     of this section shall have effect in substitution for any other enactment relating to appeals in civil or criminal proceedings.
         (2) An appeal under this section shall lie in any case at the instance of the defendant and, in the case of an application for committal
     or attachment, at the instance of the applicant; and the appeal shall lie ... (b) from an order or decision of ... a single judge of the High
     C ourt... to the Court of Appeal ...
         (3) The court to which an appeal is brought under this section may reverse or vary the order or decision of the court below, and make
     such other order as may be just ... ’

      Mr Lightman submits (a) that there can be no appeal by the applicant in respect of the dismissal of the application against Pressdram Ltd
because there was in respect of the company no application at any time for committal or attachment and that the requirements of the opening
paragraph of s 13(2) are therefore not fulfilled, (b) that in the case of Mr Hislop there is not, as a result of the letter sent with the notice of
appeal, any live issue as to committal and that the opening paragraph of s 13(2) requires that there should be a live issue as to committal on the
appeal if there is to be jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
      As to the second of those submissions I have no hesitation in rejecting it. It appears to me that the opening paragraph of s 13(2) merely
refers to the original application. If that application was for committal or attachment, as it was in the present case, the unsuccessful applicant
has in my judgment a clear right of appeal and this court can, under s 13(3), make an order for committal or impose any lesser penalty that
seems just. The fact that the applicant chooses to inform the defendant that he will not seek to persuade the Court of Appeal to commit does
not affect the position of jurisdiction at all. It is no doubt a matter to which the court, if it decides to allow the appeal, will attach very great
importance in respect of sentence but it has nothing to do with jurisdiction.
      The first submission is, if sustainable, of far-reaching importance. Since it is impossible to commit a company to prison, be it for
contempt or indeed anything else, the submission if correct would mean that, if an application to punish a company for contempt cannot
properly be made save upon an application for a fine or other remedy less than committal and it were held not guilty of a contempt, there could
be no appeal. This would be so even if it was abundantly clear that the judge had misdirected himself or reached a perverse finding on fact and
that there had been a contempt of the most heinous character, which would warrant the imposition of a very large line. It is difficult to suppose
that when enacting s 13 of the 1960 Act Parliament intended that companies should be given any such protection particularly when (a) the
purpose of s 13(1) was plainly to extend to cases of criminal contempt the right of appeal to the Court of Appeal which already existed in cases
of civil contempt, (b) the section clearly exposes an individual who has been acquitted to the risk of being found guilty and committed to prison
on appeal and (c) the section, which was plainly designed to extend rights of appeal, would have the effect of cutting down the applicant’s right
of appeal in cases of civil contempt. <k 915Q
      For the Attorney General Mr Moses QC submits that the subsection does not have the effect contended for. He contends first, that the
words 'and, in the case of an application for committal or attachment, at the instance of the applicant’ are intended to do no more than
distinguish those cases in which the decision or order sought to be appealed resulted from an application to punish for contempt from those
cases in which there was no application and the order or decision was made by the court of its own motion. He submits secondly that where, as
here, the original application was, and was properly, an application to commit the individual responsible for the publication of the articles and
the company was joined on the motion, but as against the company only a line was sought, the requirements of s 13(2) are satisfied not only as
respects the individual but also as respects the company.
      Acceptance of Mr Moses’s first submission appears at first sight to involve reading s 13(2) as if the words ‘for committal or attachment’,
which are on the face of them qualifying words, were not there at all and are mere surplusage. So to read the subsection is therefore something
to be done with caution.
      In the course of argument we sought enlightenment from counsel as to the significance of the words ‘or attachment’ in s 13(2). Despite
their best efforts no clear answer emerged but it appears to me that the answer is to be found in The Annual Practice 1960 p 1071, where there
 appears the following note: ‘But though the Court cannot order attachment against a limited company, it can upon a rule nisi order the
 company to pay a fine in respect of its contempt. ’ In support of that note reference is made to R v J G Hammond & Co Ltd [1914] 2 KB 866 in
 which a rule nisi to show cause why writs of attachment should not issue against two companies who were the printers and publishers of the
 offending matter and the managing director of one of them had been made. On the return it was submitted for the companies that the
 application was misconceived because the companies could not be committed to prison and therefore no order could be made. Darling J, giving
 the judgment of a Divisional Court of the King’s Bench Division, said (at 867):

          ‘This matter comes before the Court upon a rule which was obtained against J. G. Hammond & Co., Limited, Modem Society (1911),
      Limited, and one Frank Harris. On behalf of the two limited companies the point has been taken that this procedure is inapplicable
      because the mle calls upon them to shew cause why they should not be attached for contempt of Court. The Court cannot, it is tme, order
      a writ of attachment to issue against them and commit them to prison, for the simple reason that the officer of the Court would not be
      able to put his hand upon that which has no corporeal existence, but that does not prevent the Court from availing itself of the remedy
      which it possesses. The fact that the mle calls upon a limited company to shew cause why it should not be attached does not prevent the
      Court from inflicting the appropriate punishment, namely, ordering the company to pay a fine and the costs of the application. This point
      therefore fails.’

     In 1960, therefore, it appears that it was a perfectly proper course to proceed against a company by way of an application for the issue of a
writ of attachment even though it could not be committed to prison.
     In the absence of some further explanation I conclude therefore that the alternatives ‘committal or attachment’ appeared in the 1960 Act in
recognition of the fact that a company could not be committed to prison but could be proceeded against by writ of attachment and subjected to a
line. I conclude also that if the application for the writ had, in recognition of the fact that a company could not be committed, sought the
imposition of a fine, it would necessarily have been a good application.       916Q
     RSC Ord 44 in The Annual Practice 1960, which dealt with attachment, has now disappeared. Contempts are now dealt with by notice of
motion under RSC Ord 59, which may seek either committal or, under r 9 of that order, a fine or the giving of security for good behaviour.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

There is no longer any procedure under the rules for a writ of attachment of the person. It appears to me that the present procedure is either to
apply by notice for committal against a company leaving the court to impose the lesser and only available remedy, or to recognise the
impossibility of committal and seek only a fine: for an example of the former course see R v Thomson Newspapers Ltd, ex p A-G [1968] 1 All
ER 268, [1968] 1 WLR 1. In the light of this history the words ‘committal or attachment’ cannot be regarded as qualifying the nature of the
application but as doing no more than refer to the two procedures for bringing an individual and a company before the court to answer for
contempt, one of which is no longer available. In these circumstances I would accept Mr Moses’s first submission. I would however also
accept it on the simple ground that, if it is rejected, it involves, as I think, defeating the plain legislative purpose.
     For completeness I should add that where as here, as in the Thomson Newspapers case just referred to and as in any case where a company
is the subject of an application to the court to punish for contempt, there is only one act, which act is always the act of one or more individuals.
In respect of that one act there was, in the present case, undoubtedly an application for the committal of Mr Hislop. The fact that the remedy
sought against the company was, because it had to be, only a fine, does not in my judgment affect the matter. There was without doubt an
application which came within the section. The remedy sought against the company in respect of that act was a fine only but the application
was a single application.
     I hold therefore that this court has jurisdiction to entertain the appeal in the case of both respondents.
     I turn to the substantive appeal.

Common law contempt
     The judge directed himself, it is accepted rightly, that there were two issues for decision, namely: (1) had the Attorney General proved by
the standard of the criminal law that Private Eye intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice either by attempting to prejudice
the jury or to pressure Mrs Sutcliffe? and (2) had he shown, again by the standard of the criminal law, that there was a real risk of a fair trial
being prejudiced? On the first issue, having considered the evidence and circumstances with great care, he expressed his conclusion in the
following words:

          ‘Notwithstanding Mr Hislop’s evidence I think it is an irresistible inference that the articles on 3 February and 17 February were
      intended to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim. I am not, however, satisfied that the articles were published with the intent of
      influencing jurors. ’

     These findings are not challenged. It is therefore unnecessary to do more than refer to those matters in the evidence on this issue which
are also relevant to other matters and to note that the judge’s findings involved a rejection by the judge of sworn evidence by Mr Hislop, both
on affidavit and in the witness box, that he had had no intention whatever to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim. I pause at this point
to observe that in my view the judge’s finding was inevitable and that it is no doubt for that reason that it was not challenged. A more obvious
and blatant attempt to put pressure on Mrs Sutcliffe it would be hard to imagine. <*, 917Q
     In his evidence Mr Hislop accepted that each of the articles was very damaging, that they would inevitably blacken Mrs Sutcliffe’s name
although, so he said, not if they were true, that one of the reasons for their publication was Mrs Sutcliffe’s libel action, that although the
circulation of Private Eye was only 209,000 its readership was probably two or three times that and, finally, that somewhere about half of that
readership would be in London where the trial was due to take place.

The second issue: risk o f prejudice
     The judge first directed himself, correctly, that the question whether the intent to bring pressure succeeded or not was irrelevant: see A-G
v English [1982] 2 All ER 903 at 918, [1983] 1 AC 116 at 141. That case involved the strict liability rule under the Contempt of Court Act
1981 but there is no doubt that it is equally true of contempt at common law.
     Next he considered whether the effect of the Act relied on should be judged on a subjective or objective basis, that is to say whether, in
assessing whether there was a real risk of prejudice, which in the instant case means a real risk of deterrence, the effect upon Mrs Sutcliffe
herself should be considered or whether the proper approach should be whether a normal, ie not either unduly sensitive or unduly robust
litigant, should be considered. As to this he stated: ‘... I prefer to come to no concluded view in the absence of fuller argument than has been
possible in the instant case.’ However later he said: ‘I approach the effect that this article was likely to have upon Mrs Sutcliffe by treating
the matter objectively. ’
      This is an apparent inconsistency but may, as it seems to me, be accounted for by the fact that there was no real evidence as to Mrs
Sutcliffe’s sensitivity or otherwise and that accordingly there was no alternative but to make the objective approach. Having determined upon
the objective approach, as I consider correctly, the judge then posed himself two questions: (a) was there a substantial risk that the course of
proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced by inducing Mrs Sutcliffe to settle? (b) was it in fact contempt to bring to the attention
of the opposing party matters which the defendant properly thought could be raised in cross-examination?
      He then drew attention to two matters which he considered to be important, namely (i) that Private Eye could properly think they were
entitled to cross examine on the material in the articles, (ii) that although it was conceded that the articles were in fact untrue, Private Eye
believed them to be true at the time.
      With respect to the judge he here fell into error. In the first place if, as he said, he approached the matter objectively the question was not
as to the possible or likely effect upon Mrs Sutcliffe. Secondly, the articles were not drawing anything to the attention of the opposite party.
Private Eye were drawing to the attention of their readership that, as they asserted, Mrs Sutcliffe had lied about her knowledge of her
husband’s murderous activities and had given him a false alibi and that Private Eye’s own counsel would be cross-examining her about such
matters. Thirdly, neither Private Eye’s belief that they might properly examine on the matters in the two articles, nor their belief at the time
that they were true has in my judgment anything to do with the effect which the articles might have. They are matters which would of course
have relevance on the question of sentence if the contempt were proved, but that is all.
      Next, in answer to the first question the judge concluded that it had not been established to his satisfaction that the course of proceedings
would be seriously impeded or prejudiced by improper pressure but gave no reason for such a conclusion. With regard to the second question
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

he said: <t, 9180

        ‘It is not suggested that Private Eye did not believe the matters set out in the articles and therefore the ground of misrepresentation
     which is relied upon by some of their Lordships as constituting a ground of contempt is absent in the instant case.’

     Prior to embarking on the question here under consideration the judge had quoted extensively from the speeches in A-G v Times
Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273 (the Thalidomide case). In the light of those speeches there is in my judgment more than
one error in the passage cited.
     First, and most important, it is clear from those speeches (i) that there is a difference between private pressure whether by an opposing
litigant or a third party and publication to a wide section of the public, (ii) that so far as the latter is concerned the mere fact that the
publication will exert pressure will not suffice to constitute the publication as contempt so long as it consists in no more than fair and
temperate criticism. Secondly, it is in my view clear beyond all argument that the articles went far further than fair and temperate criticism.
They were plain abuse. To say that there was no misrepresentation is in my judgment unsustainable. They were intended to deter Mrs
Sutcliffe by what were tantamount to threats that, in an action which concerned only the question whether she had sold her story to the Daily
Mail she would be exposed, if she continued, to cross-examination designed to establish that she had known of her husband’s murderous
activities and that she had defrauded the social security authorities and would be subject to an investigation by them. I can imagine nothing
more improper. Thirdly, if the articles were in fact untrue, as the judge in my judgment rightly foimd, their publication was a tort even if they
were at the time believed to be true. Finally and for the above reason, misrepresentation does not in my judgment become ‘absent in the
instant case’ merely because Private Eye believed them to be true.
      I pause at this to mention (a) that in their respondent’s notice Private Eye asserted as an additional ground for upholding the judgment of
Popplewell J:

         ‘That far from conceding that the articles were untrue, the Respondents correctly submitted before the Learned Judge that the truth or
      otherwise of the articles was not an issue raised by the Notice of Motion

and (b) that in his skeleton argument Mr Lightman submitted:

          ‘The fact that the Respondents, for the purpose of bringing an end to certain civil litigation, may have admitted that the articles were
      untrue does not mean that the articles are to be treated as untrue in subsequent committal (criminal) proceedings. If the issue had been
      raised in these proceedings, the Respondents were entitled to challenge the Applicant’s case on this issue.’

This was pursued in oral argument.
    In view of the fact that in his affidavit in these proceedings Mr Hislop said:

          ‘... I now accept, without reservation, that Mrs Sutcliffe had not known, prior to     her husband’s arrest,of his criminal activityand
      that she had no reason to fear that the DHSS would come knocking on her door

the point sought to be made was clearly misconceived even if the issue was not raised specifically in their notice. In my judgment however it
was clearly so raised.
      The judge's basis for his conclusion of risk being in my judgment plainly unsustainable, this court is free to reach its own conclusion on
the question whether the articles created a real risk of a fair trial being prejudiced.
      In my judgment there can be only one answer to this question. The trial was          9190 only three months away. The defence had just been
amended to plead justification when Mrs Sutcliffe was subjected to the most serious charges, which had nothing whatever to do with the issues
in the libel action, and the threat that they would be raised in the libel action. That the articles went beyond fair and temperate criticism is
beyond doubt. They must clearly have created a serious risk of prejudice. Moreover, once it is found that the articles were intended by Mr
Hislop to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim the conclusion must, as I see it, follow inevitably unless it can be shown that these
articles contained no more than fair temperate and relevant criticism.
      Accordingly I find that Mr Hislop and Pressdram were guilty of common law contempt in this respect. It follows also that they were guilty
of contempt under the strict liability rule in the 1981 Act.
      The question whether there was also a contempt by reason of the risk of prejudice resulting from the possible effect on jurors stands in a
different position. The judge has negatived intent in this respect and I see no reason to differ from him. There is therefore no common law
 contempt. Private Eye would however still be liable under the strict liability rule if there was a substantial risk that a juror or jurors might be
prejudiced against Mrs Sutcliffe. That anyone reading the articles might be prejudiced is, as it seems to me, beyond doubt. The impact of tlie
 charges was great. They were admittedly very damaging to Mrs Sutcliffe and blackened her character. The trial was only three months away
 and Mr Sutcliffe was notorious. I am fully satisfied that anyone who happened to read the articles and found himself on a jury three months
 later would be likely to remember them and in that case to mention the content of them to other jurors. I am also satisfied that there was a
 substantial risk of one or more jurors having read one or both of the articles. With the trial in London and the readership of the magazine as
 large as it was, I cannot accept that the risk was only a remote possibility.
      I am conscious that in so concluding I am directly differing from the judge. The matter is however one of inference, not primary fact and I
 regard it as of the greatest importance that it should be clear that articles of this nature within a short time of trial are not to be tolerated.

Defence under s 5 o f the 1981 Act
     Private Eye sought before the judge to establish a defence under s 5 of the 1981 Act. Their attempt was unsuccessful. Mr Lightman
sought before this court to reverse the judge’s finding on this point. He did so however with a brevity and lack of enthusiasm which were
entirely appropriate. I need say no more about it than that the judge was in my view plainly right.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                          books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

Sentence
    There remains the question of sentence. This was on any view a serious contempt. As Lord Parker CJ said in the Thomson Newspapers
case [1968] 1 All ER 268 at 270, [1968] 1 WLR 1 at 4:

              it is only right to say that the most serious contempts from that point of view [culpability] are publications of matter done
     intentionally with the very object of prejudicing a fair trial.’

On the judge’s unchallenged finding this was such a case.
     With regard to the other aspect of the case, namely the likelihood of prejudice to a fair trial, this was in my judgment also a most serious
contempt. The likelihood or risk was great. That the intention did not succeed is of little importance.      920B
     As to Mr Hislop, he had made it clear that the decision to publish was his alone. He has however expressed his regret and stated that he
will in the future refrain from publishing references to or comments upon active proceedings in which Private Eye is a party. Both he and
Pressdram have clearly already suffered financially, as they richly deserved to do. The Attorney General does not seek an order for committal
against him. I have considered with care whether, despite some mitigating circumstances, this is a case when the preservation of the integrity
of justice demands, despite the Attorney General’s attitude, that he should be committed to prison. I have concluded after considerable
hesitation that on this occasion imprisonment is not necessary. I stress the word this because he should be aware that any similar conduct in
the future would be unlikely to attract such leniency. In this connection it would appear from Mr Hislop’s statement that he will refrain from
comment on actions in which Private Eye is a party that he may even yet not appreciate that whether or not Private Eye is a party publication of
comments of this nature on a party may well constitute a contempt.
     Although I find it unnecessary to make an order of committal I have no doubt that both Mr Hislop and Pressdram Ltd must pay a
substantial fine. Those fines I would fix at £10,000 each.
     In the result I would allow the appeal, set aside the judge’s order, order that Mr Hislop and Pressdram Ltd each pay a fine of £10,000 and
order that the respondents pay the Attorney General’s costs both before the judge and in this court.

N IC H O L L S LJ. The cause of these contempt proceedings is as extraordinary as it is regrettable. In February 1989 the trial of Mrs Sutcliffe’s
libel action against Private Eye was due to take place shortly. The proceedings were ‘active’, within the meaning of the Contempt of Court Act
1981. Whereupon, in two successive editions, on 3 and 17 February, Private Eye published the two articles. It did so, with the intention of
deterring Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claims against Private Eye. The judge so held after seeing and hearing Mr Hislop give evidence.
      I do not understand how a responsible editor came to do this. This is not an instance of fair and temperate criticism. A journal was using
its own columns to publish highly defamatory material, and make threats, with the view thereby of putting pressure on a plaintiff to abandon a
claim—against itself—which was in the warned list and due to be heard within two or three months. Such conduct does no service to the
cause of the freedom of the press. It was, I much regret to have to say, an abuse of that freedom.
      But was it, in law, a contempt of court, that is to say an interference with the administration of justice? Mr Lightman QC submitted that it
was not. There are many steps which a party to an action can properly take with the object of making his opponent think again, and deterring
him from going on. For instance, making a payment into court or making an open offer or making an offer without prejudice save as to costs
pursuant to RSC Ord 22, r 14. A solicitor or counsel may point out to his opposite number matters on which he proposes to cross-examine a
party if the claim gets to trial. I do not think this line of argument gets Mr Lightman anywhere. In this case a desire by Mr Hislop to take steps
of this sort did not necessitate or justify publication of highly defamatory material in the pages of Private Eye. There is an enormous difference
between bringing home to an opponent the strength of one’s own position and the weakness of his, and vilifying him in public. It cannot be m
the public interest in the due administration of justice that, to state the point in its narrowest form, those who sue newspapers should be at risk
of being mnHp the subject of defamatory articles          921ffl published with the intention of deterring them from pursuing their claims. I cannot
believe that the editor of any newspaper would suggest otherwise.
      There is nothing novel about this distinction between what may properly be done between parties in the course of preparing for trial and
what may be done in public. This subject was comprehensively canvassed in the speeches in the decision of the House of Lords in A-G v Times
Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, the well-known Thalidomide case: see especially the speeches of Lord Reid and Lord
Diplock. I see no reason to doubt that Mr Hislop and his legal advisers were aware of this principle.
      Mr Lightman had another string to his bow. He submitted that the position is different if the publication is of defamatory material which
the newspaper intends to seek to justify. He prayed in aid the principle applied in Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269 at 284, [1891-4] All
ER Rep 965 at 968: in general, the court will not restrain the publication of an alleged libel which the publisher will seek to justify, because
until it is clear that the alleged libel is untrue, it is not clear that any right has been infringed, and the importance of leaving free speech
 unfettered is a strong reason in cases of libel for granting interlocutory injunctions only in very exceptional circumstances. I cannot accept this
 submission. Contempt of court is interference with the due administration of justice. In the present case the vice in the articles was not
 dependent on the truth or falsity of the allegations against Mrs Sutcliffe. The essential vice lay in the purpose for which, the intention with
 which, these serious allegations were made. When Parliament addressed the question of contempt of court in 1981, it expressly preserved
 liability for contempt in respect of conduct which was intended to prejudice the administration of justice, irrespective of whether the
 proceedings were active or not (s 6(c) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981). The fact that Mr Hislop believed the allegations he made against
 Mrs Sutcliffe were true, and the further fact that if sued for libel he intended to plead justification as a defence, cannot justify publication of
 the allegations when the purpose was to put pressure on Mrs Sutcliffe and deter her from pursuing her existing action to trial.
       Was there a real risk of prejudicing a fair trial or, to use the statutory language, was there a substantial risk that the course of justice in the
 proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced? The judge’s conclusion was that it had not been established to his satisfaction that
 ‘there was a substantial risk that the course of proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced by improper pressure’. With respect to
 the judge, at this place in this judgment he seems to have run two different points together. He did not clearly distinguish between (a) whether
 the publication of the articles constituted improper pressure and (b) if so, whether the publication gave rise to a substantial risk that the course
 of the proceedings would be seriously prejudiced. I have already stated my view on point (a). Contrary to what seems to have been the judge’s
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another

view, I do not think that Mr Hislop’s belief in the truth of the articles, or his belief that he would be entitled to cross-examine Mrs Sutcliffe on
the material in the articles, meant that it was proper for him to publish the articles as he did. As to point (b), once this is separated from point
(a) the answer is clear, The articles were published with the intention of deterring Mrs Sutcliffe from continuing. I see no reason to doubt that
there was a substantial risk that Mr Hislop might have succeeded in his aim. Had he done so, the course of justice in Mrs Sutcliffe’s action
would have been seriously prejudiced, because she would have been deterred from having her defamation claim decided by a judge and jury.
      Some argument was addressed to us, as it was to the judge, on whether this risk fell to be assessed subjectively, by reference to Mrs
Sutcliffe’s own particular characteristics of tenacity or sensitivity, or objectively, by reference to the    9220 characteristics to be expected of
a litigant who was neither unusually tenacious nor unusually sensitive. In the present case there was no evidence of any cogency, one way or
the other, so far as Mrs Sutcliffe was concerned. Perforce the matter falls to be judged objectively in this case. For my part I prefer to express
no view on how s 2(2) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 would fall to be applied in a case where there was evidence that the litigant was so
committed to the proceedings in question that no amount of vilification would deter him.
      However, I should add this. I am not persuaded that, had there been evidence that Mrs Sutcliffe was unusually tenacious, and unlikely to
be deterred from continuing, that would have been an end of the matter in the present case where there is a liability for contempt outside the
strict liability rule by reason of the intent with which the articles were published. Part of the mischief of this particular type of contempt is the
impact which publication of articles of this nature can be expected to have on other litigants. As Lord Reid said in A-G v Times Newspapers
Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 60, [1974] AC 273 at 295:

         ‘Of course parties must be protected from scurrilous abuse; otherwise many litigants would fear to bring their cases to court.’

Likewise Lord Diplock said ([1973] 3 All ER 54 at 73, [1974] AC 273 at 310):

         ‘If to have recourse to civil litigation were to expose a litigant to the risk of public obloquy ... potential suitors would be inhibited
      from availing themselves of courts of law for the purpose for which they are established.’

When considered from this angle, the degree of tenacity or sensitivity possessed by the particular litigant who was the subject of the public
obloquy is neither here nor there. Of course, the observations of their Lordships in the Times Newspapers case must be read having in mind
the changes in the law subsequently brought about by the 1981 Act. That Act delineated for the future the scope of the strict liability rule, viz
the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as contempt of court as tending to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal
proceedings regardless of intent to do so (s 1). But, as already noted, the 1981 Act left untouched, and outside the strict boundaries set for the
strict liability rule, cases such as the present one, where the conduct was intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice.
      It follows from what I have said that in my view publication of these two articles by Private Eye was a serious contempt of court at
common law.
      It was also a statutory contempt: Private Eye is a publication within s 2(1); the two articles created a substantial risk that the course of
justice in Mrs Sutcliffe’s action would be seriously prejudiced (s 2(2)); and the action was active (s 2(3)). There is no question of the defence
of innocent publication under s 3 being applicable. Mr Lightman invoked the s 5 defence. As to that, it is sufficient to say that one of the
prerequisites to the application of s 5 is that the publication was part of a discussion ‘in good faith’ of a matter of general public interest. Mr
Hislop’s intention negatived the existence of good faith.
       I think, further, that there was a statutory contempt by reason of the risk of prejudicing jurors even though Mr Hislop had no intention of
 influencing jurors when the articles were published. There was a real risk of serious prejudice in the forthcoming trial. The publication was of
memorable allegations regarding a notorious case in a magazine with a significant circulation in an area where the trial was due to take place
 within the next two or three months.
       There remains Mr Lightman’s submission that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal, hi my view the phrase ‘in the case of
 an application for committal or attachment’ in s 13(2) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 was              923ffl intended to be a succinct
 reference to those cases where the court’s jurisdiction to punish for contempt of court was invoked by an application, in contrast to those cases
 where there was no application but the court acted of its own motion, eg where there was contempt in the face of the court. The phrase is apt
 for this purpose even though a corporate body, lacking physical form, is strictly incapable of being ‘committed’ or ‘attached’. Further, the
 phrase is applicable in all cases where an alleged contempt is brought before the court on an application, regardless of the particular form of
 punishment which, either in the application or otherwise, the applicant says he is seeking. Punishment is a matter for the court, not for the
 applicant. Any other construction of the phrase, on either of these points, would produce bizarre results which Parliament plainly could not
 have intended.
       I turn finally to the order which the court should now make. These were serious interferences with the administration of justice. A
 publication made with the intention which existed here is not to be countenanced. Further, the publication was by an experienced journalist, at
 a time when, as he knew, Mrs Sutcliffe’s libel action was active and about to come to trial. I agree that the company, Pressdram Ltd, and Mr
 Hislop personally, should each be fined the sum of £10,000. In so deciding I have taken into account that there will be a further significant
  liability for costs. I have also taken into account that Mr Hislop volunteered to be cross-examined on his affidavit and did not rely on the
 privilege against self-incrimination and, further, that he has subsequently recognised that the publication was a mistake and has resolved that
  there will be no repetition.

 M cC O W A N LJ. Mr Lightman QC sought to argue that this court had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal in respect of Mr Hislop because in
 sending the notice of appeal to his solicitors it was stated:

          ‘... the Attorney General does not propose to seek to persuade the Court of Appeal that an order of committal against Mr Hislop
       should be made, although other penalties may well be appropriate.’

 Mr Lightman further relied upon the words of section 13(2) of the Administration of Justice Act 1960:
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another


         ‘An appeal under this section shall lie in any case at the instance of the defendant and, in the case of an application for committal or
     attachment, at the instance of the applicant... ’

     So, his argument ran, this is no longer a case of an application for committal of Mr Hislop. I am wholly unimpressed by this argument. In
the first place, in so far as the nature of the application is relevant, it must be to the original notice of motion that we look, and that was
undoubtedly, in Mr Hislop’s case, an application for his committal. Secondly, the fact that the Attorney General may choose not to seek to
persuade this court to commit Mr Hislop does not remove our power to do so.
     Mr Lightman further argued that the appeal could not lie in relation to the company, because it was not and could not be an application for
the company’s committal or attachment. If he is right, no appeal could ever lie against a finding that a company had not been guilty of
contempt of court. I cannot believe that that was the intention of Parliament. If it is necessary to show that there was ‘an application for
committal or attachment’, I would hold that there was such an application here because, by the notice of motion, committal was asked for in
respect of Mr Hislop. But in any event, I would accept Mr Moses QC’s contention that all that is intended by the words in question is to
identify the applicant. <f, 924fflAccordingly, in my judgment, Mr Lightman’s argument in respect of the company also fails.
     The judge said in his judgment that Mr Hislop ‘told the court it was not his intention to put pressure on Mrs Sutcliffe’. However, the
judge did not believe him about this. He went on to say:

          ‘Notwithstanding Mr Hislop’s evidence, I think it is an irresistible inference that the articles on 3 February and 17 February were
      intended to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim.’

    Later, under the heading ‘Subjective or objective approach’, he recorded:

         ‘Mr Lightman made the submission that when considering whether the article was calculated to affect Mrs Sutcliffe the court should
      look at the matter subjectively.’

    The judge noted:

          ‘Mr Hislop gave evidence that from his observation Mrs Sutcliffe was a person dogged in litigation. The letter from her solicitors to
      the Attorney General dated 16 February 1988, which was exhibited to the Attorney General’s affidavit, described her as being a fragile
      plaintiff. ’

    As between the subjective and objective approach the judge concluded:

         ‘In the result, I prefer to come to no concluded view in the absence of fuller argument than has been possible in the instant case.’

     Some pages further on in his judgment, however, he said:

         'I approach the effect that this article was likely to have upon Mrs Sutcliffe by treating the matter objectively.’

    hi fact, there was no real evidence before the judge of what sort of woman Mrs Sutcliffe was. I agree with Mr Lightman that the fact that
her solicitors described her as fragile plaintiff was no evidence. But I disagree with his assertion that there was evidence of fact from Mr
Hislop in his description of her as a dogged pursuer of litigation. I do not consider that any more evidence of fact than her solicitor’s
description of her. It was merely Mr Hislop’s opinion. Consequently, the judge, not having seen her give evidence, could only treat her as
someone neither unduly sensitive nor unduly robust.
     The judge went on to pose to himself this question:

          ‘Was there a substantial risk that the course of proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced by inducing Mrs Sutcliffe to
      settle?’

He gave the answer:

          ‘... I conclude that it has not been established to my satisfaction that there was a substantial risk that the course of proceedings would
      be seriously impeded or prejudiced by improper pressure.’

 The matters he referred to in so concluding were first that it was conceded that Private Eye could properly think that they were entitled to
 cross-examine on the material in the articles and, secondly, that it was conceded that, though in fact the articles were untrue, Private Eye
 believed them at the time to be true. With great respect to the judge, I am unable to see that those points provided any justification for his
 answer.
      The judge went on to discuss the common practice of lawyers for the two sides in an action engaging in discussion about the mertis of their
 respective cases, and <t, 925ffl one party perhaps observing that if the other side called a particular witness that witness might well be faced
 with cross-examination about some fact which he might wish to conceal. The judge pointed out that it could hardly be suggested that the
 lawyer raising that matter was guilty of contempt of court. Then he added:

         ‘Some form of impropriety or misrepresentation at the least seems to me to be an essential element of this aspect of the case. That
      element seems to be missing, given the particular facts of this case.’
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
AUER 1991 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:37pm)
Attorney General v Hislop and another


     I should have thought that the judge had himself found an impropriety on behalf of Private Eye in that he had concluded that it was an
irresistible inference that the articles in question were intended to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim. But in any event there seems to
me all the difference in the world between a private discussion between lawyers aimed at bringing to Mrs Sutcliffe’s attention that she might
be cross-examined about certain matters and holding her up to public obloquy in terms neither fair nor temperate but of abuse, which is what I
conclude without hesitation occurred in this case. This is an aspect of the matter which the judge does not appear to have taken into account.
     Since Mr Hislop intended by the articles to deter Mrs Sutcliffe from pursuing her claim, it seems to me a matter of irresistible inference
that he believed he had a reasonable chance of succeeding. I think he was right. In my judgment, there was a substantial risk that Mrs
Sutcliffe would be so deterred and that in consequence the course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
     Turning to the question of jurors, the judge held that he was not satisfied that the articles were published with the intention of influencing
them. He subsequently held that there was no risk of any juror being prejudiced by the articles, nor was there likely to be serious prejudice.
His stated reasons were these:

          1... the articles were not likely to attract any publicity; the potential readers were limited. Trial, though close, was not immediate.
      The articles were of little interest to the general reader and were unlikely to be remembered by anyone who had read the articles and who
      also happened to be on the jury. ’

     The important factors, in my judgment, are these. (1) When the articles appeared the action was in the warned list. (2) According to Mr
Hislop the sales of the magazine at that time were 209,000, and almost half of those sales were in the area from which potential jurors might
be drawn. He accepted that actual circulation would be about two or three times the sales figure. Moreover, the judge drew the conclusion
that that figure was ‘probably a considerable underestimate’. (3) The Sutcliffe case was of great notoriety. In those circumstances, it was quite
on the cards that at least one of the jurors would have read the articles, been influenced by them, remembered their contents and been able to
relate them to other members of the jury. In this respect also, therefore, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the publication of these
articles created a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings would be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
     Turning to sentence, Mr Hislop said in his affidavit that he had been chastened by the Court of Appeal’s criticism of his publication of
these articles (expressed in his libel appeal) and resolved to refrain in the future from publishing such references to or comments upon active
proceedings in which Private Eye is a party. He also said there that the fear that he might be punished by being deprived of his liberty and that
the company might be further jeopardised by the         926ffl imposition of a substantial fine had been hanging over his head for nearly a year and
had been a source of considerable strain. In evidence before the judge Mr Hislop said that he realised it had been a mistake to publish the
articles, wished he had not done so and stated that, if the court were to hold him guilty of contempt, he would wish to apologise. These factors
persuade me that this is a case where it would not be appropriate to commit Mr Hislop to prison.
      Nonetheless, by reason of the contents of the two articles in question, this was, in my judgment, a serious contempt. Moreover, Mr Hislop
bore a very particular responsibility for it having occurred. From what he said in evidence, he took legal advice about whether to publish these
articles (the nature of which he has chosen not to reveal). He said in evidence: ‘I took advice, as I always do, and then I come to my own
decisions.’ Accordingly to this evidence, and it was the only evidence from the company about the matter, the decision to publish was his and
his alone.
      Another aspect of the matter has troubled me. In a statement in open court following settlement of the libel action brought against them in
respect of the contents of these two articles, it was stated on behalf of the company and Mr Hislop that they recognised that the allegations
made in the articles were untrue, and unreservedly apologised. In his affidavit, sworn for the purpose of the present proceedings, Mr Hislop
 said that he accepted—

          ‘without reservation, that Mrs Sutcliffe had not known, prior to her husband’s arrest, of his criminal activity and that she had no
      reason to fear that the DHSS would come knocking on her door

     In cross-examination before the judge, he accepted again that the allegations were ‘thoroughly unfounded’. The judge, in his judgment,
said that it was conceded that the articles were untrue. It was, therefore, very surprising to hear the contention advanced in the skeleton
argument filed on his behalf and persisted in oral argument that:

          ‘The fact that the Respondents, for the purpose of bringing an end to certain civil litigation, may have admitted that the articles were
      untrue does not mean that the articles are to be treated as untrue in subsequent committal (criminal) proceedings.’

I have to say that this does not fill me with great confidence that his promises as to future conduct can be relied upon.
     I agree with the orders proposed in respect of him and the company.

Appeal allowed. Leave to appeal to the House o f Lords refused.

 Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service, Headquarters', Schilling & Lom.

                                                                                                                 Raina Levy Barrister. <t, 9270
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)




                                 Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
WATKINS AND MANN LJJ
16, 17 NOVEMBER 1987, 19 FEBRUARY 1988


Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Substantial risk o f serious prejudice to fa ir trial - Imminent or pending
proceedings - Newspaper publishing articles accusing doctor o f rape and offering to fund private prosecution o f him - Doctor subsequently
acquitted after private prosecution - Whether newspaper interfering with course o f justice - Whether newspaper's conduct in encouraging
private prosecution and publishing material prejudicial to fa ir trial amounting to contempt at common law - Whether criminal proceedings
imminent or pending when newspaper published articles.

The respondents, the proprietors of a national newspaper, published articles accusing a doctor of raping an eight-year old girl. The second
article named the doctor and accused him of other indecencies. The respondents wrote to the mother’s solicitor offering to fund a private
prosecution of the doctor, since the police and the Director of Public Prosecutions had decided, in the absence of corroboration of the girl's
story, not to prosecute him. Nine months later a private prosecution of the doctor resulted in his   906ffl acquittal. The Attorney General then
applied to the court to fme the respondents, contending that the publication of the articles was a contempt of court at common law because it
was conduct which tended or was calculated to impede or prejudice the administration of justice in that they were intended or calculated and
were likely to prejudice the fair trial of the doctor. The respondents contended that there had been no contempt since at the time of publication
of the articles complained of proceedings against the doctor were neither imminent nor pending.

H e ld - The circumstances in which a criminal contempt at common law could be committed were not necessarily confined to those in which
proceedings were either pending or imminent. Conduct which involved the giving of encouragement and practical assistance to a person to
bring about a private prosecution, accompanied by an intention to interfere with the course of justice by publishing material about the person to
be prosecuted which could only serve, and was intended, to prejudice the fair trial of that person, was capable of being contempt at common
law. That was especially so where the publisher of the articles made it plain that he believed the person referred to in the articles was guilty of
a serious crime, that he was deserving of punishment for that crime and that he had committed a similar crime. Furthermore, where a
prosecution was virtually certain to be commenced and particularly where it was to be commenced in the near future, it was proper to describe
such proceedings as ‘imminent’. Publication of the articles had posed a real risk of prejudice to a fair trial of the doctor and it was clear that
the respondents when publishing the articles had very much in mind the particular proceedings against him which they were determined, so far
as it lay within their power and influence, to ensure took place. It followed that the respondents were guilty of common law contempt of court
and would be fined (see p 916 b to d, p 920 b to d and p 921 g h, post).
     Dicta of Donovan LJ in A-G v Butterworth [1962] 3 All ER at 332, of Lord Lane CJ in R v Nedrick [1986] 3 All ER at 3 ^ and A-G v
Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276 considered.

N otes
For contempt of court in relation to pending proceedings, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) paras 8—9, and for cases on the subject, see 16
Digest (Reissue) 19-33, 193-342.

C ases referred to in ju d g m en ts
A-G v Butterworth [1962] 3 All ER 326, [1963] 1 QB 696, [1962] 3 WLR 819, CA.
A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276, [1987] 3 WLR 942, CA.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, [1973] 3 WLR 298, HL.
James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593, Aust HC.
R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd [1962] NI 15, NI DC.
R v Duffy, exp Nash [1960] 2 All ER 891, [1960] 2 QB 188, [1960] 3 WLR 320, DC.
R vHancock [1986] 1 All ER 641, [1986] AC 455, [1986] 2 WLR 357, HL.
R v Moloney [1985] 1 All ER 1025, [1985] AC 905, [1985] 2 WLR 648, HL.
R v Nedrick [1986] 3 All ER 1, [1986] 1 WLR 1025, CA.
R v Parke [1903] 2 KB 432, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721, DC.
Smith & Fawcett Ltd, Re [1942] 1 All ER 542, [1942] Ch 304, CA.
Sunday Times v UK ( 1979) 2 EHRR 245, E Ct HR.

 A p p lication
 The Attorney General applied as against the respondents, News Group Newspapers Ltd, the proprietors and publishers of the Sun newspapers,
 for an order under RSC Ord 52, r 9 that the respondents do pay to HM the Queen such fme as should seem just for its several contempts of
 court in publishing the following articles; in the issue of the Sun for 14 March 1986 articles entitled ‘Rape Case Doc: Sun Acts’, ‘He’s a real
 swine’ and ‘Beast <*. 907ffl must be named, says MP’ and in the issue for 15 March 1986 articles entitled ‘Rape case Doc’ and ‘Doc groped
 me, says girl’. The facts are set out in the judgment of Watkins LJ.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

John Laws and David Pannick for the Attorney General.
Robert Alexander QC and Desmond Browne for the respondents.

                                                                                                                                       Cur adv vult

19 February 1988. The following judgments were delivered.

W A T K IN S LJ. The Attorney General applies for an order against the respondents under RSC Ord 52, r 9 that they be fined for several
contempts of court in publishing in the issue of the Sun newspaper for 14 March 1986 articles entitled ‘Rape Case Doc: Sun Acts’, ‘He’s a
real swine’ and ‘Beast must be named, says MP’ and in the issue for 15 March 1986 articles entitled ‘Rape case Doc’ and ‘Doc groped me,
says girl’.
     The grounds on which that relief is sought are that the conduct of the respondents, who own the Sun, in publishing the articles mentioned
was calculated to interfere with the course of justice which they contended should be embarked on at their expense in that the publications
would, as they intended they should, prejudice the fair trial of Dr B on a charge of rape of which, in the event, at the conclusion of a trial in the
Crown Court at Chelmsford on 12 December 1986, he was acquitted.
     The Attorney General’s expressed case is that the publications were calculated to interfere with the course of justice in criminal
proceedings which were intended to be launched with the respondents’ money and were so launched about seven weeks later; this interference
was constituted by the creation of a real risk (as opposed to a fanciful one) that the minds of potential jurors would be affected by what they
read so that their view of the case would not be founded purely on the evidence, a result which was either intended by the respondents or as to
which they were reckless whether or not such criminal proceedings would be prejudiced.
     The facts of this matter began in the summer of 1985 when an eight-year-old girl stayed at the home of Dr B, who is a well-known
consultant anaesthetist. He is a married man with a son. He is now about 55 years of age. He had known the girl and the rest of her family for
some time. Shortly after staying with Dr and Mrs B, she went for a holiday with her mother, a divorced woman, and two young brothers. She
started, so her mother has said, having nightmares on holiday and behaving oddly. The nightmares continued after the family returned home.
In September, an incident occurred which caused the mother to take the girl to be examined by the family doctor, who diagnosed that she had
been raped. Thereupon, the girl named Dr B as being responsible for such an attack on her. He was soon afterwards questioned by police
officers. The material gathered by them from a number of sources was considered by the county prosecuting solicitor and counsel. They
advised there was insufficient evidence to prosecute Dr B.
     The girl’s mother and grandmother were dissatisfied with that decision. One or both of them saw their local member of Parliament about
it. He wrote to the Director of Public Prosecutions, who, on 30 January 1986, replied to him as follows:

          ‘Dear Mr. St. John-Stevas ...
          Thank you very much for your letter of 20th January 1986, together with enclosures which I now return. It would probably be of
      assistance to you to know that Miss “M’s” case was originally referred, by the Essex Police, to their County Prosecuting Solicitor. It was
      felt that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute ... but nevertheless the opinion of Counsel was sought. Counsel’s opinion was that:
       “I reluctantly advise that no proceedings should be instituted . . . ” This was both in respect of rape and indecent assault. The case was
      then referred to this office, on 6th January 1986, as Mrs. “M” had indicated that she was considering mounting a % 908ffl private
      prosecution. The evidence was again considered and no reason was found for disagreeing with Counsel’s advice. I understand that the
      police have kept their investigation open, and that should further evidence be forthcoming, the case will be reviewed. I trust that I have
      been of assistance.’

     The mother and grandmother were as dissatisfied with that decision as they were with the advice of the county prosecuting solicitor and
counsel.
     The editor of the Sun, Mr Kelvin Mackenzie, informed us in an affidavit that the allegation of rape against Dr B first broke in the Star
newspaper on 13 March 1986. It was, without naming Dr B, given considerable prominence on the first three pages of that newspaper, on page
2 of which a copy of the Director of Public Prosecutions’ letter was exhibited. On the front page, it was stated that the mother was considering
embarking on a private prosecution, that available medical evidence showed that the girl had been raped, that a doctor was responsible, that he
had refused to answer police questions, that when spoken to by the mother he had, according to her, boasted ‘You cannot touch me’ and that a
prosecution had not been commenced because of the absence of corroboration of the girl’s statement.
     Having read the Star’s articles, Mr Mackenzie became very interested in their contents, as his affidavit in the following extracts from it
clearly shows. The Mr Crone, to whom he refers, was a practising barrister who has become the respondents’ deputy legal manager.

          ‘5. Reading The Star’s story and the Mother’s plea: “Can anybody help me bring this man to justice?”, I felt that Mrs M. was fully
      justified in feeling that she and her daughter were being denied access to justice. The matter was wholly out of her hands and the DPP’s
      office had decided against a prosecution. Thus her accusation against Dr B. was not going to be tested in a court of law.
          6. The Star stated that Mrs M. was considering a private prosecution, but it was clear that the cost of such a prosecution would be
      quite beyond Mrs M’s means. I therefore decided that The Sun would offer her whatever financial help she needed to investigate and
      pursue the case against Dr B.
          7. On my instructions, one of our Reporters, Kieron Saunders, offered our help to the Mother’s Solicitor. I instructed Mr. Crone to
      contact the Solicitor and draw up an agreement with him to cover N.G.N.’s funding of the case. Mr. Crone and I discussed the matter in
      reasonable detail. He was particularly concerned that we could be dragged into a “bottomless pit” (he used those words) of costs. He
       advised that if the prosecution was unsuccessful, we might possibly be ordered to pay the defence costs as well. We also talked about
      why the doctor was not being prosecuted by the DPP and Mr. Crone explained the position regarding the need for corroboration.
          8. Mr. Crone told me that in law the evidence of a child required independent corroboration. Since three different sets of lawyers
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

     had advised against a prosecution, it seemed to us that at the end of the police investigation there can have been no satisfactory
     corroboration of the girl’s story. Thus, even with N.G.N.’s financial backing it was very far from certain that a private prosecution could
     be brought.
         9. I should add that at this stage we did not know that the DPP had proceeded on the basis that the girl would not be able to give
     sworn evidence. When it transpired that the child could give sworn evidence, the chances of bringing a prosecution drastically improved.
      However, none of this was known to us when The Sun published the articles which are the subject of this application.
         10. Although I wanted to give the Mother whatever financial backing she needed to bring her case, I was also keen that we should not
     be drawn into having to spend large sums of money if the case, after investigation, turned out to be devoid of realistic prospects of
     success. At this stage I knew very little more than had been published in The Star. Mr. Crone and I therefore decided that in our
     agreement % 909ffl with the Mother, we should insist on a clause enabling us to review the likelihood of success at an early stage, and to
     opt out, if success seemed remote. Mr. Crone then negotiated an agreement with Mrs. M’s Solicitor whereby when the evidence had
     been gathered, Counsel would be asked to advise on the likelihood of a prosecution succeeding. If the advice was unfavourable, we could
     then cease our support. From the various discussion I had with Mr. Crone about the rules of evidence regarding children, I did not think
     that Counsel was likely to advise in favour of a prosecution. Nevertheless I was determined that Mrs. M. should not be prevented by
     lack of funds from having the whole matter independently investigated. Her feeling that she was the victim of injustice could thus be
     allayed.
         11. In considering the articles which are the subject of this application, the question of contempt of Court did not occur to me. There
     were no criminal proceedings in being and, as best I could see, it was very far from certain that criminal proceedings would follow from
     the investigations of Mrs. M’s solicitor. I naturally took legal advice from Mr. Crone about the articles. We had several conversations
     about libel, but I believed that what we were publishing was true. Mr. Crone never mentioned contempt of Court.
         12. On 14th March 1986 Dr. B. was named in the Commons by Geoffrey Dickens M.P. His name was carried on the Press
     Association tapes (which go to all the national and provincial press) and in the London Standard that evening. Our report on 15th March
     followed that lead and also identified him.
         13. Mr. Olsen is quite wrong in his supposition in paragraph 12 of his affidavit of 20th February 1987 that Dr. B. was not named in
     the first article, because we appreciated that to do so would involve a contempt of Court. The reason we did not name Dr. B. in the
     article of 14th March was to diminish the risk of libel proceedings being brought. That risk was reduced once Dr. B. had been named in
     the Commons, and so on 15th March we mentioned his name.
         14. The Sun seeks to be scrupulous in complying with its legal obligations. I would never publish an article knowing that it was or
     might be a contempt of Court. On 13th and 14th March 1986 I did not regard proceedings against Dr. B. as imminent. I knew from Mr.
     Crone that a great deal of work would have to be done by Mrs. M ’s solicitor before Counsel could even be asked to advise whether a
     prosecution could lie against Dr. B. As I have said, I was far from convinced that it was likely that at some future date Counsel would
     advise a prosecution. The articles which The Sun published were simply normal day to day reporting of what we regarded as an
     unfolding scandal. They were published for that reason: it was not my intention in publishing the articles to prejudice Dr. B., should
     proceedings ultimately be commenced.’

     Mr Crone, in his affidavit, summarises his conversations with Mr Mackenzie, whom he advised on, among other things, the law of libel in
the context of publishing the articles complained of by the Attorney General. The possibility of the articles being in contempt of court did not
occur to Mr Mackenzie and was not mentioned although Mr Crone states that earlier on he had given that a thought, but quickly dismissed it
from his mind because there was no “active” period under Sch 1 to the Contempt of Court Act 1981 and any likely proceedings were a long
way off. Mr Mackenzie instructed Mr Crone to reach an agreement with the mother’s solicitor to provide her with financial assistance to bring
a private prosecution subject to certain safeguards.
     The letter of 13 March addressed to the mother’s solicitor is in these terms:

          ‘I am writing on behalf of News Group Newspapers Ltd. We understand that your client Mrs. ‘M ’ wishes to pursue a private criminal
     prosecution against the man she believes has raped her daughter. She has good reason to believe this man is guilty of that crime, but
     lacks the funds to pursue such a prosecution. We are, therefore, prepared to offer her the following: 1. N.G.N. Ltd. will underwrite the
    % 910ffl reasonable costs of bringing such a prosecution and taking it as far as a full trial at the Crown Court and will make reasonable
     interim payments to her legal advisers when requested to do so. 2. N.G.N. Ltd. will indemnify her against any costs which may be
     awarded against her by the Court in the event of the prosecution being unsuccessful. 3. If at any stage she is advised by Counsel that
     such a prosecution is likely to be unsuccessful N.G.N. Ltd. reserves the right to terminate its financial support for the prosecution. 4. She
     or her legal advisers will keep N.G.N. Ltd. informed of any developments and steps taken prior to and during the case including any
     advice given by Counsel about the prospects for success. 5. She will not grant interviews or make statements to any other media
     organisation or freelance journalist, except to N.G.N. Ltd. and will use her best endeavours to ensure that her immediate family do
     likewise, until the conclusion of this agreement. 6. She grants N.G.N. Ltd. the full and exclusive right to publish her and her daughter’s
      account and for this purpose will grant a reasonable number of interviews and pictures to the editorial staff of The Sun. It is understood
     that The Sun will not identify her or her daughter. 7. She agrees that both she and her legal advisers will keep the existence and contents
      of this agreement confidential. If the foregoing is acceptable to you, I would be grateful if you would sign the copy of this letter, and
      return it to our representative. ’

      On 6 May 1986 informations were laid at the Braintree Magistrates’ Court and on that day Dr B was arrested.
      On 14 August 1986 the solicitor sent to the respondents his bill for the work he had done up to committal for trial. At the end of the trial,
 the judge ordered the costs of the prosecution to be paid out of central funds.
      The headlines to the articles complained of could hardly have been bolder, larger or more prominent. The same can be said of those in the
 Star of 13 March.
      In the main article on 14 March, it is, at the outset, made clear that ‘The Sun is to pay for a mother to privately prosecute a top doctor
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd

accused of raping her eight year old daughter’. There follows an account of a confrontation between the mother and the doctor in the presence
of his wife in which, in the absence of Mrs B, who by that time had gone to another part of his home, he is reported as having said of the girl to
the mother: ‘She deserved all she got, eight or eighteen, she knew what it was all about. There is nothing you can do about it. Wherever you
go I will have been there first. ’
     In another article in the same edition of the newspaper, there is much more emotive material, as the following extracts from it clearly, in
my view, demonstrate:

         ‘The Granny of tragic eight-year-old Miss X spoke yesterday of her hatred for the doctor accused of raping the child. “He is a beast
     and a swine”, said the 58 year-old woman, who cannot be named. “I am utterly convinced it was he who raped the child.” Trembling
     with emotion she added: “I had to hold back my husband from murder when we were first told. He kept shouting that he would do a life
     sentence for killing him. I calmed him down by saying perhaps the man was sick and needed help. Then last Christmas I snapped and
     went berserk myself and attacked the doctor in his own house. He had pompously told me that I shouldn't accuse him of interfering with
     the little girl when it could have been someone else. I saw red and smacked him in the jaw before leaving the house. His wife treats him
     like a little God, she worships the ground he walks on. We are just an ordinary working class family and he is a brilliant professional
     man. He quite clearly looked down on us. He would keep correcting our pronunciation and grammar while we were speaking. He had a
     way of making us feel very small when he stared at us over his glasses.” MPs last night backed moves to prosecute the doctor.’

     On the front page of the edition for 15 March, following Mr Geoffrey Dickens’s example, Dr B was named as ‘Rape case Doc’ alongside a
photograph of him. Details were         911ffl given of his education, associations with the royal family, his wealth, hobbies and family. On
another page it was stated, under the heading ‘Victim’s horror injuries’: ‘The raped girl may never have children of her own because she
suffered terrible injuries that will eventually lead to an operation.’ Further, under the heading ‘Doc groped me, says girl’, there is an account
provided by ‘an attractive 20 year old woman’ of alleged indecent assaults on her by Dr B when they were cruising on a luxury yacht in the
Mediterranean about four years before. This woman is stated to have said among much else: ‘Now I feel this terrible guilt. When I discovered
the eight-year old said she had been raped by him I had to blurt it out. But by then it was too late. ’ In the same article, it was stated:

          ‘Nude photographs of the eight year old rape victim and a cine film of her showing her knickers were also found in the doctor’s house.
       Her mother remembers the film being shot in the doctor’s back garden. “A friend with me astounded me by saying the doctor was a
      pervert” she said. “He pointed out that the whole afternoon the doctor had been getting my little girl to perform handstands and
      cartwheels—anything that would show her knickers.’”

      On 7 May 1986 the headline on the first page of the Sun was ‘Doc charged with raping girl, 8’, ‘The Sun helps mum prosecute him’. Dr
B is not named in the article which refers to his appearance before the justices at Braintree. But it is contended on behalf of the Attorney
General that there was no need for that to be done: readers of the Sun would have had no difficulty when reading it in recalling the articles
complained of in this application.
      On 26 November 1986 Mr Mackenzie was interviewed by Detective Chief Superintendent Thompson in pursuance of an inquiry into an
alleged contempt of court by the Sun. To most of many questions or suggestions put to him, he said he had no comment to make, but he made
it clear that he did not consider a contempt to have been committed.
      On 7 December 1986 the Attorney General told the Sun that he was minded to prosecute.
      At the commencement of his submissions counsel for the Attorney General told us that, since the articles complained of were not within
the strict liability provisions of ss 1 and 2 of the 1981 Act, the contempt alleged arose at common law, a law which provides that any conduct
which tends or is calculated to interfere with the course of justice which it is then intended should be embarked on is contemptuous and
consequently exposes the contemnor to punishment. The mens rea involved in such an offence requires, so it has been said he reminded us,
proof of specific intent. He, counsel, did not accept that proposition, he reserved the point possibly for argument elsewhere, but, he submitted,
proof of specific intent was present here. Anyway, he added, recklessness was established beyond any shadow of doubt and he asked for a
finding to that effect, if necessary.
      We should regard, he said, Mr Mackenzie’s evidence as deeply questionable. In that context, he referred to the whole of para 14 and in
particular to para 8 of Mr Mackenzie’s affidavit in which this deponent declared his state of mind to be that it appeared to him that, even with
the respondents’ financial backing, it was far from certain a private prosecution could be brought.
      The contents of the paragraphs themselves, especially those in paras 9 and 11, which should be regarded as admissions of intent, counsel
for the Attorney General also said, revealed the respondents’ clear intention of doing everything possible to ensure that criminal proceedings
were commenced against Dr B. Likewise, the letter of 13 March.
      There is here, he submitted, all the actus reus of a contempt of court: everything in the articles served to prejudice Dr B in his trial. Their
 contents could not have been forgotten by any potential juror who had read them. Furthermore, at the time of publication, no one could predict
 how far off the commencement of proceedings was.
      He accepted that the Attorney General could not succeed unless he proved that there         912Q was a real as opposed to a fanciful risk of
justice being interfered with by the contents of the articles.
      Counsel for the respondents submitted that, at the time of publication of the articles complained of, proceedings against Dr B were neither
 imminent nor pending. Thus, the Attorney General was, in the circumstances, seeking to broaden the field of contempt; he had not in any
 event established the necessary intent and could not rely in the alternative on recklessness. The contents of Mr Mackenzie’s evidence should
 be accepted, he maintained, as entirely genuine and true, expecially that part of it which relates to the deponent’s asserted lack of intention to
 interfere with the course of justice and to the matter bearing on the imminence of proceedings in which connection, counsel said, acceptably to
 me, that investigative journalism is not by itself a contempt of court. No attempt, he said, had been made by the Attorney General to apply for
 leave to cross-examine Mr Mackenzie. Thus, the invitation to the court to regard him as untrustworthy should, he maintained, be firmly
 declined. In this regard, he drew our attention to Re Smith & Fawcett Ltd [1942] 1 All ER 542 at 545, [1942] Ch 304 at 308, where Lord
 Greene MR stated:
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd


         ‘That being my view on the question of law in this case, it only remains to consider the issue of fact which has been raised. It is said
     that on the evidence before us we ought to infer that the directors here were purporting to exercise their power to refuse a transfer, not
     bona fide in the interests of the company, but for some collateral purpose—namely, the desire of the leading director to acquire part of
     the shares for himself at an under-value. Speaking for myself, I strongly dislike being asked on affidavit evidence alone to draw
     inferences as to the bona fides or mala fides of the actors ... If it is desired to charge a deponent with having given an account of his
     motives and his reasons which is not the true account, then the person on whom the burden of proof lies should, in my judgment, take the
     ordinary and obvious course of requiring the deponent to submit himself to cross-examination. That does not, of course mean that it is
     illegitimate to draw such inferences in a proper case. There may be on the face of the affidavit sufficient justification for doing so, but
     where you have the oath of the deponent, as we have it here, and the only grounds on which the court is asked to disbelieve it are matters
     of inference, many of them of a doubtful character, I for one must decline to give to those suggestions the weight which it is desired to
     give to them. ’

    Counsel for the respondents conceded that the funding by the respondents of the mother through her solicitor was intended to secure that
Dr B be, if possible, prosecuted. However, the articles themselves, he submitted, could not have had that effect.
    With those submissions in mind and others to which I will refer, I turn to examine the law of criminal contempt at common law, its
application in terms of time and the ingredients of it which have, beyond a reasonable doubt, to be proved by a prosecutor.
     The 1981 Act made fairly extensive provision for what might be called statutory contempts but by s 6 it made the following material
saving, namely that nothing in the 1981 Act—

         ‘(c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice.’

     In order to tell whether it has been established that a contempt has been committed by reason of a newspaper publication, it is a first and
necessary finding that the contents of the publication present a risk of prejudice to a fair trial assuming that, at the time of publication,
proceedings have commenced or there has been an arrest and the commencement of proceedings is thereafter inevitable. The risk predicted
must be real as opposed to a remote possibility: seei? v Duffy, exp Nash [1960] 2 All ER 891 at 896, [1960] 2 QB 188 at 200.       913Q
     No one could possibly resist the conclusion that in the circumstances I have assumed for the present purpose that the contents of the
articles complained of here posed a real risk of prejudice to a fair trial of Dr B. Publication of them during pending proceedings could not, in
my view, have had failed to have had that effect, so grave are the allegations made against the doctor and so prominent, widespread and so
savage, in headline at least, is the publicity given to them.
     We heard much argument on intent. The submission of counsel for the Attorney General as to that is mirrored in the judgment of Sir John
Donaldson MR in^l-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276 at 303-304, [1987] 3 WLR 942 at 977, where he stated:

         ‘This, counsel for the Attorney General fully accepts. But this does not mean that they cannot be charged on a basis which involves
     having regard to intent and indeed s 6(c) expressly contemplates and saves such a possibility when it provides: “Nothing in the foregoing
     provisions of this Act ... (c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede or prejudice the
     administration of justice.” This at once raises the question, “What kind of intent?”, counsel for the Attorney General contending for a
     general or basic intent and the newspapers for a specific intent. In the light of the policy of Parliament as evidenced by s 8 of the
     Criminal Justice Act 1967, and the likelihood that in passing the 1981 Act Parliament intended to accept the recommendations of the
     Phillimore Committee in 1977 (Report of the Committee on Contempt of Court (Cmnd 5794)), I am quite satisfied that what is
     contemplated, and what is ‘saved’, is the power of the court to commit for contempt where the conduct complained of is specifically
     intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice. Such an intent need not be expressly avowed or admitted, but can be
     inferred from all the circumstances, including the foreseeability of the consequences of the conduct. Nor need it be the sole intention of
     the contemnor. And intent is to be distinguished from motive or desire (see R v Moloney [1985] 1 All ER 1025 at 1037, [1985] AC 905
     at 926 per Lord Bridge).’

     As I have said, counsel for the Attorney General, who maintained that those observations of Sir John Donaldson MR are obiter dicta and
reserves for possible future argument elsewhere the issue of whether a specific intent is called for, nevertheless derived support, he said, from
the last two sentences of them. Lloyd LJ, in the same case, put the matter in the following way ([1987] 3 All ER 276 at 310, [1987] 3 WLR
942 at 985):

          ‘I would therefore hold that the mens rea required in the present case is an intent to interfere with the course of justice. As in other
      branches of the criminal law, that intent may exist, even though there is no desire to interfere with the course of justice. Nor need it be
      the sole intent. It may be inferred, even though there is no overt proof. The more obvious the interference with the course of justice, the
      more readily will the requisite intent be inferred.’

     Broadly speaking, I agree, with respect, with all that appears in those two quotations from A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic, more
emphatically perhaps with what relates to the ascertainment of intention than with what was stated as to the kind of intent required. As to that,
however, I feel bound to say that I should be surprised if the law were authoritatively declared to be that something less than a specific intent
will do. After all, what is in contemplation here, as has been in some previous cases of criminal contempt, is serious criminal conduct
accompanied by the possibility of the infliction of drastic penalty.
     The ascertainment of the existence of intention is, of course, quite a different matter. That is undoubtedly a commonplace exercise of
judgment involving the drawing of an inference from established fact which is done every day by judges and juries. The most recent assistance
towards properly and effectively discharging that task is to be found in   914ffl the judgment of Lord Lane CJ in R v Nedrick [1986] 3 All ER
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

1 at 3-4, [1986] 1 WLR 1025 at 1028, where he stated:

         ‘In R v Hancock [1986] 1 All ER 641, [1986] AC 455 the House decided that the R v Moloney guidelines require a reference to
     probability. Lord Scarman said ([1986] 1 All ER 641 at 651, [1986] AC 455 at 473): “They also require an explanation that the greater
     the probability of a consequence the more likely it is that the consequence was foreseen and that if that consequence was foreseen the
     greater the probability is that that consequence was also intended.” When determining whether the defendant had the necessary intent, it
     may therefore be helpful for a jury to ask themselves two questions. (1) How probable was the consequence which resulted from the
     defendant’s voluntary act? (2) Did he foresee that consequence? If he did not appreciate that death or serious harm was likely to result
     from his act, he cannot have intended to bring it about. If he did, but thought that the risk to which he was exposing the person killed
     was only slight, then it may be easy for the jury to conclude that he did not intend to bring about the result. On the other hand, if the jury
     are satisfied that at the material time the defendant recognised that death or serious harm would be virtually certain (barring some
     unforeseen intervention) to result from his voluntary act, then that is a fact from which they may find it easy to infer that he intended to
     kill or do serious bodily harm, even though he may not have had any desire to achieve that result. As Lord Bridge said in R v Moloney
     [1985] 1 All ER 1025 at 1036, [1985] AC 905 at 925: ” ... the probability of the consequence taken to have been foreseen must be little
     short of overwhelming before it will suffice to establish the necessary intent.” Later he uses the expression “moral certainty” (see [1985]
      1 All ER 1025 at 1037, [1985] AC 905 at 926) and says, “will lead to a certain consequence unless something unexpected supervenes to
     prevent it” (see [1985] 1 All ER 1025 at 1039, [1985] AC 905 at 929). Where the charge is murder and in the rare case where the simple
     direction is not enough, the jury should be directed that they are not entitled to infer the necessary intention unless they feel sure that
     death or serious bodily harm was a virtual certainty (barring some unforeseen intervention) as a result of the defendant’s actions and that
     the defendant appreciated that such was the case. Where a man realises that it is for all practical purposes inevitable that his actions will
     result in death or serious harm, the inference may be irresistible that he intended that result, however little he may have desired or
     wished it to happen. The decision is one for the jury to be reached on a consideration of all the evidence. ’

       Counsel for the respondents submits that it would be wrong to infer the required intent from the contents of the articles, for which
proposition he relies on R v Moloney [1985] 1 All ER 1025, [1985] AC 905.
       If, in so submitting, he intended us to conclude that the contents are all we have to consider, I cannot agree with him, nor do I accept that
the contents of these articles are not alone capable of giving rise to the inference that the respondents intended to prejudice the fair trial of Dr
B if and when that proceeding took place. I agree with junior counsel for the Attorney General that we are not bound to accept Mr
Mackenzie’s assertion that he did not intend to interfere with the course or administration of justice. But the articles do not stand alone. The
respondents’ affidavits and financial support to the mother stand with them in forming the whole of the circumstances to be considered for the
purpose of ascertaining by inference whether the intent required was present.
       Counsel for the Attorney General submits that we should draw the inference that the respondents intended to prejudice the fair trial
because (1) the contents of the articles strikingly showed that the respondents took the view that Dr B was guilty; in para 11 of his affidavit,
Mr Mackenzie states: ‘I believe that what we were publishing was true’, (2) although the risk of being in contempt was never mentioned, so
they say, in discussions between him and Mr Crone, Mr Crone thought there would be an answer to an allegation                     915H of being in
contempt, in regard to which he states in para 10 of his affidavit that he dismissed this as a likely danger since they were not in an active
period under Sch 1 to the 1981 Act and that any proceedings likely to ensue were a long way off, (3) Mr Mackenzie and Mr Crone thought
proceedings were likely to ensue otherwise why go to the lengths they did to put the mother in funds and further they could only have printed
 articles of such a kind if they were campaigning for a conviction, as they clearly were.
       I regard that as a powerful and persuasive submission. I simply cannot accept that an experienced editor such as Mr Mackenzie could
have failed to have foreseen that the material which he published in the articles complained of and the steps he announced he was taking to
 assist the mother to prosecute would incur a real risk of prejudicing the fairness of a trial of Dr B. The inescapable inference is, in my
judgment, that Mr Mackenzie became so convinced of Dr B ’s guilt and incensed by that and the failure to prosecute him that he endeavoured
 to persuade readers of the Sun to take a similar view. Some of those obviously could possibly have formed part of a jury to try the doctor. That
 is trial by newspaper, a form of activity which strikes directly at a jury’s impartiality.
        Furthermore, what conceivable reason could there be for publishing the article headed ‘Doc groped me, says girl’ unless it was intended to
 prejudice a fair trial by bringing to the notice of readers of the Sun, including possibly potential jurors, extremely damaging matter affecting Dr
 B which would be inadmissible as evidence in his trial?
        In coming to that conclusion, I have borne well in mind, as counsel for the respondents urged that we should, the observations of Lord
 Bridge on the inferring of intention (a legal concept in crime different from motive, as any experienced trial judge only too well recognises) in
 R v Moloney [1985] 1 All ER 1025, [1985] AC 905.
        If, contrary to my view, the Attorney General has failed to establish the intent required, can he succeed in establishing, as counsel for the
 Attorney General submits he can, that the respondents were in contempt on the basis of recklessness? That the conduct of the respondents in
 publishing the articles was in fact reckless I entertain not the slightest doubt. On Mr Mackenzie’s account, it was conduct committed without
  any thought whatsoever given to the possibility that these dramatic and excitable articles might interfere with the course of justice in the not
 too distant future.
        However, there is persuasive authority for the proposition that recklessness will not suffice to cause someone to be in contempt of court at
  common law.
        In ^-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276 at 309-310, [1987] 3 WLR 942 at 983-984 Lloyd LJ provided it in a trenchant
  manner:

          ‘Counsel for the Attorney General did not seek to support the first possibility. But he argued strongly in favour of the second. There
      was, he says, nothing in the pre-existing law to suggest that contempt of court was ever a crime of specific intent. If therefore it was
      necessary to show a guilty mind on the part of the contemnor, in other words when the strict liability rule did not apply, it was sufficient
      to show either that he intended to interfere with the course of justice, or that he was reckless whether he did so or not. This would be in
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

     accordance with the ordinary principles of criminal law. Moreover, if it were necessary to show in every case that the contemnor
     intended to interfere with the course of justice, the protection afforded by the law of contempt to the administration of justice would be
     undermined. Counsel for the Attorney General relied on the following passage from Arlidge and Eady, The Law o f Contempt (1982) para
     2-80: “The best view is that contempt of court is a crime of general intent. There is insufficient authority to indicate that it is a crime of
     specific intent and the purpose of the jurisdiction might be too easily defeated if it were.” He also relied on a later passage, where the
     authors sound a less certain note (paras 4-46): “Since this type of offence has hitherto been absolute, there are no authorities which
     indicate the precise nature of the mens rea required in the case of prejudicial publications which fall outside the Act but which are
     nevertheless prima facie contempts. On principle the contemnor must know the                      916tB publication contains matter capable of
     prejudicing particular proceedings; he must know the proceedings are pending or imminent, and he must intend to prejudice these
     proceedings. It may be that if he is reckless as to any or all of these requirements he will also be guilty.” If reckless interference with the
     course of justice was a ground of liability before the Act, as counsel for the Attorney General submits it was, then there is nothing in the
     Act itself which restricts that ground of liability. It is true that s 6(c) refers to conduct intended to impede or prejudice the administration
     of justice, and there is nothing about recklessness. But s 6(c) was enacted for the avoidance of doubt. Since there is nothing in ss 1 or 2
     to restrict liability based on recklessness, there was no need to refer to recklessness in s 6(c). Alternatively, "intent” in s 1 and “intended
     to impede etc”, in s 6(c) must refer to general intent, ie basic mens rea, which would include recklessness. Such was the argument of
     counsel for the Attorney General. I cannot accept it. Counsel for the Independent is surely right when he submits that the statutory
     purpose behind the 1981 Act was to effect a permanent shift in the balance of public interest away from the protection of the
     administration of justice and in favour of freedom of speech. Such a shift was forced on the United Kingdom by the decision of the
     European Court of Human Rights in Sunday Times v UK (1979) 2 EHRR 245, and was in any event foreshadowed by the
     recommendations of the Phillimore Committee. If we were to hold that, where the strict liability rule does not apply (because, for
     example, the publication does not create a substantial risk that the course of justice would be seriously impeded, but only some lesser
     risk, or some minor impediment), the publisher might nevertheless be liable if he is reckless, we would certainly not be furthering the
     statutory purpose. But counsel for the Independent has a narrower, and even more compelling, point based on the language on s 1. The
     strict liability rule is expressed to be a rule whereby a person may be liable “regardless of intent“. Now whatever else recklessness may
     or may not mean (and the cases show that the concept is not without its difficulties) it is clear that it is independent of, and frequently
     contrasted with, intent. Liability based on recklessness is thus a liability regardless of intent. If that is so, then liability based on
     recklessness is included within the statutory description of the strict liability rule, and is therefore subject to the restrictions imposed by s
     2. It must follow that recklessness does not provide the Attorney General with an avenue of escape from s 2, which is the essence of the
     submission of counsel for the Attorney General. Putting the matter another way, s 6(c) of the 1981 Act saves from the operation of ss 1
     and 2 conduct which is intended to impede or prejudice the administration of justice. If it was the object of Parliament to save also
      conduct which is reckless, then Parliament would surely have said so. Sections 1, 2 and 6(c) cover the whole ground. In cases covered
     by the Act to which the strict liability rule does not apply, there is no room for a state of mind which falls short of intention. There is no
     middle way.’ (Lloyd LJ’s emphasis.)

     Counsel for the Attorney General submitted that the views there expressed are obiter dicta in relation as to both the kind of intent required
and recklessness, likewise, as I have said, the view of Sir John Donaldson MR on intent. The questions of what kind of intent is required and
whether recklessness will do are, he contends, without direct authority and he says we should not be guided by the views expressed in A-G v
Newspaper Publishing pic, which he, if necessary, will argue against elsewhere.
     The editors of Borrie and Lowe Law o f Contempt (2nd edn, 1983) pp 87-88 express views consistent with those of Lloyd LJ.
Nevertheless it is, I believe, right to say that there is no direct authority to support those views. However, I have found it impossible to find
any good reason for suggesting that they are wrong, albeit that recklessness of the seriousness committed in this case could only lead, it seems
to me, to the creation of a real risk of the course of justice being interfered with.
     My conclusions thus far stated cannot wholly answer the vital question, which is, of 0, 917H course, whether the Attorney General has
established that the respondents are guilty of contempt at common law. A further and important issue has yet to be resolved. It arises from the
submission of counsel for the respondents that the respondents cannot be in contempt unless the conduct complained of was carried out at a
time when proceedings were either pending or imminent. For the law of contempt to apply, a time requirement must, he says, be satisfied. It
is not here satisfied, it is submitted, because when the articles were published, it is beyond doubt that proceedings were in fact not pending and
on authority it cannot be said again that they were not imminent.
     In Borrie and Lowe Law o f Contempt pp 162-163 it is stated:

         ‘The common law position in England seems to be that the law of contempt definitely applies when proceedings are “pending” and
      probably when proceedings can be said to be “imminent". The uncertainty as to the application of the law to “imminent” proceedings is
      compounded by the uncertainty of both the concepts of “imminence” and “pending“.’

     Counsel for the Attorney General did not contend that proceedings were pending at the time of publication of the articles, but he argued
that the trial of Dr B was imminent at the material time. The word ‘imminent’, he said, may be misleading. It is more appropriate to have
regard to the expression ‘course of justice’, which comprehends both actual and future proceedings. He referred us in respect of future
proceedings to part of the judgment of the court given by Wills J in.R v Parke [1903] 2 KB 432 at 437-438, [1900-3] All ER Rep 721 at 723:

          ‘Looking, therefore, to the principles upon which this jurisdiction rests, and to the mischief to prevent which it exists, we can have no
      doubt that it is properly invoked in the present case. Great stress has been laid by [counsel for the defendant] upon an expression which
      has been used in the judgments upon questions of this kind—that the remedy exists when there is a cause pending in the Court. We
      think undue importance has been attached to it. It is true that in very nearly all the cases which have arisen there has been a cause
      actually begun, so that the expression, quite natural under the circumstances, accentuates the fact, not that the case has been begun, but
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

     that it is not at an end. That is the cardinal consideration. It is possible very effectually to poison the fountain of justice before it begins
     to flow. It is not possible to do so when the stream has ceased.’

    Publication in that case was during committal proceedings, but counsel for the Attorney General says the last two sentences of the passage
quoted are of much significance in the present context.
    Counsel for the respondents contended that imminence relates only to the inception of proceedings and he quoted Lord Diplock’s words in
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 71, [1974] AC 273 at 308:

        ‘To constitute a contempt of court that attracts the summary remedy, the conduct complained of must relate to somespecific case in
     which litigation in a court of law is actually proceeding or is known to be imminent.

    We were referred a number of times to the helpful commentary on the timing of publications in Borrie and Lowe Law o f Contempt ch 6,
which includes passages on the meaning of the word ‘imminent’ in this context.
    One of the passages illustrates the difficulty of alighting on an uncontroversial definition (p 167):

          ‘What, then, does “imminent” mean? The concept admits of no easy definition. It is not even clear precisely what has to be
      “imminent". Definitions commonly refer to the proximity of the arrest but it would be perhaps preferable to relate the timing to
      proximity of court proceedings. On the other hand it is reasonably likely,       918(11although not inevitable, that once a suspect has been
      arrested, court proceedings will follow fairly quickly. “Imminent” would suggest that the relevant event will take place in the immediate
      future. Viscount KTT.MTTTR (when Lord Chancellor) commented in the House of Lords’ debate on the Administration of Justice Bill
      clause 11(( 1960) 222 HL Official Report (5th series) col 252): “Proceedings may be imminent, for example, when no one has yet been
      charged with a crime but an arrest is expected hourly.” R v Beaverbrook Newspapers Ltd ([1962] NI 15) might be thought be provide a
      good example within this definition. The police had surrounded a suspect’s house, but nevertheless, a reporter was allowed to enter the
      house where an interview, which was later published, took place. The article and a photograph were published shortly before the suspect
      was arrested and charged with murder. SHEIL J said (at 21): “how any reasonable person, knowing the contents of the report and having
      expert advice available, could have failed to form the opinion that proceedings were imminent, passes my comprehension.” He also
      suggested that “imminent” meant “impending” or “threatening11. A somewhat wider view of “imminence” was taken by SALMON LJ.
      In the report under his chairmanship on Contempt of Court as affects Tribunals of Inquiry (Cmnd 4078 (1969), p 9) it was said: “There
      are cases, however, in which it is obvious that a certain individual is on the point of being arrested on a serious criminal charge—perhaps
      in twenty-four hours, perhaps in seven or eight days, it is impossible to lay down a precise scale.’” (Borrie and Lowe's emphasis.)

     Again in Borrie and Lowe p 168:

         ’’’Imminence” is an elusive concept, and while it would seem clearly to cover cases where “a man is helping police with their
      inquiries” or the situation in Beaverbrook Newspapers where the publication appeared while the police were surrounding a suspect’s
      house, it appears to go beyond that. Are proceedings “imminent” when there is a massive man-hunt in operation for a named man? The
      answer might well depend on how quickly the suspect is arrested after the publication. Are proceedings “imminent” when a suspect is
      arrested abroad and extradition proceedings are in progress or about to begin? Again the answer might depend on how quickly the case
      comes before the English courts. While it is difficult to defend a law which operates so arbitrarily it is worth making the point that the
      greater the time lag between publication and trial the less the risk that the ensuing proceedings will be prejudiced.’

     Junior counsel for the Attorney General most impressively submitted that ‘imminent proceedings’ is a vague and uncertain phrase which
cannot be confined to any particular length of time as a matter of principle. Its application depends on all the circumstances of the case. The
concept is necessarily imprecise because it is intended to be applied by reference to its purpose. There are cases, he said, where although
proceedings are not yet active, they are likely to be commenced in the near future. Some proceedings are imminent when there is a likelihood
or a real risk that they will be instituted in the near future and when there is a real risk that the kind of publication as here would interfere with
the course of justice.
     hi the present case, he submitted, proceedings were imminent, the respondents intended they should be commenced at their expense as
soon as possible and actively pursued that goal because they were determined to see Dr B charged, tried and convicted. The possibility of
counsel advising against proceedings did not remove the likelihood or real risk that proceedings would be instituted in the near future.
     Alternatively, he argued that, if the proceedings here could not be said to be imminent, common law contempt applies none the less in the
whole of the circumstances of this case. This is because the purpose of the contempt jurisdiction is to prevent interference with the course of
justice. The more distant the commencement of proceedings, the less 0, 919H likely such interference. But here, he said, the contents of the
articles created a real risk that a fair trial would be impeded.
      There is, he contended, no authority which states that common law contempt cannot be committed where proceedings cannot be said to be
 imminent but where there is a specific intent to interfere with the course of justice accompanied by a real risk that the published matter will
 impede a fair trial, the occurrence of which is in contemplation. The authorities are not concerned with the scope of common law contempt
where such an intent exists in relation to proceedings in the contemplation of a respondent who deliberately assists a private prosecutor to
 prosecute as soon as possible.
      I have found that a formidable contention. The circumstances in which a criminal contempt at common law can be committed are not
 necessarily, in my judgment, confined to those in which proceedings are either pending or imminent, ‘an imprecise word by which to mark out
 a period of time’: per Windeyer J in James v Robinson (1963) 109 CLR 593. The common law surely does not tolerate conduct which
 involves the giving of encouragement and practical assistance to a person to bring about a private prosecution accompanied by an intention to
 interfere with the course of justice by publishing material about the person to be prosecuted which could only serve to and was so intended to
 prejudice the fair trial of that person. This is especially so where the publisher of them makes it plain that he believes the person referred to in
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:38pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

the articles is guilty of serious crime, that he is deserving of punishment for that and that he has committed some other similar crime.
     The common law is not a worn-out jurisprudence rendered incapable of further development by the ever increasing incursion of
parliamentary legislation. It is a lively body of law capable of adaptation and expansion to meet fresh needs calling for the exertion of the
discipline of law.
     hi A-G v Newspaper Publishing pic [1987] 3 All ER 276 at 299, [1987] 3 WLR 942 at 971 Sir John Donaldson MR stated:

         ‘Based on these propositions of law, the Vice-Chancellor said that it seemed to him that the Attorney General was seeking to widen
     the application of the law of criminal contempt, albeit in accordance with established principle. This I am unable to accept. The law of
     contempt is based on the broadest of principles, namely that the courts cannot and will not permit interference with the due
     administration of justice. Its application is universal. The fact that it is applied in novel circumstances, for example to the punishment of
     a witness after he had given evidence (see A-G v Butterworth [1962] 3 All ER 326, [1963] 1 QB 696), is not a case of widening its
     application. It is merely a new example of its application. In that case, as here, the trial judge (Mocatta J) relied on the fact that there
     was no such case in the books, but this court held that that was a distinction of fact, not principle (see [1962] 3 All ER 326 at 332, [1963]
     1 QB 696 at 724-725 per Donovan LJ).’ (Sir John Donaldson MR’s emphasis.)

     What Donovan LJ stated in A-G v Butterworth [1962] 3 All ER 326 at 332, [1963] 1 QB 696 at 724-725, which I now quote with
respectful agreement, is very much to the point in the present case:

         ‘The like remark is made of a trade union or trade association which might embody in its rules a rule that any member who should
     sue it, or give evidence against it, would lose his membership. But since the action of the employer, or the trade union or trade
     association would clearly be calculated to interfere with the proper administration       920H of justice, it is not easy to understand why it
     is not covered by the principle, already existing, on which the courts act, namely, the prevention of interference having that effect. The
     cases envisaged are distinguished in the judgment on the ground that none of the present respondents had any particular future
     proceedings in mind, and no intention to interfere with the administration of justice. This may well be true, but the distinction is one of
     fact rather than of principle. Whether it is a crucial distinction of fact is something to which I must presently return. I refer to two
     matters which seem to me to show that contempt of court is not an offence confined to pending cases. First, scurrilous abuse of a judge
     after the case is over cannot affect that case. It can affect only future cases which he tries, by reducing his authority. Yet it is certainly
     contempt. Second, the Witnesses (Public Inquiries) Protection Act, 1892, was not cited to the Restrictive Practices Court. It gives
     protection to witnesses before any inquiry by a royal commission or any parliamentary or statutory committee in the terms already
     quoted by LORD DENNING, M.R. The exclusion of a court of justice from the definition of “inquiry” contained in s. 1 can be
     reasonably explained only on the ground that Parliament considered courts of justice as already possessing a corresponding jurisdiction.
     So far as judicial authority is concerned, there are a number of decisions in which passages appear which, at first sight, tend to support
     the view contended for by the respondents. They are all enumerated, and, if I may say so, admirably summarised in the judgment under
     review, and I need, therefore, make only this general comment; that, since the passages in question occur in judgments dealing with
     pending cases, their references to this fact are apposite and natural. But it would be reading far too much into them to regard them as
     impliedly recognising or asserting the principle that contempt is impossible once the case is over. The administration of justice is, after
     all, a continuing thing. It is not bounded by the day’s cases. It has a future as well as a present. And, if somebody pollutes the stream
     today so that tomorrow’s litigant will find it poisoned, will he appeal to the court in vain?’

     The need for a free press is axiomatic, but the press cannot be allowed to charge about like a wild unbridled horse. It has, to a necessary
degree, in the public interest, to be curbed. The curb is in no circumstance more necessary than when the principle that every man accused of
crime shall have a fair trial is at stake. It is a principle which, in my experience, newspaper proprietors and editors are usually as alert as
anyone to avoid violating.
     There may not have been in fact, as was suggested, another case quite like this, but the kind of threat which the articles complained of
posed to the proper administration of justice is by no means novel, as reports of previous cases of criminal contempt committed by publishers
of newspaper articles show.
     The respondents here had very much in mind particular proceedings which they were determined, as far as it lay within their power and
influence, to ensure took place.
     If it is necessary for the Attorney General to establish that proceedings were imminent, he has, I think, done so. In my judgment, where a
prosecution is virtually certain to be commenced and particularly where it is to be commenced in the near future, it is proper to describe such
proceedings as imminent. Such was the case here.
     Thus, for the reasons I have explained, I find that the Attorney General justifiably complains of the conduct of the respondents, whom I
would hold are in contempt of court at common law and liable to be punished therefor.

 MANN LJ. For the reasons given by Watkins LJ, I agree that the respondents are in contempt of court at common law and should be punished
 accordingly.

Application allowed. Respondents fined £75,000. Leave to appeal to the House o f Lords refused.

 9 June. The Appeal Committee o f the House o f Lords (Lord Keith o f Kinkel, Lord Templeman and Lord Ackner) refused leave to appeal.

 Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service; Farrer & Co (for the respondents).

                                                                                                              N P Metcalfe Barrister. <t. 921H
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997              books on screen™
AUER 1988 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:39pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
A llE R 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)




                                     Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court: COMMUNICATIONS: TORTS; Defamation

COURT OF APPEAL, CIVIL DIVISION
SIR JOHN DONALDSON MR, PARKER LJ AND SIR GEORGE WALLER
16, 17, 30 APRIL 1986


 Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Pending proceedings - Substantial risk o f serious prejudice to fa ir trial -
Libel proceedings - Defence ofjustification - Proposed publication by third party o f matters already subject o f libel proceedings - Trial set
fo r no earlier than ten months from proposed publication - Whether proposed publication creating substantial risk o f serious prejudice to
 trial - Whether appropriate to restrain publication - Contempt o f Court Act 1981, ss 1, 2.

In 1984 a well-known sportsman began proceedings for libel against the editor and owners of a newspaper which had published certain
allegations against him. They relied on the defence of justification and the case was set down for trial no earlier than March 1987. In April
1986 the defendants, the owners of another newspaper, proposed to publish the same allegations against the sportsman in their newspaper.
The Attorney General brought proceedings to restrain the defendants under the strict liability rule set out in s \ a of the Contempt of Court Act
1981, ie ‘the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as a contempt of court as tending to interfere with the course of justice in particular
legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so’. However, under s 2^ the strict liability rule only applied if the publication created a
substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question would be seriously impeded or prejudiced and if such proceedings were
‘active’, ie had (in the case of civil proceedings other than appeals) been set down for trial, at the time of publication. The defendants
contended that where the publication could be justified the right of freedom of expression was to be balanced against the right to a fair trial and
up until three months before the trial the balance ought to come down in favour of publication. They further contended that in any event a
substantial risk of serious prejudice had not been established for the purposes of s 2 because the trial was not to take place until March 1987 at
the earliest. The judge granted an injunction restraining publication. The defendants appealed.

a    Section 1, so far as material, is set out at p 842 g, post
k    Section 2 is set out at p 836 j to p 837 b, post



H eld - Although the general rule that no prior restraint would be ordered against a defendant who intended to plead justification in libel
proceedings was normally decisive, in balancing the right to freedom of expression against the right to a fair trial the court would inevitably
make an order under s 2 of the 1981 Act restraining a defendant from repeating allegations which were the subject matter of a libel action if
there was a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the trial of the action. However, ‘substantial risk’ and ‘serious prejudice’ were stringent
tests for the making of an order for restraint. Each case depended on its own facts, but the place of trial, the nature of the proposed publication
and the proximity of publication to the date of the trial were factors of considerable importance in assessing whether the criteria set out in s 2
were met. In the circumstances, although the proceedings in question were ‘active’ within the meaning of s 2, the date fixed for trial was so far
in advance of the proposed publication that it did not create a substantial risk of serious prejudice to the trial of the action. The Attorney
General’s action was therefore premature. The appeal would accordingly be allowed and the injunction discharged (see p 838 h j, p 841 a b e f
h j, p 842 a b e f p 843 d to /a n d p 844 a b g, post).
      Bonnard v Perryman [1891—4] All ER Rep 965 and dictum of Lord Reid in A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER at 65
considered. <f. 833H

 N otes
For contempt of court in defamation proceedings, see 9 Halsbury 's Laws (4th edn) para 21.
    For the Contempt of Court Act 1981, ss 1, 2, see 11 Halsbury’s Statutes (4th edn) 181, 182.

 C ases referred to in ju d g m en ts
A-G v BBC [1980] 3 All ER 161, [1981] AC 303, [1980] 3 WLR 109, HL rvsg [1979] 3 All ER 45, [1981] AC 303, [1979] 3 WLR 312, CA.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, [1973] 3 WLR 298, HL.
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd, A-G v Associated Newspapers Ltd, A-G v Odhams Newspapers Ltd, A-G v News Group Newspapers Ltd, A-G v
    Express Newspapers pic (1983) Times, 12 February, DC.
Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269, [1891—4] All ER Rep 965, CA.
Coulson (William) & Sons v James Coulson & Co (1887) 3 TLR 846, CA.
R v Kray (1969) 53 Cr App R 412, CCC.
Schering Chemicals Ltd v Falkman Ltd [1981] 2 All ER 321, [1982] 1 QB 1, [1981] 2 WLR 848, CA.
Thomson v Times Newspapers Ltd [1969] 3 All ER 648, [1969] 1 WLR 1236, CA.
Truth and Sportsman Ltd, Re, ex p Bread Manufacturers Ltd (1937) 37 SR(NSW) 242.
Wallersteiner v Moir, M oirv Wallersteiner [1974] 3 All ER 217, [1974] 1 WLR 991, CA.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
AUER 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

C ases also cited
Gaskell & Chambers Ltd v Hudson Dodsworth & Co, R v Hudson, exp Gaskell & Chambers Ltd [1936] 2 KB 595, DC.
Peacock v London Weekend Television [1985] CA Transcript 723.

In terlo cu to ry a p p eal
The defendants, News Group Newspapers Ltd, appealed against the order ofLeggatt J made on 11 April 1983 whereby he granted the plaintiff,
Her Majesty’s Attorney General, an injunction restraining them from publishing any narrative allegations covering substantially the same
ground as the allegation contained in the Mail on Sunday articles on 11 March and 8 April 1984 relating to Mr Ian Botham and in respect of
which writs for damages for libel had been issued by Mr Botham against Stewart Stevens, Associated Newspapers Group pic, and the editor,
publishers and proprietors of the Mail on Sunday on 13 March and 9 April 1984 respectively. The facts are set out in the judgment of Sir John
Donaldson MR.

Charles Gray QC and Mark Warby for the defendants.
John Laws for the Attorney General.

At the conclusion of the argument Sir John Donaldson MR announced that the appeal would be allowed for reasons to be given later.

30 April 1986. The following judgments were delivered.

S IR J O H N D O N A L D S O N M R . In this appeal we have been called on to consider the interaction of two fundamental freedoms: the right to
free speech and the right to an unprejudiced trial by jury.

Freedom o f speech
     On 11 March 1984 the newspaper Mail on Sunday contained an article alleging that, during the MCC tour of New Zealand in that year,
Mr Ian Botham had smoked marijuana in public places in Hamilton, Christchurch and Wellington, had committed criminal offences by
possessing and supplying a prohibited drug, namely cocaine, in Wellington <t, 8340 and behaved in an unseemly manner during the test match
at Christchurch. On 8 April 1984 the same newspaper contained a further article alleging that he had committed criminal offences by offering
to supply marijuana to two girls in the hotel in Auckland and had ‘encouraged the girls, whom he had never met previously, to have sex with
him’.
     On 13 March and 9 April Mr Botham issued writs for libel against Mr Stewart Steven, the editor of Mail on Sunday and Associated
Newspapers Group pic, its publisheers. The defendants by their defences entered pleas of justification. In these circumstances the rule in
Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269, [1891-4] All ER Rep 965 inhibited Mr Botham from obtaining an injunction restraining the defendant
editor and publishers from repeating the allegations and they remained free to do so if they wished, subject always to the risk that, if at the trial
they failed in the plea of justification, any award of damages would be likely to be very considerably increased.

The rule in Bonnard v Perryman
    North J had granted an interlocutory injunction restraining the repetition of an alleged libel. On appeal to the Court of Appeal, this order
was set aside, Kay LJ dissenting. The judgment of the majority was delivered by Lord Coleridge CJ with the concurrence of Lord Esher MR
and Lindley, Bowen and Lopes LJJ. All the members of the court, including Kay LJ, held that there was jurisdiction to impose a prior restraint
on the threatened publication of a libel. The disagreement was as to how the discretion to grant such relief should be exercised. As to that
Lord Coleridge CJ said ([1891] 2 Ch 269 at 284-285, [1891-4] All ER Rep 965 at 968-969):

            ‘But it is obvious that the subject-matter of an action for defamation is so special as to require exceptional caution in exercising the
       jurisdiction to interfere by injunction before the trial of an action to prevent an anticipated wrong. The right of free speech is one which
       it is for the public interest that individuals should possess, and, indeed, that they should exercise without impediment, so long as no
       wrongful act is done; and, unless an alleged libel is untrue, there is no wrong committed; but, on the contrary, often a very wholesome act
       is performed in the publication and repetition of an alleged libel. Until it is clear that an alleged libel is untrue, it is not clear that any
       right at all has been infringed; and the importance of leaving free speech unfettered is a strong reason in cases of libel for dealing most
        cautiously and warily with the granting of interim injunctions. We entirely approve of, and desire to adopt as our own, the language of
       Lord Esher, M.R., in Coulson v. Coulson ((1887) 3 TLR 846)—“To justify the Court in granting an interim injunction it must come to a
        decision upon the question of libel or no libel, before the jury have decided whether it was a libel or not. Therefore the jurisdiction was
        of a delicate nature. It ought only to be exercised in the clearest cases, where any jury would say that the matter complained of was
        libellous, and where, if the jury did not so find, the Court would set aside the verdict as unreasonable.” In the particular case before us,
        indeed, the libellous character of the publication is beyond dispute, but the effect of it upon the Defendant can be finally disposed of only
        by a jury, and we cannot feel sure that the defence of justification is one which, on the facts which may be before them, the jury may find
        to be wholly unfounded; nor can we tell what may be the damages recoverable. Moreover, the decision at the hearing may turn upon the
        question of the general character of the Plaintiffs; and this is a point which can rarely be investigated satisfactorily upon affidavit before
        the trial,—on which further it is not desirable that the Court should express an opinion before the trial. Otherwise, an injunction might
        be granted before the trial in a case in which at the trial nothing but nominal damages, if so much, could be obtained. Upon the whole we
        think, with great deference to Mr. Justice North, that it is wiser in this case, as it generally and in all but exceptional cases must be, to
        abstain from interference until the trial and determination of the plea of justification.’
                                                                      <k 835Q
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
AUER 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd

The right to an unprejudiced trial
     At common law conduct which tended to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings constituted a criminal contempt
of court regardless of intent to do so. This was known as the ‘strict liability rule’. In the years prior to the enactment of the Contempt of Court
Act 1981 the courts were on numerous occasions confronted with the problem of the conflict between their duty to prevent the commission of
criminal contempts under the rule and their duty to refrain from interfering with the right of free speech under the rule in Bonnard v Perryman.
     Sometimes writs were issued with the genuine intention of seeking compensation for defamation and orders preventing any repetition, but
sometimes the writs were issued with the sole purpose of stifling discussion. The latter were popularly, or in some quarters ‘unpopularly’,
known as ‘gagging writs’. I will return to the authorities to which we were referred on the resolution of this conflict, but first I must advert to
the change in the law effected by the 1981 Act.

The Contempt o f Court Act 1981
     The first and most important aspect to note is that the 1981 Act did nothing to create any new or wider offence of contempt of court than
had theretofore existed and had no application to conduct intended to interfere with the course of justice. Thus s 6 provides:

         ‘Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act—(a) prejudices any defence available at common law to a charge of contempt of court
     under the strict liability rule; (b) implies than any publication is punishable as contempt of court under that rule which would not be so
     punishable apart from those provisions; (c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede or prejudice
     the administration of justice.’

     The 1981 Act prohibits the bringing of proceedings for a contempt of court under the strict liability rule other than by or with the consent
of the Attorney General or on the motion of a court having jurisdiction to deal with it (see s 7). However, this section has been held to be
confined in its effect to proceedings in relation to contempts of court alleged already to have been committed. It has no application to, and does
not inhibit, applications for injunctive relief in respect of apprehended future contempts of court. On the other hand, in deciding whether or
not to grant such relief the court is concerned to consider whether, in the light of the other provisions of the Act, the defendant would have a
defence if he committed the acts sought to be restrained. If he would, there would be no basis on which a restraining order could be made.
     The Act provides specific defences to a charge of contempt of court under the strict liability rule in relation to innocent publication or
distribution, contemporary reports of proceedings and discussion of public affairs. The latter, although not directly relied on in the present
proceedings, is worthy of note for the light cast on it by some of the authorities to which we were referred. It is contained in s 5, which
provides:

          ‘A publication made as or as part of a discussion in good faith of public affairs or other matters of general public interest is not to be
      treated as a contempt of court under the strict liability rule if the risk of impediment or prejudice to particular legal proceedings is merely
      incidental to the discussion. ’

     For present purposes the most important provision of the Act is contained in s 2, which limits the application of the strict liability rule, as
it previously existed, by reference to the nature of the conduct complained of, the risk of interference with the course of justice, the seriousness
of the interference (if it were to occur) and the stage which has been reached in any proceedings which might be interfered with. It provides:

          ‘(1) The strict liability rule applies only in relation to publications, and for this purpose “publication” includes any speech, writing,
      broadcast, cable programme or other communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the public at large or any section of the
      public.    836Q
          (2) The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in
      question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
          (3) The strict liability rule applies to a publication only if the proceedings in question are active within the meaning of this section at
      the time of the publication.
          (4) Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which proceedings are to be treated as active within the meaning of this section.’

      Proceedings in the High Court, such as Mr Botham’s actions in respect of the articles in Mail on Sunday, become active when the case is
set down for trial. It is conceded that at all material times these actions had become active, although none of the parties is seeking a date for
trial before the beginning of March 1987.

Enter the News o f the World
     On 6 April 1986 the News of the World newspaper contained an article on Mr Botham in the context of the current MCC tour of the West
Indies. The main headline was: ‘He snorted drugs on pitch. Botham Cocaine and Sex Scandal.’ I refrain from reproducing any more of the
article, save to mention that it included a separate paragraph towards the end reading: ‘In New Zealand two years ago Botham indulged in an
amazing catalogue of drug incidents.’ I understand that Mr Botham has issued a writ for libel against News Group Newspapers in respect of
this article, but that is not material for present purposes.
      On 10 April 1986 Mr Botham’s solicitor was told by the legal adviser to the News of the World that the newspaper intended to publish, on
 13 April 1986, a further article containing ‘detailed allegations concerning the persistent use of cocaine, hard drugs and soft drugs whilst on
cricket tour in New Zealand and Fiji in 1984, with a peripheral story concerning sexual allegations’. The legal adviser acknowledged that
these allegations would cover the same sort of ground as the allegations contained in the original Mail on Sunday articles in 1984. Before this
court, the editor has said that it would be based on independent investigations.

Enter the Attorney General
 A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                          books on screen™
 AUER 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
 Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

     In these circumstances the Attorney General applied for, and Leggatt J granted, an injunction restraining the defendants, as publishers of
 the News of the World, from publishing any narrative allegations covering substantially the same ground as the allegations contained in the
 Mail on Sunday articles of 11 March and 8 April 1984.

 The judgment o f Leggatt J
      The judge referred to the strict liability rule and the relevant sections of the 1981 Act. He continued:

            ‘Elaborating the grounds on which his client intend to launch their publication [counsel for the defendants] says there are four reasons
       for not interfering. First, the intended publication does not create a substantial risk of serious prejudice. The earliest date for hearing is
       not for some 11 months. The question as [counsel] submits is whether the average juryman will remember when the trial comes on
       anything he has read, and if he does, whether he will be influenced by what he has read. That is a question which a judge must answer
       with special circumspection, bearing in mind that it is a question of fact for the jury. But having considered it I am quite satisfied there
       must be a substantial risk of serious prejudice. Mr Botham is a public figure. For that reason if for no other people are likely to
       remember what they hear about him. Among them are likely to be people on the jury. Moreover, it is to be noticed that the allegations
       which are the subject matter of the proceedings were made as long ago as 1984. The effect of publication now would be to resurrect
       those allegations at this halfway or intermediate stage in the libel proceedings. Next [counsel for the defendants] submits that the 1981
       Act was to liberalise the law relating to contempt. He refers to s 6. It is plain that the law of contempt was not <t, 8370 intended to be
       more stringent now than before the Act. [Counsel] invites attention to the judgment of Salmon LJ in Thomson v Times Newspapers
       [1969] 3 All ER 648 at 650, [1969] 1 WLR 1236 at 1239, where the Lord Justice considers the matter hand in hand with that of libel. It
       is to be noted that those observations were obiter. [Counsel for the defendants] also relied on Wallersteiner v M oir [1974] 3 All ER 217
       at 229-230, [1974] 1 WLR 991 at 1004. Lord Denning MR makes reference to the “sub judice” point and the particular manner in which
       Dr Wallersteiner had availed himself of it, which he declares as not having the effect intended. In this context I accept [counsel for the
       Attorney General’s] caution to beware any assimilation of libel and contempt. As he pertinently submits, in libel truth is in issue
       whereas what the court is concerned with in contempt is the risk of prejudice. That only has to be stated for the distinction to be
       understood; it is the risk of prejudice which is the essential feature of this application. Relied on also in this context is A-G v Times
       Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273 and in particular Lord Reid’s observations where he cited with approval a passage
       from Jordan CJ in Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd, exp Bread Manufacturers Ltd (1937) 37 SR(NSW) 242 at 249-250(see [1973] 3 All ER
       54 at 61-62, [1974] AC 273 at 296). It appears to me that when one contrasts the position of Mr Botham with that of the person
       contemplated by Jordan CJ the distinction is clear, hi relation to Mr Botham the article could not but have the result of being
       “calculated" to prejudice him. As to the question of whether the publication is intended to prejudice, I say only that to the person on the
       receiving end the distinction is of no consequence, hi the circumstances, though the 1981 Act was intended to liberalise the law, I cannot
       construe the dicta referred to so as to exclude its operation in the case before me. [Counsel for the defendants’] third submission
       concerned the question of “serious prejudice11. [Counsel] says Mr Botham’s activities have attracted considerable publicity, in relation to
       New Zealand, this country, the current tour of the West Indies, his charity walk and the allegations made or alleged to have been made by
       his manager. And the temerarious submission is made that this article could add little. I find that extremely unattractive. I say no more
       than that I reject it. It cannot be right that if enough ullage is cast at a man then it is free for all to throw what they please. The fourth
        submission made by [counsel for the defendants] referred to s 5 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981, and was that any risk of prejudice is
       merely incidental. But it is quite clear that this article is not put forward under any guise of public interest. It is confined to the activities
        of Mr Botham and what he has personally been about. Some attempt was made to say that because Mr Botham is a public figure the
        newspaper has a duty to show that he has feet of clay. And that, irrespective of the effect it will have on the trial. But this could not
        apply to an attempt to reiterate allegations made some two years ago in another newspaper. An attempt was made to equate the
        allegations against Mr Botham with those made against Mr Fagan which were the subject of A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd, A-G v
       Associated Newspapers Ltd (1983) Times, 12 February. But there the “public affairs” were a great deal more plain than any of those
        which are or could be relied on here. For those reasons which I have attempted to state, the Attorney General’s application must
        succeed. ’

         The defendants have appealed and, at the conclusion of the argument, I stated that we would set aside the injunction on the grounds that
   we were not satisfied that the proposed article would create a substantial risk that the course of justice in Mr Botham’s actions against the Mail
   on Sunday would be seriously prejudiced, taking account of the interval of time which would elapse before it was tried. The Attorney
   General’s application was premature in the sense that different considerations might have applied if it had been proposed to publish the same,
   or a similar, article closer to the date for trial. However, in deference to the importance of the issues which had been raised in the most helpful
   arguments of counsel for the defendants and of counsel for the Attorney General, we decided to take time to put our judgments into writing.
<t, 838Q
          Counsel for the defendants advanced four submissions, namely: (1) where the publisher asserts credibly that the publication can be
   justified, he requires special consideration in the context of an application to commit for contempt or for an interlocutory injunction to restrain
   publication; (2) this special consideration involves weighing in the balance the desirability of ensuring freedom of expression against the right
   of litigants to have their litigation tried without outside interference; (3) normally where this special consideration arises, the balance will
    come down in favour of publication where the allegedly contemptuous publication takes, or will take, place before the allegedly prejudiced
    litigation comes into the jury list, if it is a jury action, or about three months before the trial; (4) in any event, on the facts of this case, there
   was no substantial risk of serious prejudice.
          hi support of the first three of these submissions, counsel for the defendants referred us to dicta in a number of authorities, the latest of
   which was Schering Chemicals Ltd v Falkman Ltd [1981] 2 All ER 321, [1982] 1 QB 1. hi each case the court was concerned with the law as
    it stood before the passing of the 1981 Act. Counsel for the defendants is entitled to say, and he does say, that this does not matter because the
    Act has preserved all defences to a charge of contempt of court which were open before the passing of the Act and therefore cannot have made
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers Ltd

anything a contempt which would not have been one apart from the Act.
    This is, however, an over-simplification. In the years immediately before the passing of the Act the courts were engaged in the exercise of
reconciling the rule m Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269, [1891-4] All ER Rep 965 with the strict liability rule. Thus, for example, in A-G
v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 61-62, [1974] AC 273 at 296 we find Lord Reid adopting the judgment of Jordan CJ in Re
Truth and Sportsman Ltd, ex p Bread Manufacturers Ltd (1937) 37 SR (NSW) 242 at 249-250 that:

         ‘It is of extreme public interest that no conduct should be permitted which is likely to prevent a litigant in a court of justice from
     having his case tried free from all matter of prejudice. But the administration of justice, important though it undoubtedly is, is not the
     only matter in which the public is vitally interested; and if in the course of the ventilation of a question of public concern matter is
     published which may prejudice a party in the conduct of a law suit, it does not follow that a contempt has been committed. The case may
     be one in which as between competing matters of public interest the possibility of prejudice to a litigant may be required to yield to other
     and superior considerations. The discussion of public affairs and the denunciation of public abuses, actual or supposed, cannot be
     required to be suspended merely because the discussion of the denunciation may, as an incidental but not intended by-product, cause
     some likelihood of prejudice to a person who happens at the time to be a litigant. It is well settled that a person cannot be prevented by
     process of contempt from continuing to discuss publicly a matter which may fairly be regarded as one of public interest, by reason merely
     of the fact that the matter in question has become the subject of litigation, or that a person whose conduct is being publicily criticised has
     become a party to litigation either as plaintiff or as defendant, and whether in relation to the matter which is under discussion or with
     respect to some other matter

     This is the defence of public interest, now confirmed by s 5 of the 1981 Act, and nothing in the authorities suggests that the defence at
common law was wider than that available under the Act. Wallersteiner v Moir, Moir v Wallersteiner [1974] 3 All ER 217, [1974] 1 WLR 991
is in the same category. It was an exteme case of a plaintiff seeking to make use of the ‘gagging writ syndrome’ and the courts reacted
strongly. But it would be a mistake to take sentences from the judgment out of context and to treat them as representing a considered and
comprehensive statement of the law. Thus, with all due respect, the remark by Lord Denning MR ([1974] 3 All ER 217 at 230, [1974] 1 WLR
991 at 1005) that ‘Fair comment does not prejudice a fair trial’ is far too general a <t, 8390 statement and falls to be contrasted with the
following passage from the judgment of Lord Reid in A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54 at 65, [1974] AC 273 at 300:

         ‘I think that anything in the nature of prejudgment of a case or of specific issues in it is objectionable not only because of its possible
     effect on that particular case but also because of its side effects which may be far reaching. Responsible “mass media” will do their best
     to be fair, but there will also be ill-informed, slapdash or prejudiced attempts to influence the public. If people are led to think that it is
     easy to find the truth disrespect for the processes of the law could follow and, if mass media are allowed to judge, unpopular people and
     unpopular causes will fare very badly. Most cases of prejudging of issues fall within the existing authorities on contempt. I do not think
     that the freedom of the press would suffer, and I think that the law would be clearer and easier to apply in practice if it is made a general
     rule that it is not permissible to prejudge issues in pending cases.’

Indeed, counsel for the defendants did not contest the proposition that, given sufficient proximity to the trial and sufficient publication, the rule
in Bonnard v Perryman had to yield to the strict liability rule.
    It is not difficult to multiply dicta in support of the proposition that the courts are rightly concerned to protect freedom of expression. Thus
Lord Denning MR in A-G v BBC [1979] 3 All ER 45 at 51, [1981] AC 303 at 311 said: ‘ ... the courts should not award him such an
injunction except in a clear case where there would manifestly be a contempt of court for the publication to take place’. Lord Salmon said
([1980] 3 All ER 161 at 170, [1981] AC 303 at 344):

          ‘... if the broadcast was accurate and a defence of justification was established it would have been a shocking blot on the law if it
      had previously prevented the BBC, by an interim injunction, from republishing the broadcast which would have been of great service to
      the public.’

And Lord Scarman said ([1980] 3 All ER 161 at 183, [1981] AC 303 at 362):

         ‘But the prior restraint of publication, though occasionally necessary in serious cases, is a drastic interference with freedom of speech
      and should only be ordered where there is a substantial risk of grave injustice. I understand the test of “pressing social need” as being
      exactly that. ’

     Counsel for the Attorney General has submitted as follows. (1) The reasons for not granting an injunction in libel do not apply in
contempt. The public interest in free speech has to be balanced against the public interest in justice. If the strict liability rule would be
breached by the apprehended publication, an injunction can properly be granted because there is no analogue to the alternative remedy in
damages which exists in the case of libel. The publisher who was not restrained and published could be punished for his contempt after the
event, but this does not undo the damage to justice in the way in which damages compensate for the loss of the reputation of a libelled plaintiff.
 (2) hi libel no court can know whether the plea of justification is well founded until the jury has pronounced. By contrast, given enough
information, the court can determine in advance whether publication would constitute a contempt. (3) No newspaper can have any legitimate
interest in being allowed to commit a criminal contempt of court. (4) To repeat as being true the very allegations which are in issue in the libel
proceedings is inherently likely to create a risk of prejudice. There is no real distinction between asserting the truth of facts in issue in civil
proceedings and doing the same in relation to criminal proceedings, eg a charge of murder, yet no one would assert a right to do the latter.
     There is substantially force in the submissions of counsel for the Attorney General. The strict liability rule is quite as important as the
rule in Bonnard v Perryman and each depends on wholly distinct, if potentially conflicting, considerations. However, if and in so far as his
submissions might suggest that the strict liability rule is paramount, I do not <t, 840Q think that this was necessarily true prior to the passing of
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                         books on screen™
A llE R 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

the 1981 Act and, in theory, some such balancing operation as is indicated by the first three submissions of counsel for the defendants could
still be called for. In practice I think that the rule in Bonnard v Perryman will be decisive unless and until the strict liability rule is invoked.
Once it is invoked, it will prevail, because, in the form in which it survives in the 1981 Act, if strictly construed and applied, the balance must
always come down on the side of protecting the right to justice. Let me explain.
      For present purposes we can put on one side innocent publication, because, once a claim for prior restraint is made, innocence will have
disappeared. We can also put on one side any form of publication other than that which is defined in s 2(1) of the 1981 Act, namely a
communication to the public at large, or any section of the public, since the strict liability rule no longer applies outside this limited but
important field. In the light of the pre-1981 authorities, that leaves only a need to balance where (a) there is an element of public interest in
general discussion being permitted and (b) there is an issue whether the proceedings sought to be protected are sufficiently proximate to the
apprehended publication to require protection.
      Section 5 of the 1981 Act abrogates the strict liability rule if publication is made as, or as part of, a discussion in good faith of public
affairs or other matters of general public interest and is merely incidental to the discussion. I know of no reported authority which would have
led the courts to refuse to order prior restraint on the ground of a public interest in allowing general discussion of the topic in circumstances
which would not be protected by s 5. The courts might well have refused prior restraint on other grounds, but that is a different matter.
      This leaves only proximity between the publication sought to be restrained and the proceedings sought to be protected. The Act tackles
this in two ways. First, it abrogates the strict liability rule in the period before the proceedings said to be in need of protection become ‘active’
(s 2(3)). Second, it abrogates the rule, save where a very strict test of need is satisfied. This is contained in s 2(2). There has to be a
substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced. This is a double test. First,
there has to be some risk that the proceedings in question will be affected at all. Second, there has to be a prospect that, if affected, the effect
will be serious. The two limbs of the test can overlap, but they can be quite separate. I accept the submission of counsel for the defendants
that ‘substantial’ as a qualification of ‘risk’ does not have the meaning of ‘weighty’, but rather means ‘not insubstantial’ or ‘not minimal’. The
‘risk’ part of the test will usually be of importance in the context of the width of the publication. To declare in a speech at a public meeting in
Cornwall that a man about to be tried in Durham is guilty of the offence charged and has many previous convictions for the same offence may
well carry no substantial risk of affecting his trial, but, if it occurred, the prejudice would be most serious. By contrast, a nationwide television
broadcast at peak viewing time of some far more innocuous statement would certainly involve a substantial risk of having some effect on a trial
anywhere in the country and the sole effective question would arise under the ‘seriousness’ limb of the test. Proximity in time between the
publication and the proceedings would probably have a greater bearing on the risk limb than on the seriousness limb, but could go to both.
      If the proceedings to be protected are ‘active’ within the meaning of the Act and both limbs of the test in s 2(2) are met, not only will the
strict liability rule apply, but I find it hard to think of any circumstances in which the conduct complained of would not, prior to 1981, have
been held to be a contempt or, if it was only apprehended, in which prior restraint would not have been ordered. Accordingly, for practical
purposes, those who are asked to make orders for prior restraint can, save in extraordinary circumstances, decide the matter solely by reference
to the 1981 Act.
      In deciding this appeal I have therefore put on one side the rule in Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269, [1891—4] All ER Rep 965 and
have concentrated solely on s 2(2) of the 1981 Act. Whatever else may be said about the News of the World, it is a newspaper with a
 nationwide circulation and there is a reasonable chance that it will have been read <t, 841Q by at least one member of the jury which
 eventually hears Mr Botham’s claims against the Mail on Sunday. Whilst it is true that these actions are not yet in the jury list, I wholly reject
 the suggestion of counsel for the defendants that there is any significance in the time at which the case comes into that list or in a period of
 about three months before trial. To accept such a submission would be to substitute a new test for ‘activity’ for the purposes of the 1981 Act.
      However, proximity to the trial is clearly a factor of great importance and this trial will not take place for at least ten months, by which
 time many wickets will have fallen, not to mention much water having flowed under many bridges, all of which would blunt any impact of the
 publication. Furthermore, whilst I have never been a great believer in the efficacy of a conscious effort to put something out of one’s mind, an
 acceptance of the fact that it is likely to remain there, but a determination not to take it into account, is more effective, and, whilst I fully accept
 that judges may have an exaggerated belief in the extent to which juries are prepared to be guided by them in such mental gymnastics, the fact
 is that for one reason or another a trial, by its very nature, seems to cause all concerned to become progressively more inward looking, studying
 the evidence given and submissions made to the exclusion of other sources of enlightenment. This is a well-known phenomenon. As Lawton J
 put it on the basis of vast experience of jury trials, both at the Bar and on the Bench, ‘the drama, if I may use that term, of a trial almost always
 has the effect of excluding from recollection that which went before’ (R v Kray (1969) 53 Cr App R 412 at 415).
       The time may well come when a national newspaper would be in breach of the strict liability rule if it referred to the disputed incidents
 which are the subject matter of the Mail on Sunday actions. But in my judgment that day has not yet arrived, because it is not at present
 possible to say that there is a substantial risk of the Mail on Sunday trials being seriously prejudiced.
       By inadvertence the formal order of the judge purported to record an undertaking in damages by the Attorney General. Such an
 undertaking is never sought or given in a case in which the Attorney General is seeking to uphold the administration of justice and was never
 mentioned in the court below. That purported undertaking will be set aside, released or expunged and, subject thereto, the appeal will be
  allowed.

P A R K E R LJ. I agree but add some observations of my own in view of the fact that we are differing from the judge and that the appeal raises
important questions as to the effect of the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
     Section 1 of that Act defines ‘the strict liability rule’ as ‘the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as a contempt of court as tending
to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so’. It is to be noted that the words used are
‘may be treated as a contempt’. This is a correct statement of the law for not all conduct tending to interfere with the course of justice in
particular proceedings would, prior to the Act, have been regarded as a contempt.
     Section 2 then sets out three limitations on the application of the strict liability rule. In the first place, it is thenceforth only to apply to
publications as defined in sub-s (1) of the section. Secondly, it is only to apply to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course
of justice in the proceedings in question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced. Thirdly, it is only to apply to a publication if the proceedings
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
AUER 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

in question are ‘active’ within the meaning of the section. Proceedings become so active at the various points of time laid down by Sch 1. In
broad terms, criminal proceedings become active at the time of arrest without warrant, issue of a warrant for arrest, the issue of a summons to
appear, the service of an indictment or oral charge, whichever first occurs. Thus in relation to criminal proceedings the strict liability rule
applies from the outset or initial step in the proceedings. Civil proceedings (other than appellate proceedings) are however not regarded as
active until arrangements for hearing are made or, if no such arrangements are previously made, from the time the hearing begins. In England,
Wales and Northern Ireland arrangements for the hearing are to be regarded as made, in the case of % 8420 proceedings in the High Court for
which provision is made by rules of court for setting down for trial, when the case is set down, and in the case of any proceedings when a date
for the hearing is fixed.
      These limitations clearly interact with one another. An article in a newspaper circulating in a part of Devon would for example be far less
likely, if likely at all, to create a substantial risk of prejudice to proceedings which were due to be tried in Newcastle than would the same
article contained in a national newspaper or a local Newcastle newspaper. The converse is equally true. An article in a Devon newspaper
would be more likely to have an effect on a trial in Devon than the same article in a Newcastle paper. The nature of the publication and place
of trial thus vitally affect the question whether the publication creates a substantial risk within s 2(2). Whether the risk, if established, is a risk
that the proceedings will be seriously prejudiced or impeded will clearly be affected by the content of the publication and the remoteness or
proximity of the trial. As to this, it is important to remember that the Act merely provides that the strict liability rules does not apply until the
proceedings concerned become active. Thus a publication will be wholly protected if it happens to be made the day before High Court
proceedings, the course of justice in which it is alleged that it will seriously prejudice or impede, are set down. Thereafter it will not be
completely protected but that is all. The imminence or remoteness of the proceedings will still vitally affect both the existence of a substantial
risk of prejudice and the question whether, if there is such a risk, it is a risk that the course of justice will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
Both the risk and the degree of prejudice will, as it seems to me, increase with the proximity of the trial but it is not possible, and indeed
would be contrary to the Act, to say that no publication earlier than a certain number of months before trial could be subject to the application
of the strict liability rule. Each case must be decided on its own facts and a publication relatively close to trial may escape whereas another
much further from trial will not do so by reason of the impact of its content on the reader, listener or viewer, as the case may be.
      In the present case the trial of Mr Botham’s actions in respect of earlier publications is still so far distant that I am unable to see any
substantial risk of serious prejudice and that is enough to dispose of the appeal.
      It is however necessary briefly to mention certain further matters arising from the general rule that repetition of a libel will not be
restrained by injunction where a defendant seeks to justify. As between the plaintiff and the defendant this is no doubt true and warranted by
the public interest in the preservation of freedom of speech. By s 7 of the Act, however, proceedings for contempt under the strict liability rule
 are only to be brought by or with the consent of the Attorney General, who has a separate and independent interest from the parties to the
 action. When the Attorney General moves for contempt he seeks to establish the commission of a criminal offence. The defendant has
 available to him any defence available at common law and also the defences made available by ss 3(1), 4(1) and 5 of the Act. If the Attorney
 General can establish that the publication concerned does create a substantial risk that the course of justice in the threatened proceedings will
 be seriously prejudiced and the defendant cannot avail himself of the specific defences provided by the Act, he cannot in my view establish any
 common law defence either.
      Where the Attorney General moves to restrain a threatened contempt the position can be no different. If the court is satisfied that the
 threatened publication would be a contempt, ie would, if made, create a substantial risk etc, and the defendant cannot make out a defence
 under the Act, the court will in my view necessarily grant relief because to refuse it would license the commission of a criminal offence. The
 fact, if it be a fact, that the plaintiff could not himself obtain the relief is neither here nor there.
       This may seem to present a somewhat bizarre situation. The Mail on Sunday is free, as against Mr Botham, to repeat its defamatory
 statements. If the News of the World does publish, it will be free, if it justifies, to repeat its defamatory statements. Why then, it may be
 asked, should the Attorney General be able to restrain the News of the World? <t, 843QThe answer is simply this: that, if the News of the
 World could not make out a defence under the 1981 Act, the Attorney General’s interest in the preservation of the administration of justice
 transcends the rights of the parties. The public interest in the freedom of speech must give way to the public interest that the course of justice
 should not be seriously impeded or prejudiced.

S IR G E O R G E W A L L E R I agree that this appeal should be allowed for the reasons given by Sir John Donaldson MR. I only add a few
words of my own. In 1984 the Mail on Sunday published an account given by witnesses of Mr Botham’s behaviour in New Zealand. The
allegations were that on a number of occasions during the tour by the England cricket team Mr Botham took drugs. In 1984 Mr Botham issued
proceedings against the Mail on Sunday and those proceedings have been set down for trial with a jury.
     The defendants unless restrained intend to publish another article based on other information and this article it is accepted would cover in
part some of the same ground as in the 1984 article in the Mail on Sunday.
     On the application of the Attorney General under s 2 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 Leggatt J granted an injunction restraining the
defendants from publishing the article. The defendants now appeal.
     Two questions arise. Firstly, the defendants allege that the allegations in the article are true and submit that no injunction should be
granted except in very special circumstances which do not exist at the present time. Secondly, since it is agreed that the trial will not take
place before March 1987, the defendants submit that publication of the article at the present time would not prejudice the fair trial of the
action.
     I deal first with the second question. In my opinion the risk of prejudicing juries is very often exaggerated. In R v Kray (1969) 53 Cr App
R 412 at 414 Lawton J in a criminal matter after emphasising the responsibility of newspapers to report said:

           ‘... the mere fact that a newspaper has reported a trial and a verdict which was adverse to a person subsequently accused ought not in
       the ordinary way to produce a case of probable bias against jurors empanelled in a later case. I have enough confidence in my
       fellow-countrymen to think that they have got newspapers sized up ... and they are capable in normal circumstances of looking at a
       matter fairly and without prejudice even though they have to disregard what they may have read in a newspaper.’
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen™
AUER 1986 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:41pm)
Attorney General v News Group Newspapers L td

I entirely agree with those observations. Furthermore, in that case Lawton J was dealing with a report published only a few weeks before. In
the present case we are dealing with a period of ten to eleven months before trial. In my opinion, publication at the present time would not
create a substantial risk that the course of justice will be seriously prejudiced.
     Returning to the first question, if the application for an injunction was being made by Mr Botham, the authorities show that the courts will
be very reluctant to grant an injunction: see, for example, Bonnard v Perryman [1891] 2 Ch 269 at 284, [1891—4] All ER Rep 965 at 968,
where the full Court of Appeal indicated that the court should act ‘most cautiously and warily with the granting of interim injunctions’ in such
cases see also Thomson v Times Newspapers Ltd [1969] 3 All ER 648 at 650, [1969] 1 WLR 1236 at 1239 per Salmon LJ and Wallersteiner v
Moir, Moir v Wallersteiner [1974] 3 All ER 217, [1974] 1 WLR 991. Counsel for the Attorney General has argued that the situation is
different when the Attorney General has applied for an injunction. The fact that the article claims to be true is not sufficient. In civil
proceedings if the jury finds it is not true an award of damages will compensate the plaintiff. But the Attorney General is concerned with the
administration of justice and if the publication would create a substantial risk that the course of justice would be seriously prejudiced that
would be a contempt of court, a criminal matter, and accordingly an injunction would preserve the true administration of justice. Every case
must involve a balance. On the one hand, there          844Q is the freedom of the press which should be preserved. The press should be free to
publish what it believes to be the truth. On the other hand, it is equally important that the administration of justice should not be inpugned. In
the present case the defendants are seeking to report something which happened two years ago and some of which was reported by the Mail on
 Sunday two years ago. In my opinion, the resurrecting of facts which are two years old is not necessarily something which the press needs
freedom to publish and were the interval to trial of the main action not so great I would have been prepared to uphold the injunction.

Appeal allowed. Injunction discharged.

Solicitors: Allen & Overy (for the defendants); Treasury Solicitor.

                                                                                                                        Diana Procter Barrister.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
A llE R 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)




                                               Attorney General v English and another
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
WATKINS LJ, BOREHAM AND GLIDEWELL JJ
15, 18, 21 DECEMBER 1981, 19 FEBRUARY 1982


HOUSE OF LORDS
LORD DIPLOCK, LORD ELWYN-JONES, LORD KEITH OF KINKEL, LORD SCARMAN AND LORD BRANDON OF OAKBROOK
21, 22 JUNE, 15 JULY 1982


Contempt o f court - Publications concerning legal proceedings - Pending proceedings - Publication o f matter calculated to prejudice fa ir
trial - Defence - Newspaper article on matter ofpublic interest - Whether words complained ofpart o f discussion o f general public interest -
Whether risk o f prejudice to trial merely incidental to discussion - Contempt o f Court Act 1981, ss 1, 2(2), 5.

In October 1981 a national newspaper published an article under the heading ‘The vision of life that wins my vote’ written by a well-known
journalist in support of a parliamentary candidate who was seeking election as a pro-life candidate. The article was concerned with preserving
the sanctity of human life, but also asserted that handicapped babies were unlikely to be allowed to survive and had either been or were likely
to be allowed to die of starvation and by other means. The article was published in the same week that the trial began of a doctor for murder of
 a handicapped baby by starvation. The Attorney General applied to the Divisional Court for an order for committal against the editor and
 owners of the paper for contempt of court under the Contempt of Court Act 1981, contending that the publication of the article at the same time
 as the trial of the doctor had seriously prejudiced the trial. The Attorney General did not suggest that the article was intended to influence the
 doctor’s trial but relied on the ‘strict liability rule’ contained in s la of the Act whereby conduct could be treated as contempt of court if it
tended to interfere with the course of justice in particular proceedings, regardless of lack of intent to do so, and contended that because the
 article had created a substantial risk that the course of justice in the doctor’s trial would be seriously impeded or prejudiced, by virtue of s
 2(2)b the strict liability rule applied to the article. The editor and owners contended that by virtue of s 5C of the 1981 Act the publication of
 the article did not amount to contempt of court since it had been made ‘as part of a discussion in good faith of public affairs or other matters of
 general public interest’ and ‘the risk of prejudice to [the] particular legal proceedings [was] merely incidental to the discussion’. The
 Divisional Court held that the publication of the article had created a serious risk of prejudice to the trial of the doctor and that there was no
 defence under s 5 for words or expressions <t, 903m which fell outside the ambit of a discussion of general public interest and that accordingly,
 on the facts, the publication of the article amounted to contempt of court. The editor and owners appealed.

a    Section 1 is set out at p 917 c, post
k    Section 2(2) is set out at p 917 d e, post
c    Section 5 is set out at p 918 a b, post


Held - (1) Section 5 of the 1981 Act was not to be treated as an exception to the strict liability rule and therefore was not a matter to be raised
by way of defence. Instead, both s 2(2) and s 5 stated criteria by which a publication was to be held not to amount to contempt of court despite
its tendency to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings. Accordingly, it was for the prosecution to prove, first that the
publication created a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question would be impeded or prejudiced within s 2(2),
and then, if the publication was part of a wider discussion on a matter of general public interest, that the risk of prejudice to the particular
proceedings was not merely incidental to the discussion, within s 5 (seep 9 1 8 /g , p 919 g h andp 921 a to c, post).
      (2) Section 5 of the 1981 Act was intended to prevent bona fide public discussion in the press of controversial matters of general public
interest being stifled merely because there were contemporaneous legal proceedings in which some particular instance of those controversial
matters might have been in issue. The test of whether the risk of prejudice was ‘merely incidental’ to the discussion was not whether an article
could have been written effectively without those passages or whether some other phraseology might have been substituted for them that could
have reduced the risk of prejudicing the trial, but whether the risk created by the words actually chosen by the author was no more than an
incidental consequence of expounding its main theme. Furthermore, ‘discussion’ was not confined to the airing of views and the propounding
of principles and arguments but could include accusations made in good faith which were part of the basis of the discussion (see p 920 a to c j
and p 921 a to c, post).
      (3) The publication of the article suggesting that it was common practice among some doctors to do that which the doctor was charged
with, created the risk of serious prejudice to the trial of the doctor within the provisions of s 2(2) of the 1981 Act. However, the absence of the
 accusation (which was believed to be true by the pro-life candidate and the journalist) in the passages complained of that it was common
practice among some doctors to do what they were accused of doing would have meant that the article had no purpose, whether as support for
 the pro-life views of the candidate’s election policy or as a contribution to the wider controversy as to the justifiability of mercy killing. There
 was no mention in the article of the doctor’s trial and the risk of the jury reading the article and allowing it to prejudice their minds in favour of
 finding the doctor guilty on evidence that did not justify such a finding was ‘merely incidental’ to the views sought to be portrayed in the
 article. Accordingly, the publication of the article came within s 5 and did not amount to contempt of court. The appeal would therefore be
 allowed (see p 919 d to g, p 920 c d f to h and p 921 a to c, post).
All England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

N otes
For conduct amounting to contempt generally, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) para 7, and for cases on matters likely to prejudice the fair trial
or conduct of criminal proceedings, see 16 Digest (Reissue) 233, 25342.

C ases referred to in ju d g m en ts
A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, [1973] 3 WLR 298, HL, 16 Digest (Reissue) 23, 221.
B (a minor) (wardship: medical treatment), Re [1981] 1 WLR 1421, CA.
Palser v Grinling, Property Holding CoLtd vM ischeff] 1948] 1 All ER 1, [1948] AC 291, HL, 31(2) Digest (Reissue) 1017, 8072.
R v Evening Standard Co Ltd, ex p A-G [1954] 1 All ER 1026, [1954] 1 QB 578, [1954] 2 WLR 861, DC, 16 Digest (Reissue) 27, 384.
   <t, 9040

C ases also cited
R v Duffy, expN ash [1960] 2 All ER 891, [1960] 2 QB 188, DC.
Robson v Dodds (1869) 20 LT 941.

A p p lica tio n
The Attorney General applied with leave of the court for an order of committal in respect of a contempt of court allegedly committed by the
editor, David English, and the owners, Associated Newspapers Group Ltd, of the Daily Mail newspaper (the respondents) in respect of an
article published in the Daily Mail on 15 October 1981 under the heading ‘The vision of life that wins my vote’.

Simon D Brown and Andrew Collins for the Attorney General.
Lord Rawlinson QC and Richard Rampton for the respondents.

On 21 December 1981 the court stated that it found the respondents to be in contempt of court, for reasons to be given later.

19 February 1982. The following judgment was delivered.

W A T K IN S L J read the following judgment of the court. This is an application by leave of the court by Her Majesty’s Attorney General for an
order of committal in respect of an alleged contempt of court. The respondents are, respectively, the editor and the owners of the Daily Mail
newspaper.
      The application relates to an article which appeared in the issue of 15 October 1981 under the heading ‘The vision of life that wins my
vote’. The article was written by Mr Malcolm Muggeridge, a well-known commentator, journalist and broadcaster. It will be necessary to
consider it in some detail later. It is sufficient to say at this stage that it propounds in the author’s characteristically trenchant style an
approach to the question whether or not severely disabled babies should be allowed or encouraged to survive.
      It was published on the third day of the trial of Dr Arthur, a very experienced consultant paediatrician, for the murder of Jolm Pearson, a
baby suffering from Down’s syndrome: he was mongoloid. The Attorney General submits that its publication was in contempt of court in that
it created a substantial risk that the court of justice in Dr Arthur’s trial would be seriously prejudiced. This submission is founded on the
recently introduced strict liability rule, which by s 1 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 is defined as ‘the rule of law, whereby conduct may be
treated as a contempt of court as tending to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so’. To
understand why it is said that Mr English and the owners are strictly liable for contempt of court, a recital of the history of relevant events is
indispensable.
      On 28 June 1980 John Pearson was bom in Derby City Hospital. He was almost immediately afterwards diagnosed as suffering from
Down’s syndrome. He died on 1 July 1980. During his short life he had been under the care of Dr Arthur.
      On 5 February 1981 Dr Arthur appeared at the Derby City Magistrates’ Court charged with the child’s murder. It was alleged that he, in
accordance with the child’s parents’ wishes, had caused, or intended to cause, the child’s death by starvation. In March he was committed for
trial. Because of the standing of the defendant, the circumstances of death and the nature of the allegation, the case aroused very great public
interest, but the restrictions on reporting imposed by s 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 were not lifted.
      On 15 January and 6 February material had been published in the Daily Mail which caused the Attorney General to warn the respondents
by letter dated 31 March 1981 that ‘the constraints placed upon the press by the law of contempt should be respected’. That warning was
acknowledged by the respondents in the editor’s letter of 8 April 1981 as follows:

             ‘Thank you for your letter of March 31st. I have, of course, taken careful note of what you say in your letter and I am grateful to you
         for writing to me about this matter. ’
                                                                      <^9050
      Early in August 1981 widespread publicity was given to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Re B (a minor) (wardship: medical
 treatment) [1981] 1 WLR 1421. That case concerned a Down’s syndrome baby whose survival was said to depend on speedy surgical
 intervention to remove an intestinal blockage. The child’s parents had decided not to sanction the operation. The decision was upheld by a
 judge in chambers. It was reversed by the Court of Appeal on 7 August 1981. The problems involved and the conflict of medical, parental and
 judicial opinion attracted widespread publicity and invoked much public interest. The editor was away in America at this time but his deputy
 gave the case extensive coverage on 8 August 1981.
      On 6 October nominations for a parliamentary by-election for the constituency of Croydon North West closed. One of those nominated
 was Mrs Marilyn Carr, who had been bom without arms and who was seeking election as an independent pro-life candidate. As such she was
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
AUER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

campaigning for the sanctity of life and the right of every person, of whatever age and however severely handicapped, to be cherished and
encouraged to live. An election address by her agent refers to thalidomide, but makes no reference to mongoloid children.
     One week later, on 13 October, the trial of Dr Arthur opened at the Crown Court at Leicester before Farquharson J and a jury. Dr Arthur
pleaded not guilty.
     On the following day, 14 October, the first day’s proceedings were prominently reported under large banner headlines on p 3 of the Daily
Mail. In descending order of prominence these headlines were ‘Baby “given a hunger drag to kill him’” ; ‘Doctor: I alone was responsible for
treatment of mongol’; and ‘Consultant accused of murdering child that parents did not want’.
     It is extremely unlikely, we think, that anyone of this national newspaper’s extensive readership failed to see these unusual headlines and
to read the fairly detailed report beneath them, which contained this passage: ‘Before the jurors were sworn in, Mr Justice Farquharson said
that if any were connected with handicapped children, they should not serve.’ In saying this the judge was obviously anxious to ensure that no
one should be a juror whose strongly-held views about handicapped children might prevent that person from considering the grave issues
involved impartially.
     On the same day a press release issued by Mr Malcolm Muggeridge in support of Mrs Carr’s candidature and of the principles for which
she stood was discussed at the daily editorial conference at the Daily Mail. It announced his intention of making an election address on her
behalf. This was considered newsworthy and so the associate editor, who in the absence of the editor and his deputy presided over the
conference, persuaded Mr Muggeridge to present his proposed election address in the form of an article in the Daily Mail. Thus the article was
composed by Mr Muggeridge for publication by the respondents on the following day, 15 October 1981.
     The author asserts by affidavit that his purpose in writing the article was to further the cause of Mrs Carr. In para 8 of his affidavit he
states:

         ‘I have now retired from active journalism. I read the newspapers only superficially and I do not have a television in my house.
     Accordingly although I was aware that some sort of “mercy-killing” trial was in the offing, I knew nothing of its detail and I certainly did
     not appreciate that it was in its second day when I was telephoned by the Daily Mail. I wrote my article without any thought of Dr.
     Arthur’s case in my head and without the least idea that it might be taken to reflect upon that case. As I have said, the article was written
     solely in order to draw attention to Mrs. Carr’s candidature and to the importance of the cause for which she stood.’

     This court has seen a copy of the original article which was in some respects altered before publication by the associate editor, who in his
affidavit states he altered the part sentence ‘Some doctor would surely recommend letting her die of starvation’ to ‘Someone would surely
 He did this because he thought the original text might suggest that Mr Muggeridge was intending to refer to Dr Arthur’s case, when in fact he
was not. % 906fflFurthermore, he thinks it was he who on the grounds of taste and clarity changed the passage ‘On the one hand the image of
the broiler house or factory farm in which concern is solely for the physical well being of the livestock and the financial well being of the
enterprise ... ’ into that which reads ‘Are human beings to be culled like livestock?’
     On Thursday, 15 October, the third day of Dr Arthur’ trial, the article appeared on p 6 of the Daily Mail, which on p 19 contained a report
of the second day of the trial referring therein to it as ‘the mongol murder baby trial’. The article was brought to the attention of Farquharson
J, who expressed his serious disquiet at its content in these terms:

          ‘The difficulty now, of course, is that under the new Act I am only really concerned with contempts in the face of the court in dealing
      with them myself. For my part I nonetheless instruct that the copy of this particular article should be sent to the Attorney General and
      that could be done through the medium of the court. Beyond that all I shall say at the present time is that I think that it is highly
      unfortunate that any editor, whether he had had the previous warnings or not, should publish an article of this kind in the middle of a trial
      which is very sensitive and very emotionally charged in the terms that appear in this article. I think it is quite deplorable.’

      On 3 November Dr Arthur was acquitted, by direction of the trial judge of murder and by the jury of attempted murder.
      We now turn to Mr Muggeridge’s article so as to examine it in some detail. It is unnecessary to read all of it, though of course the
allegedly contemptuous parts must be considered in their proper context in the light of the article as a whole and to the publicity given to the
trial of Dr Arthur. It begins by referring to Mrs Carr’s candidature as an independent pro-life candidate and extols her undoubted courage in
overcoming the handicap of her serious disabilities. Then follow the words of which complaint is made:

           ‘In fact she was bom armless, with little buds where the arms should have come. As the doctor who delivered her put it—and he
       must have had a gift for poetic imagery somewhat rare in his profession—her arms had budded but never bloomed. Today the chances o f
       such a baby surviving would be very small indeed. Someone would surely recommend letting her die o f starvation, or otherwise
       disposing o f her. Thus Marilyn is a living witness to the pro-life cause: in herself an embodiment of life triumphant, challenging the
       right of any one human being to decide that another, whether an unborn or bom child, whether a fatally ill or senile old person, has no
       right to go on living in view of circumstances—economic or physical or mental—not conducive to a worthwhile life. It is the difference
       between the quality of life and the sanctity of life. The former being seen in how far the individual concerned may be assumed to be
       capable of enjoying life or contributing to life, of exercising the responsibilities of a parent, wage-eamer, a husband or wife. The latter
       being seen in terms of the potentialities existing in every single human being, young or old, well or sick, intelligent or stupid, from the
       moment of conception to the moment of death. Are human beings to be culled like livestock? No more sick or misshapen bodies, no
       more disturbed or twisted minds, no more hereditary idiots or mongoloid children. Babies not up to scratch to be destroyed, before or
       after birth, as would also the old beyond repair. With the developing skills o f modem medicine, the human race could be pruned and
       carefully tended until only the perfect blooms—the beauty queens, the Mensa IQs, the athletes - remained. ’ [Mr Muggeridge’s
       emphasis.]
      Having thus identified and commented on what may be called the scientific or qualitative or selective approach, the article continues with
 the strongly contrasted Christian view of the sanctity of life. No complaint is made of this latter part.
      The law of contempt relating to legal proceedings is contained in s 1 (already referred to) <t, 907ffland ss 2 to 5 of the Contempt of Court
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                         books on screen™
AUER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/199 7 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

Act 1981, which came into force as recently as 27 August 1981. By way of preface to our reference to it, it is important to observe that the
Attorney General has not alleged that the respondents intended to influence the course of justice in Dr Arthurs’ trial. His application is
founded on the rules of strict liability as defined in s 1.
     By s 2 that rule is applied to an article such as that now under consideration, which is published when, as here, relevant proceedings are
active. Section 2(2) is of particular importance, for it defines contempt for the purposes of the rule of strict liability. It provides:

        ‘The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in
     question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.’

     The three following sections give protection to publications which might otherwise be in contempt. Of these the defence under s 5 only is
relied on by the respondents. It provides:

          ‘A publication made as or as part of a discussion in good faith of public affairs or other matters of general public interest is not to be
      treated as a contempt of court under the strict liability rule if the risk of impediment or prejudice to particular legal proceedings is merely
      incidental to the discussion.’

       The parties accept that for present purposes the provisions of ss 2(2) and 5 pose two questions, either one or both of which we must
answer.
       The first question is, did the article create a substantial risk that the course of justice in Dr Arthurs’ trial would be seriously prejudiced? If
the Attorney General, on whom lies the burden of satisfying this court so that it is sure it did create such a risk, fails to do so, his application
must be dismissed, in which event the second question will not have to be considered.
       Are we then sure that this risk was created? From the observations previously quoted by Farquharson J, he appears to have been in no
doubt that it had been. It should be made clear however that if that really was his conclusion, whilst it may be of some persuasive force, it is in
no sense binding on us, and we are entitled to disregard it altogether if we feel so inclined. We are called on to answer the question having
regard to the totality of the material before us, of which the observations of the trial judge form only a part. This counsel for the respondents
invites us to ignore altogether.
       Now we take it to be self-evident that the material risk could not possibly have been created unless the article expressly, or by implication,
referred or related to Dr Arthur’s trial. There was no express reference to it; no mention of Dr Arthur nor of John Pearson. On the other hand
the allegations made, and the issues raised in the trial, were unusual. Dr Arthur was accused of murder. The particulars were that as the
consultant paediatrician in charge of the baby John Pearson, he had embarked on or decreed a course of treatment which he intended should
cause, and did cause, the child’s death by starvation. By his plea of not guilty Dr Arthur had put all those allegations in issue.
       Not only were the circumstances unusual: they had received very great publicity. True there had been comparable publicity of Re B (a
minor) [1981] 1 WLR 1421, but there the circumstances were different. There there had been a withholding of surgical intervention. In Dr
Arthur’s case was an allegation of withholding the basic essential to life: food. In Re B (a minor) the powers of the civil jurisdiction of the
court had been successfully invoked, the issue of life or death had been resolved, the child lived. In the case of John Pearson it was alleged
that someone had succeeded in starving him to death. Moreover, some two months had passed since the public interest in baby B was at its
height. John Pearson was now in all the headlines.
       In these circumstances it seems to us inevitable that all sensible people, including the jurors at the Crown Court at Leicester, would
 conclude that such assertions as ‘Someone would surely recommend letting her die of starvation’, ‘Babies not up to scratch to be <t, 908111
 destroyed', and the question ‘Are human beings to be culled like livestock?’ followed by ‘No more ... mongoloid children' referred to the
 matters currently being investigated at the Crown Court at Leicester. Who would come to mind when such passages were read? With all the
 publicity attending his trial, surely Dr Arthur. But did all this create a substantial risk that his trial would be seriously prejudiced?
       The first point taken on behalf of the respondents is that in this context the word ‘substantial’ means something like large or great. For
 this proposition reliance is placed on the decision of Falser v Grinling, Property Holding Co Ltd v Mischeff[ 1948] 1 All ER 1, [1948] AC 291,
 a case decided under the then current Rent Restriction Act, and concerned with the assessment of a substantial proportion of rent. We gain no
 assistance for an interpretation or definition of the meaning of the word ‘substantial’ in such a very different statutory context. We are faced
 with a word of common usage, which Parliament, we think, intended to bear its common understanding when used, as here, as a qualifying
 adjective. Apart, therefore, from saying that it means a risk which is real, we think that any further definition is unnecessary and undesirable
 and would probably introduce confusion where we think there is none.
        Secondly, it is argued that the article restricts itself to moral argument, that it deals with the law of God and not with the law of the land.
 Thus it is said that there was no substantial risk that a juror, bound by his oath to judge according to the evidence and constrained to apply the
 law of the land as directed by the judge, would be influenced by anything in the article.
        We accept, of course, that the main theme of the argument deployed in the article is founded on the Christian morality of preserving the
  sanctity as well as the quality of life. But moral argument published during, touching on and taken to refer to the issues in an active criminal
  trial may be as seriously prejudicial to the course of justice in that trial as any other published matter which refers to it. And in Dr Arthurs'
  trial one of the most difficult tasks of the judge was successfully to strive to ensure that the jury allowed itself to be governed not by any moral
  law but strictly by the law of the land.
        However, as has already been demonstrated by quotations from the article, it is not confined to argument. It contains undisguised
  assertions or insinuations that babies who are bom with certain kinds of handicaps are caused or allowed by those in charge of them to die
  within days of birth of starvation among other means.
        Such statements as that may wrongly prejudice jurors, no matter how strongly a judge, whose experience keeps him on the alert for this
  hazard, specifically warns them against paying any attention to them. At the same time he would doubtless warn them against allowing their
  own privately formed prejudices, if any, to influence them in any way.
        One of the reasons why this branch of the law exists is in recognition of the judge’s difficulty always successfully to sweep away
  prejudice, regardless where it has come from, and to assist him to do so by preventing the contents of publications bearing prejudicial matter
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
A llE R 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

from going into the jury room. Everyone surely agrees that the well of justice must remain clear. Thus by one means or another the poison of
prejudice must be kept away from it. If it is not, then the possibility of a miscarriage of justice inevitably accompanies prejudice. No one will
know what harm is then done except the jury whose verdict, whatever it be, will not inform others as to whether or not it is tainted by
prejudice. Moreover, the verdict be it guilty or not guilty, is irrelevant to the considerations which enable us to answer this question. These
considerations have satisfied us beyond any reasonable doubt that the words complained of created a substantial risk of serious prejudice in the
trial of Dr Arthur. This must mean that the respondents were in contempt of court unless the second question, to which we now turn, is
answered in their favour.
      This question is, have the respondents, on whom, in our view and as counsel for the respondents concedes, the burden lies of establishing
a defence under s 5, proved on the balance of probability the essential requirements of that defence, which are (1) that the publication of the
article was made as part of a discussion of a matter of general public <t, 909Q interest, (2) that the publication was made in good faith, and (3)
that the substantial risk of prejudice (that is undoubtedly the risk referred to in s 5), which thereby arose to the trial of Dr Arthur was merely
incidental to the discussion of the matter of general public interest. A failure by the respondents to establish any one of these essential
requirements will disable them from the benefit of the defence under s 5.
      It is not disputed, and it cannot be gainsaid, that the article could justifiably be claimed to form part of a discussion of a matter of public
interest. Accordingly the first requirement is fulfilled. Counsel on behalf of the Attorney General has expressly told us that he does not
dispute that Mr Muggeridge and the respondents acted in good faith. Accordingly we regarded ourselves as relieved of the necessity to inquire
into facts relevant to an issue which undoubtedly in some circumstances could be of vital importance. So the respondents’ sole task on the
second question is to persuade us that the substantial risk of prejudice was merely incidental to the discussion.
      It is, we think, first of all necessary to identify the matter of public interest which, according to the respondents, was the subject of the
discussion of which the contents of the article formed a part. It is expressly and succinctly stated in paras 5 and 6 of the affidavit of the editor,
Mr English, as follows:

          ‘5. Another matter which was of considerable public interest during the late summer and early autumn of 1981 was the forthcoming
      by-election at Croydon North West, which was due to be held on the 22nd October 1981. The candidates were formally nominated on the
      6th October. One of the candidates was a Mrs. Marilyn Carr, who was bom without arms and who was standing as an independent
      pro-life candidate.
          6. The expressly “pro-life” originated in the United States of America and its currency is fast increasing in this country, it is used to
      described those who believe that all human life is sacred and who are in consequence opposed to abortion and to all kinds of mercy
      killing, whether of the young or the old. Mrs. Carr was the first “pro-life” candidate to stand at a Parliamentary election, which was
      itself a mater of some interest. ’

Put in even shorter form, the discussion was about Mrs Carr’s candidature and the pro-life cause for which she stood.
     It was of course a coincidence that the trial of Dr Arthur and the electioneering at Croydon North West were going on at the same time.
No one could reasonably have expected either one to be postponed so as to avoid this clash of events, despite the extremely unusual features
involved in both of them. Dr Arthur’s trial, as has been said, received widespread publicity throughout this country and abroad. How much
publicity Mrs Carr and what she stood for received outside Croydon we do not know. It would have probably been markedly less if Mr
Muggeridge had not announced his intention of going to her support, and consequently been invited to write the article in the Daily Mail by the
associate editor. When the latter issued the invitation at the time when he was presiding at the daily editorial conference, he had observed the
following entry on the agenda:

          ‘Marilyn Carr a woman bom without arms, who is standing in Croydon by-election as a independent pro-life candidate opposed to
      killing of handicapped new bom babies. Malcolm Muggeridge is going to Croydon to led support.'

Immediately above this, and solely by chance, another item appeared, which reads: ‘The nurses from Derby hospital will today give evidence
in trial of Dr. Leonard Arthur accused of murdering a 3 day old mongol baby. They will reveal they were instructed by doctor to give death
inducing drug’.
      This item assisted the associate editor, who was well aware that Dr Arthur’s trial had already commenced, to give some thought, when he
reviewed the article, to the possibility of the contents of it being taken to refer to that trial. In the course of his consideration of this he
decided, among other things, against deleting the reference to mongoloid children. % 910ffl
      It lay within his power to delete this reference and to eliminate all other terms such as ‘Someone would surely recommend letting her die
of starvation’, of which complaint is made. Had these parts of the article been omitted, the point of it would still have been clear and it would,
in our opinion, have remained a powerfully expressed form of support for Mrs Carr’s cause.
      The respondents may nevertheless have been accused of contempt, but a defence founded on the provisions of s 5 would have been
irresistible, since in our view no one could successfully argue that any remaining material claimed to be contemptuous would give rise to a risk
of prejudice which was other than merely incidental to the discussion.
      Thus a subsidiary question arises, could the matter complained of reasonably be said to be a necessary part of the general theme of the
discussion?
      Counsel for the Attorney General submits that the use of this matter, which gave rise to the substantial risk, added nothing of value to the
 discussion, it was easily avoidable, and consequently wholly unnecessary. Counsel for the respondents contends that the article would have
 been in precisely the form it was, or almost so, if the trial of Dr Arthur had never taken place. The matter complained of was a necessary part
 of it, illustrating as it did attitudes and conduct towards handicapped newly bom babies to which the pro-life movement was resolutely
 opposed. That is a view which we feel unable, as our earlier observations indicate, to share. The detailed assertions of how handicapped
 babies either have been or are likely to be destroyed were, we think, wholly expendable by the respondents without damaging the vigour and
 clarity of the vision of life sought to be portrayed.
       However, that conclusion, it could be said, does not answer the third main question conclusively, for although the matter complained of
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/199 7 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

was an unnecessary part of the article, it may be that it could still reasonably be regarded as merely incidental to the discussion.
     What do these all important words, namely ‘merely incidental to the discussion’, in relation to the risk of prejudice imply? What the
provisions of s 5 exist for is important in this respect. They aim to strike a sensible balance between two important and often competing
principles: on the one hand the maintenance of unimpeded and unprejudiced justice to every litigant and defendant, and on the other hand the
preservation of the freedom of discussion of matters of general public interest. Thus s 5 provides in effect that bona fide discussion of matters
of public interest need not be silenced if, as a mere incident of such discussion, a substantial risk of serious prejudice to a particular litigant or
defendant may arise.
     Counsel for the respondents submits, and we agree, that a risk of prejudice is merely incidental to a discussion when it is in subordinate
conjunction to the real subject of an article. We should not be astute, he says, to take such an article outside the protection of s 5 merely
because it contains expressions and statements which, serving no other purpose than to inflame an article, could therefore have been dispensed
with. The journalist’s traditional freedom of expression must not be artificially restricted, especially when, as here, the publication of the
article was made in good faith and solely to support a Parliamentary candidate without intending to prejudice the fair trial of Dr Arthur.
Furthermore, editors are placed in a genuine intellectual difficulty in trying to construe, amongst other provisions in the Act, what material may
or may not be ‘merely incidental’.
      These submissions arouse to some extent our sympathy for editors and editorial staff who have to take decisions quickly about the contents
of articles immediately prior to publication and to have regard to new legislation which may affect it. But we doubt that the task of avoiding
being in contempt of active criminal proceedings is so difficult a task as is suggested.
     In this respect we have not found, as counsel for the Attorney General submitted we might, reference to the Phillimore report (Report of
the Committee on Contempt of Court (1974) (Cmnd 5794)) helpful, and we feel unable to agree with him that it is relevant to discover what
activated the publication. This is particularly so where the good faith of the editor and publishers is not in question. % 911ffl
     It seems to us that the protection of s 5 is not available once the matter complained of has been identified as extraneous to the main
intendment of the article which is a contribution to a discussion of a matter of general public interest and the proper inference to be drawn from
the extraneous matter is that it refers to vital issues in active criminal proceedings affecting a man on trial such as Dr Arthur. Should that
inference be drawn here?
     We would accept that the matter may be put in this slightly different way. To qualify for the protection of s 5 the words or expressions,
which by the application of s 2(2) are held to create the risk of serious prejudice, must form part of a discussion of a matter of general public
interest. From this it follows that protection is not provided for words or expressions which fall outside the ambit of such a discussion either
because they are not, on a fair reading, part of the discussion or because they deal with matters which are not of general public interest.
      In this sort of context recognition and identification are easier than definition. If definition is to be attempted, discussion suggests the
airing of views and the propounding and debating of principles and arguments: not the making of accusations. Matters of general public
interest are to be distinguished from matters of particular personal interest. Thus to say in an article on the rights of married women, ‘no man
should ever beat his wife’, would be acceptable as part of a discussion of general public interest. But is the position the same if there is added
 ‘as Mr X frequently did’? We think not. Now discussion has given way to accusation, and to the matter of general public interest there has
been added a matter which is of particular personal interest. We think that, whichever approach is adopted, the extraneous matter of the
 excess is not difficult to identify.
      To return to the matters complained of in the present case, suppose that in the first paragraph in italics there had been interposed after the
 word ‘Someone’ the words Tike Dr Arthur’, could it then be said that there was no more in the article than a discussion of a matter of general
 public interest and no reference to the trial? Surely not. Of course such an addition would be strong evidence of a deliberate intent to
 prejudice Dr Arthur’s trial, whereas such an intention is not alleged here. But the absence of intention cannot avail the respondents, for this
 whole application is founded on the strict liability rule. Then does it make any difference that there is no express reference in the article to Dr
 Arthur or his trial or to John Pearson? In our view it does not, since the reference to that particular trial appears, we have no doubt, by clear
 implication from the matter complained of as published.
       For these reasons we have reached the clear conclusion that the risk of serious prejudice we have, without the assistance of the trial
judge’s comments, found to have been created was not incidental to a discussion of general public interest; it was created by assertions of fact,
 which clearly implied (albeit unwittingly) that that which was alleged against Dr Arthur had in fact been done, and done by whom, if not Dr
 Arthur? It follows therefore that the respondents are not entitled to claim the protection afforded by s 5.
       [The court heard submissions in relation to punishment]

W A T K IN S L J. Mr David English and the Associated Newspaper Group Ltd having been found guilty of contempt, now face judgment. In
 forming that judgment we have been considerably assisted by the extremely valuable address made to us by counsel for the respondents this
 morning.
      It should be emphasised that the powers of the court to imprison and to fine in dealing with contempt under the 1981 Act are extensive. It
 is in the public interest and otherwise of supreme importance that juries unaffected by prejudice should do justice to defendants who come to
 trial in criminal courts. It is of almost equal importance that litigants in civil matters have their disputes resolved by courts unaffected by
 prejudice. Newspapers and televisions and broadcasting authorities have a unique role to play in this respect. They have also, as must be
 acknowledged and never be forgotten, an essential role to play in maintaining dissemination of news and other information to the public
 without being unlawfully inhibited from doing so. % 912Q
       So having highlighted the two interests which have to be safeguarded, namely on the one hand a fair trial and on the other a free press, we
 turn to see what damage may have been done in the instant case by the press to the trial of Dr Arthur, that is to say the potential harm which
 could have come to the trial, but which, by reason of the acquittal, obviously did not.
       All litigation, in this context I refer to both criminal and civil matters, which involves emotionally charged issues, specially of a moral
 kind, inevitably attracts publicity at the instant of those issues being raised, from no matter what quarter. In that event the care of the press to
 avoid damaging the vital interests of the parties involved must be an unceasing one.
       It is well known that the Daily Mail had a warning at the beginning of 1981 about their role in respect of publication of matters ventilated
 in privacy in committal proceedings. They acknowledged that they were transgressing the rules laid down by Parliament at that time. But we
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                   books on screen™
AUER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

wish to say at once that we have not allowed that failure by the newspaper to conform to an Act of Parliament to influence us in any way in the
matter of punishment, which must exclusively, in our judgment, now relate to what was done in October last year in very different
circumstances.
     We turn first of all to the activities of Mr English. He is a very experienced editor. He knows well what great responsibilities he carries,
when day by day he is surveying and controlling the contents of what should and what should not go into the widely circulated newspaper,
which is, generally speaking, under his direction. It so happens that on the relevant occasions he was absent from the office, and so for most of
what went on leading up to the eventual publication of the article by Mr Muggeridge, he could not be said to be in any way personally
responsible. Moreover, as he states in his affidavit and we accept, when he did see the article immediately before publication, it having
occurred to him that it might be taken by some to refer to the trial by Dr Arthur, he took the precaution of advising the associate editor to
ensure that it received the approval of the legal adviser who at night examines material of this kind for the possibility of contemptuous
material.
     We have an affidavit from the gentleman who looked at the article at the invitation of the associate editor for this purpose. He gave then
as his opinion, and he has repeated in an affidavit to this court, that he did not regard the article as being capable of being read by anyone as
referable to the trial of Dr Arthur. We think that that was a mistaken view and that if he read the Act more carefully, he would not have
formed it.
      In those circumstances we think it right to exculpate the editor altogether. We do not therefore pass any penalty of any kind on him.
      I now turn to the newspaper itself. There is no doubt, as counsel for the respondents has pointed out, that this was in many ways a
complex matter, and the decision as to whether or not material falls to be considered as contemptuous involves an intellectual exercise which
sometimes is not easily resolved. We are asked to say that on this occasion what occurred was an excusable error of judgment. Parliament
sought to tilt the balance by enacting s 5 in favour of the press. No bad faith is alleged against the newspaper, nor anyone concerned with it.
That must of course weigh very heavily in favour of a newspaper on an occasion such as this. If bad faith is averred and is established, there
can be no do doubt whatsoever that the penalty imposed by a court can in certain circumstances be condign.
      Nevertheless, whilst we acknowledge the difficulties and accept the care which was taken by those who looked at this article before it was
printed and who to some extent altered it, we feel that discretion demanded a sharper cutting edge to the editorial knife. If a knife as sharp as
that had been used, we have no doubt that this act of contempt would not have been committed.
      However in the light of the problems which the press at that time were exposed to by this new legislation, which we have taken some time
to consider, as is evident from the length of the adjournment from the hearing of this case and giving of this judgment, we believe that justice
 demands that we should do no more than pass on the Daily Mail a nominal fine. In this context nominal means, we think, a fine of £500. This
 is a great <t. 91303 newspaper which has a very large circulation. No more need to be said in furtherance of our judgment nor about the
punishment, than this, the absence of bad faith has weighed very heavily in favour of both the editor and the owners of the Daily Mail.

Application granted. Leave to appeal to the House o f Lords.

Solicitors: Director o f Public Prosecutions; Swepstone, Walsh & Son (for the respondents).

                                                                                                                  Jacqueline Charles Barrister.

A p p eal
The respondents appealed to the House of Lords with leave of the House granted on 19 February 1982.

Lord Rawlinson QC and Richard Rampton for the respondents.
Simon D Brown and Andrew Collins for the Attorney General.

                                                                                                    Their Lordships took time fo r consideration

L O R D D IP L O C K My Lords, this is an appeal brought by the editor and publishers of the Daily Mail newspaper against a decision of the
Divisional Court on 16 December 1981, holding them to be guilty of contempt of court by publishing an article entitled ‘The vision of life that
wins my vote’ on 15 October 1980, which was the morning of the third day of the trial in the Crown Court at Leicester of a well-known
paediatrician, Dr Arthur, on a charge of murdering a three-day-old mongoloid baby boy by giving instructions that it should be treated with a
drug which had caused it to die from starvation. The question of the punishment to be imposed for these contempts was adjourned until 19
February 1982, when the court decided that no penalty should be imposed on the editor, but fined the publishers the sum of £500 and ordered
them to pay the Attorney General’s costs.
     The case provided the first opportunity for judicial consideration of the changes in the law of contempt of court that have been affected by
the Contempt of Court Act 1981; and since it raises, in particular questions as to the extent to which discussion in the media of a matter of
general public interest is to be curbed because of the effect that it may have on contemporaneous legal proceedings, it is necessary to start by
stating in summary form the circumstances in which the article was published and the events that had preceded its publication. They can be
found in greater detail in the judgment of the Divisional Court. The matter of public interest with which the article dealt was whether it can
ever be morally justifiable to allow newly-born babies, however direly handicapped physically and mentally they may be, to die as a result of
withholding from them medical treatment by which they could have been kept alive longer.
      Your Lordships can, I think, take judicial notice of the fact that with the recent advances made in medical science which now enables
doctors to keep alive severely handicapped children and the incurable and painfully sick and the senile old who would otherwise have died a
natural death, there has in the past few years been a lively controversy whether it is morally justified deliberately to refrain from using every
resource available to medical science to keep alive persons in these categories whose disabilities will preclude them from living what would be
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                    books on screen™
AUER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

regarded by an ordinary human being as a worthwhile sentient life at all. Indeed, the controversy is hardly as recent as all that. Arthur Hugh
Clough’s couplet written in the mid-nineteenth century:

         ‘Thou shall not kill; but needst not strive
         Officiously to keep alive

shows that the issue of long standing. <{, 914Q
     In December 1977 the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children, which was formed in 1967 as a pressure group opposed to the
liberalisation of the abortion laws and now has over 30,000 members, decided to take up the cause of severely handicapped babies whose lives
they believed it had become a developing practice among doctors to terminate within a few days of birth by the use of drugs or the deliberate
deprivation of nourishment.
     A special effort to publicise this new aspect of the society’s objects was made in 1981 which had been designated the International Year of
the Disabled.
     In February 1981 Dr Arthur had been charged at Derby City Magistrates’ Court with murdering a mongoloid baby, who had been bom
three days before. It was alleged against him that he had administered to the new-born child a drug which prevented it from taking
nourishment, as a result of which it had died of starvation three days after birth. These allegations, however, were not made public at the time
of the committal proceedings, as reporting restrictions were not removed. Those proceedings ended in March 1981 with his committal for trial
at the Crown Court at Leicester.
     On 6 June 1981 the member of Parliament for North-West Croydon died and it became necessary to hold a by-election, for which the
polling day, by a coincidence, was eventually fixed for 22 October 1981, a date which turned out to be in the middle of Dr Arthur’s trial. On
28 June an announcement was made to the press by the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children that Mrs Marilyn Carr, a woman who
had been bom without arms, intended to run as an independent ‘pro-life’ candidate in the by-election, taking as a main plank in her election
campaign the stopping of the practice that she asserted was developing in some British hospitals of killing new-born handicapped babies.
      During the following month, Mrs Carr continued to seek by various means to obtain publicity for this aspect of her election campaign, with
what degree of success does not appear in the material before your Lordships. But public interest in the controversy about the morality of
 allowing babies bom with severe incurable mental and physical handicaps to die as a result of depriving them of medical treatment whereby
their lives could have been prolonged was fired, during August 1981, by the wide publicity given to a decision of the Court of Appeal allowing
 an appeal in a case in which the parents of a mongoloid child had refused their consent to an operation which would prolong its life and the
 surgeon, respecting the parents’ wishes, had refused to undertake the operation and had expressed his belief that the great majority of surgeons
would have reached the same decision if faced with a similar situation. The Court of Appeal, reversing the decision of the judge, made an
 order that the operation should be performed.
      The controversy, though it may have temporarily died down, was not allowed to lapse and on 3 October there appeared in a Sunday
 newspaper with a wide circulation, an article by a well-known disc jockey, Tony Blackburn, defending the opposite point of view to that of Mrs
 Carr, viz that the termination of life of unborn babies who are hopelessly handicapped is morally justified.
      On 1 October notice was given that the poll in the by-election would be held on 22 October and on 6 October Mrs Marilyn Carr became a
 candidate, and published her election address. The well-known journalist and broadcaster, Mr Malcolm Muggeridge, had agreed to speak for
 her at a public meeting to be held on Tuesday, 20 October, two days before the poll.
      On 13 October the trial of Dr Arthur started at the Crown Court at Leicester. It attracted great public interest and was prominently
 reported in the Daily Mail and in the national press generally on the following day. On that day, the editorial staff of the Daily Mail learnt
 through a press release issued by Mr Malcolm Muggeridge that he was going to speak at an election meeting in support of Mrs Carr’s pro-life
 candidature in the Croydon by-election. It was decided to invite him to put what he intended to say into the form of an article for publication in
 the Daily Mail. This he did. It was published on the following day, 15 October. This is the publication that the Divisional Court held was a
 contempt of court. It was drawn to the attention of the trial judge who instructed that <{, 915ffl a copy of the article should be sent to the
 Attorney General whose consent is now required for proceedings for a contempt of court. The judge commented:

         ‘I think that it is highly unfortunate that any [paper] ... should publish an article of this kind in the middle of a trial which is very
      sensitive and very emotionally charged in the terms that appear in this article. I think it is quite deplorable.’

      Dr Arthur’s trial continued until 3 November. At the close of the prosecution’s case the judge had directed a verdict of 'Not Guilty’ on the
charge of murder, but left to the jury a charge of attempted murder, of which Dr Arthur was acquitted on 3 November 1981.
      The article complained of was directed exclusively to Mr Muggeridge’s support of Mrs Carr’s candidature in the by-election because of
                          ife cause and in           hpr opposition to deliberate failure to keep alive newlv-bom babies suffering from what are
presently regarded as incurable physical or mental disabilities so severe as to deprive them of all possibility of their enjoying what a normal
person would regard as a life that was worth living. For any human being to arrogate to himself the right to decide whether a human being was
fit to be bom or to go on living was regarded by Mr Muggeridge as contrary to Christian morality which regarded all human life as sacred.
There was no mention in the article of Dr Arthur’s trial.
      The first part of the article described Mrs Carr herself and how she had succeeded in overcoming the terrible physical handicap with
which she had been bom and in carving out a useful career for herself. He wrote, in a passage principally relied on by the Attorney General as
amounting to contempt of court:

           ‘To-day, the chances of such a baby surviving would be very small indeed. Someone would surely recommend letting her die of
       starvation or otherwise disposing of her.’

 The article then continued with a skilful piece of polemical journalism which concluded with the following passages derisive of those whose
 views he was condemning:
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another


         ‘Are human beings to be culled like livestock? No more sick or misshapen bodies, no more disturbed or twisted minds, no more
      hereditary idiots or mongoloid children. Babies not up to scratch to be destroyed, before or after birth, as would also the old beyond
      repair. With the developing skills o f modem medicine, the human race could be pruned and carefully tended until only the perfect
      blooms—the beauty queens, the Mensa IQs, the athletes—remained. ’ [Mr Muggeridge’s emphasis.]

The article then went on to contrast this with what the writer claimed to be the Christian view of the equal sanctity of all human life, whatever
may be the individual human being’s physical or mental qualities or deficiencies. As an example of a devotion to this view of Christian
morality, he cited Mother Teresa of Calcutta, to whose work and outlook the last third of the article was devoted.
     My lords, that part of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 which is relevant to this appeal is to be found in the first seven sections. These
appear under the crossheading ‘Strict liability’. They deal with the publication to the public or a section of the public of matter which tends to
interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings, and they seek to hold the balance between the competing public interest of
what American lawyers pithily described as ‘fair trial and free press’. Apart from the provisions of ss 11 and 12 of the Administration of
Justice Act 1960, of which the former is now repealed and replaced by s 3 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981, the law as to contempt of court
before the passing of the 1981 Act was entirely ‘judge-made’ law, and the remedies for it lay within a virtually unfettered discretion of the
individual judge or Divisional Court which remained unappealable until by the Administration of Justice Act 1960 a right of appeal to the
Court of Appeal, and ultimately to this House, was granted in matters of contempt of court. The distinction was blurred between publications
that did not     916Q amount to a contempt of court and those which, although ‘technically’ they did, were regarded by the court before which
the matter came as being so venial as not to merit any punishment or even an order to pay the costs; and the criteria for determining where in a
particular case the balance lay between fair trial and free press can hardly be said to have been rendered clear-but by obiter dicta to be found in
the five separate speeches in this House in ^ -G v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273. These were two-fold mischiefs
which, as it seems to me, the first seven sections of the 1981 Act were intended to remedy.
     In the instant appeal your Lordships will be primarily concerned with the construction of s 2(2) and s 5 of the 1981 Act; but for this
purpose it is helpful to read them in the context of the remaining sections appearing under the cross-heading ‘Strict liability’, and since the text
of the Act, being recent, may not yet be readily available it is convenient to reproduce all seven sections here:



                                                                                      Strict liability
     1. In this Act “the strict liability rule” means the rule of law whereby conduct may be treated as a contempt of court as tending to interfere
with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings regardless of intent to do so.
    2 .—(1) The strict liability rule applies only in relation to publications, and for this purpose “publication” includes any speech, writing,
broadcast or other communication in whatever form, which is addressed to the public at large or any section of the public.
     (2) The strict liability rule applies only to a publication which creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in
question will be seriously impeded or prejudiced.
     (3) The strict liability rule applies to a publication only if the proceedings in question are active within the meaning of this section at the
time of the publication.
     (4) Schedule 1 applies for determining the times at which proceedings are to be treated as active within the meaning of this section.
           3 .__( 1) A person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule as the publisher of any matter to which that rule
      applies if at the time of publication (having taken all reasonable care) he does not know and has no reason to suspect that relevant
      proceedings are active.
           (2) A person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule as the distributor of a publication containing any such
      matter if at the time of distribution (having taken all reasonable care) he does not know that it contains such matter and has no reason to
       suspect that it is likely to do so.
           (3) The burden of proof of any fact tending to establish a defence afforded by this section to any person lies upon that person.
           (4) Section 11 of the Administration of Justice Act 1960 is repealed.
           4 . (1) Subject to this section a person is not guilty of contempt of court under the strict liability rule in respect of a fair and accurate
       report of legal proceedings held in public, published contemporaneously and in good faith.
           (2) In any such proceedings the court may, where it appears to be necessary for avoiding a substantial risk of prejudice to the
       administration of justice in those proceedings, or in any other proceedings pending or imminent, order that the publication of any report
       of the proceedings, or any part of the proceedings, be postponed for such period as the court thinks necessary for that purpose.
                   t->  .*             f    t       i'     /1 \                                               +V»~ T m t r rtf T iU.%1 A tviitM               A /-»+ 1 0 0 0 ( n n   o   />+
           ( . 3 ) r or U1C pm poses O l S U U S C tU U ll      u u a a w w c iv n c u i u V I o v v u u n Ui                          , u u v u - i u v i u * iv v          v^**. .   v

       proceedings shall be treated as published contemporaneously—(a) in the case of a report of which publication is postponed pursuant to
       an order under subsection (2) of this section, if published as soon as practicable after that order expires; (b) in the case of a report of
       committal proceedings of which publication is permitted by virtue only of subsection (3) of <k 917Q section 8 of the Magistrates’ Court
       Act 1980, if published as soon as practicable after publication is so permitted.
            (4) Subsection (9) of the said section 8 is repealed.
            5. A publication made as or as part of a discussion in good faith of public affairs or other matters of general public interest is not to be
       treated as a contempt of court under the strict liability rule if the risk of impediment or prejudice to particular legal proceedings is merely
       incidental to the discussion.
            6. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act—(a) prejudices any defence available at common law to a charge of contempt of
       court under the strict liability rule; (b) implies that any publication is punishable as contempt of court under that rule which would not be
        so punishable apart from those provisions; (c) restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede or
        prejudice the administration of justice.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
A llE R 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

        7. Proceedings for a contempt of court under the strict liability rule (other than Scottish proceedings) shall not be instituted except by
     or with the consent of the Attorney General or on the motion of a court having jurisdiction to deal with it. ’

       The long title of the 1981 Act is ‘An Act to amend the law relating to contempt of court and related matters’, and it is apparent from s 6(a)
and (b) that such changes as ss 1 to 5 make in the existing law are intended to effect some reduction in its severity in its application to those
responsible for publications which may have a tendency to interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings. So far as the
reported cases go, the ‘strict liability rule’, as defined in s 1, had only been applied to conduct which involved some publication of offending
material; and it can reasonably be inferred from the provision in s 2(1) which confines the ambit of the fasciculus of sections to publications
addressed to the public at large or a section of the public, that the principal intended beneficiaries of any reduction in severity were the media,
viz the press, television and radio. It is true that public speakers also are included; but unless their speeches are reported by the media these
are likely to be exonerated by s 2(2).
       There is, of course, no question that the article in the Daily Mail of which complaint is made by the Attorney General was a ‘publication’
within the meaning of s 2(1). That being so, it appears to have been accepted in the Divisional Court by both parties that the onus of proving
that the article satisfied the conditions stated on s 2(2) lay on the Attorney General and that, if he satisfied that onus, the onus lay on the
defendants to prove that it satisfied the conditions stated in s 5. For my part, I am unable to accept that this represents the effect of the
relationship of s 5 to s 2(2). Section 5 does not take the form of a proviso or an exception to s 2(2). It stands on an equal footing with it. It
does not set out exculpatory matter. Like s 2(2) it states what publications shall not amount to contempt of court despite their tendency to
interfere with the course of justice in particular legal proceedings.
       For the publication to constitute a contempt of court under the strict liability rule, it must be shown that the publication satisfies the
criterion for which s 2(2) provides, viz that it ‘creates a substantial risk that the course of justice in the proceedings in question will be
 seriously impeded or prejudiced’. It is only if it falls within s 5 that anything more need be shown. So logically the first question always is:
has the publication satisfied the criterion laid down by s 2(2).
       My Lords, the first thing to be observed about this criterion is that the risk that has to be assessed is that which was created by the
publication of the allegedly offending matter at the time when it was published. The public policy that underlies the strict liability rule in
contempt of court is deterrence. Trial by newspaper or, as it should be more compendiously expressed today, trial by the media, is not to be
permitted in this country. That the risk that was created by the publication when it was actually published does not ultimately affect the
outcome of the proceedings is, as Lord Goddard CJ said in R v Evening Standard Co Ltd, expA -G [1954] 1 All ER 1026 at 1028, [1954] 1 QB
 578 at <{, 918Q 582, neither here nor there. If there was a reasonable possibility that it might have done so if in the period subsequent to the
 publication the proceedings had not taken the course that in fact they did and Dr Arthur was acquitted, the offence was complete. The tme
 course of justice must not at any stage be put at risk.
       Next for consideration is the concatenation in the subsection of the adjective ‘substantial’ and the adverb ‘seriously’, the former to
 describe the degree of risk, the latter to describe the degree of impediment or prejudice to the course of justice. ‘Substantial’ is hardly the
 most apt word to apply to ‘risk’ which is a noumenon. In combination I take the two words to be intended to exclude a risk that is only remote.
  With regard to the adverb ‘seriously’ a perusal of the cases cited in ^-G v Times newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273 discloses
 that the adjective ‘serious’ has from time to time been used as an alternative to ‘real’ to describe the degree of risk of interfering with the
 course of justice, but not the degree of interference itself. It is, however, an ordinary English word that is not intrinsically inapt when used to
 describe the extent of an impediment or prejudice to the cause of justice in particular legal proceedings, and I do not think that for the purposes
 of the instant appeal any attempt to paraphrase it is necessary or would be helpful. The subsection applies to all kinds of legal proceedings, not
 only criminal prosecutions before a jury. If, as in the instant case and probably in most other criminal trials on indictment, it is the outcome of
 the trial or the need to discharge the jury without proceeding to a verdict that is put at risk, there can be no question that that which in the
 course of justice is put at risk is as serious as anything could be.
        My Lords, that Mr Malcolm Muggeridge’s article was capable of prejudicing the jury against Dr Arthur at the early stage of his trial when
 it was published, seems to me to be clear. It suggested that it was a common practice among paediatricians to do that which Dr Arthur was
 charged with having done, because they thought that it was justifiable in the interests of humanity even though it was against the law. At this
  stage of the trial the jury did not know what Dr Arthur’s defence was going to be; and whether at that time the risk of the jury’s being
  influenced by their recollection of the article when they came eventually to consider their verdict appeared to be more than a remote one, was a
 matter which the judge before whom the trial was being conducted was in the best position to evaluate; even though his evaluation, although it
  should carry weight, would not be binding on the Divisional Court or on your Lordships. The judge thought at that stage of the trial that the
  risk was substantial, not remote. So, too, looking at the matter in retrospect, did the Divisional Court despite the fact that the risk had not
  turned into an actuality since Dr Arthur had by then been acquitted. For my part I am not prepared to dissent from this evaluation. I consider
  that the publication of the article on the third day of what was to prove a lengthy trial satisfied the criterion for which s 2(2) of the 1981 Act
  provides.
        The article, however, fell also within the category dealt with in s 5. It was made, in undisputed good faith, as a discussion in itself of
  public affairs, viz Mrs Carr’s candidature as an independent ‘pro-life’ candidate in the North-West Croydon by-election for which the polling
  day was in one week’s time. It was also part of a wider discussion on a matter of general public interest that had been proceeding
  intermittently over the last three months, on the moral justification of mercy killing and in particular of allowing newly-born hopelessly
  handicapped babies to die. So it was for the Attorney General to show that the risk of prejudice to the fair trial of Dr Arthur, which I agree was
  created by the publication of the article at the stage the trial had reached when it was published, was not ‘merely incidental’ to the discussion
   of the matter with which the article dealt.
        My Lords, any article published at the time when Dr Arthur was being tried which asserted that it was a common practice among
   paediatricians to let severely physically or mentally handicapped new-born babies die of starvation or otherwise dispose of them would (as, in
   common with the trial judge and the Divisional Court, I have already accepted), involve a substantial risk of prejudicing his fair trial. But an
   article supporting Mrs Carr’s candidature in the by-election as a pro-life candidate that contained no such assertion would depict her as tilting
   at imaginary windmills. One of the main planks of <{, 919Q the policy for which she sought the suffrage of the electors was that these things
   did happen and ought to be stopped.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                       books on screen™
A ll ER 1982 Volume 2 (25/09/1997 03:43pm)
Attorney General v English and another

      I have drawn attention to the passages principally relied on by the Divisional Court as causing a risk of prejudice that was not ‘merely
incidental to the discussion’. The court described them as ‘unnecessary’ to the discussion and as ‘accusations’. The test, however, is not
whether an article could have been written as effectively without these passages or whether some other phraseology might have been
substituted for them that could have reduced the risk of prejudicing Dr Arthur’s fair trial; but it is whether the risk created by the words
actually chosen by the author was ‘merely incidental to the discussion’, which I take to mean, no more than an incidental consequence of
expounding its main theme. The Divisional Court also apparently regarded the passages complained of as disqualified from the immunity
conferred by s 5 because they consisted of ‘accusations’ whereas the court considered that ‘discussion’ was confined to ‘the airing of views and
the propounding and debating of principles and arguments’. I cannot accept this limited meaning of ‘discussion’ in the section. As already
pointed out, in the absence of any accusation, believed to be true by Mrs Carr and Mr Muggeridge, that it was a common practice among some
doctors to do what they are accused of doing in the passages complained of the article would lose all its point whether as support for Mrs
Carr’s parliamentary candidature or as a contribution to the wider controversy as to the justifiability of mercy killing. The article would be
emasculated into a mere contribution to a purely hypothetical problem appropriate, it may be, for debate between academic successors of the
medieval schoolmen, remote from all public affairs and devoid of any general public interest to readers of the Daily Mail.
      My Lords, the article that is the subject of the instant case appears to me to be in nearly all respects the antithesis of the article which this
House (pace a majority of the judges of the European Court of Human Rights) held to be a contempt of court in A-G v Times Newspapers Ltd
[1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273. There the whole subject of the article was the pending civil actions against the Distillers Co arising out of
their having placed on the market the new drug Thalidomide, and the whole purpose of it was to put pressure on that company in the lawful
conduct of their defence in those actions. In the instant case, in contrast, there is in the article no mention at all of Dr Arthur’s trial. It may
well be that many readers of the Daily Mail who saw the article and had read also the previous day’s report of Dr Arthur’s trial, and certainly if
they were members of the jury at that trial, would think ‘That is the sort of thing that Dr Arthur is being tried for; it appears to be something
that quite a lot of doctors do’. But the risk of their thinking that and allowing it to prejudice their minds in favour of finding him guilty on
evidence that did not justify such a finding seems to me to be properly described in ordinary English language as ‘merely incidental’ to any
meaningful discussion of Mrs Carr’s election policy as a pro-life candidate in the by-election due to be held before Dr Arthur’s trial was likely
to be concluded, or to any meaningful discussion of the wider matters of general public interest involved in the current controversy as to the
justification of mercy killing. To hold otherwise would have prevented Mrs Carr from putting forward and obtaining publicity for what was a
 main plank in her election programme and would have stifled all discussion in the press on the wider controversy about mercy killing from the
 time that Dr Arthur was charged in the magistrates’ court in February 1981 until the date of his acquittal at the beginning of November of that
 year; for those are the dates between which under s 2(3) and Sch 1, the legal proceedings against Dr Arthur would be ‘active’ and so attract the
 strict liability rule.
       Such gagging of bona fide public discussion in the press of controversial matters of general public interest, merely because there are in
 existence contemporaneous legal proceedings in which some particular instance of those controversial matters may be in issue, is what s 5 of
 the Contempt of Court Act 1981 was in my view intended to prevent. I would allow this appeal. <{, 920Q

L O R D E L W Y N -J O N E S . My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend Lord Diplock. I
agree with his reasons and would therefore allow the appeal.

L O R D K E IT H O F K IN K E L . My Lords, I have had the benefit of reading in draft the speech delivered by my noble and learned friend Lord
Diplock. I agree with it, and for the reasons he gives I too would allow the appeal.

L O R D S C A R M A N . My Lords, I have the advantage of reading in draft the speech delivered by my noble and learned friend Lord Diplock. I
agree with him, and would allow the appeal.

L O R D B R A N D O N O F O A K B R O O K My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in advance the speech prepared by my noble and
 learned friend Lord Diplock. I agree with it and for the reasons which he gives I would allow the appeal.

Appeal allowed.

 Solicitors: Swepstone, Walsh & Son (for the respondents); Director o f Public Prosecutions.

                                                                                                                     Mary Rose Plummer Barrister.
                                                                         921(3
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                     books on screen™
AUER 1980 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:44pm)




                  Attorney-General v New Statesman and Nation Publishing Co Ltd
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE; Contempt of Court

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
LORD WIDGERY CJ AND PARK J
13, 14 DECEMBER 1979, 15 JANUARY 1980


Contempt o f court - Publication concerning legal proceedings - Disclosure o f jury room secrets - Whether mere disclosure punishable as
contempt - Whether necessary to show tendency to imperil finality o f verdict or to have other adverse effect on jury system.

The jury at a trial which attracted much publicity acquitted the accused. Afterwards two journalists, who had been commissioned by the editor
of a magazine to write an article about the trial, interviewed a juror who was willing, without reward, to divulge what had happened in the jury
room because he felt that some aspects of the case should be made public. The journalists then wrote an article incorporating his account of a
significant part of the jury’s deliberations. The editor of the magazine believed that nothing but good could come from publication of the
article and decided to publish it. Following publication of the article, the Attorney General applied under RSC Ord 52, r 9, for an order that
the publishers of the magazine were in contempt of court on the ground that the article interfered with the due administration of justice because
it tended to imperil the finality of jury verdicts and thereby diminish public confidence in the general correctness and propriety of such verdicts
and to affect adversely the attitude of future jurors and the quality of their deliberations. The Attorney General conceded that publication of
the article could not have interfered in any way with the administration of justice in the particular case to which it referred and that the article
itself was unexceptionable since it showed that the jury had approached their task in a sensible and responsible manner.

H e ld - (i) Although the mere disclosure of the secrets of the jury room was not necessarily a contempt of court, if such disclosure or any other
similar activity tended to imperil the finality of jury verdicts or to affect adversely the attitude of future jurors and the quality of their
deliberations it was capable of being a contempt. Whether a disclosure was in fact a contempt had to be judged in the light of the
circumstances in which the publication took place (see p 649 c d and/ and p 650 c, post); Attorney General v Leveller Magazine Ltd [1979] 1
All ER 745 applied; dicta of Lord Hewart CJ in R v Armstrong [1922] All ER Rep at 156-157 and of Bankes LJ and of Atkin LJ in Ellis v
Deheer [1922] All ER Rep at 452, 454-455 considered.
     (ii) Since the sole ground on which the allegation of contempt was based was the disclosure of some of the secrets of the jury room in the
particular trial, but there were, <{, 644Q apart from that, no special circumstances which called for condemnation, the publication of the article
did not amount to a contempt. Accordingly the application would be dismissed (see p 649 g and p 650 c d, post).

N otes
For contempts outside the court, see 9 Halsbury's Laws (4th edn) paras 7-14, and for cases on criminal contempt, see 16 Digest (Repl) 17^15,
102-396.

C ases referred to in ju d g m en t
Attorney General v Leveller Magazine Ltd [1979] 1 All ER 745, [1979] AC 440, [1979] 2 WLR 247, 68 Cr App R 342, HL.
Ellis v Deheer [1922] 2 KB 113, [1922] All ER Rep 451, 91 LJKB 937, 127 LT 431, 86 JP 169, 20 LGR 625, CA, 14(1) Digest (Reissue) 429,
     3643.
R v Armstrong [1922] 2 KB 555, [1922] All ER Rep 153, 91 LJKB 904, 127 LT 221, 86 JP 209, 27 Cox CC 232, 16 Cr App R 149, CCA,
      14(2) Digest (Reissue) 522, 4258.
R v Holmes (22 June 1979) unreported.
R v Martin (1848) 5 Cox CC 356, 16 Digest (Repl) 45, *181.

C ases also cited
Attorney General v Times Newspapers Ltd [1973] 3 All ER 54, [1974] AC 273, UL.
Langdell v Sutton (1737) Bames 32, 94 ER 791.
R v Dyson (1972) 1 OR 744, 5 CCC (2d) 401.
R v Thompson [1962] 1 All ER 65, CCA.
R v Twiss [1918] 2 KB 853, CCA.

 A p p lication
 By notice of motion the Attorney General applied for an order under RSC Ord 52, r 9, against the publishers of the New Statesman magazine,
 New Statesman and Nation Publishing Co Ltd (‘the publishers’), for contempt of court in publishing in the issue of the magazine dated 27 July
 1979 an article entitled ‘Thorpe’s Trial: How the Jury Saw it’. The facts are set out in the judgment of the court.

 Simon D Brown and Andrew Collins for the Attorney General.
 Geoffrey Robertson and Andrew Nicol for the publishers.
A ll England Law Reports 1936-1997                                                                                      books on screen™
AUER 1980 Volume 1 (25/09/1997 03:44pm)
Attorney-General v New Statesman and Nation Publishing Co L td

                                                                                                                                        Cur adv vult

15 January 1980. The following judgment was delivered.

L O R D W ID G E R Y C J. The judgment I am about to read, composed by Park J, is the judgment of the court.
      In these proceedings counsel for the Attorney General moves for an order under RSC Ord 52, r 9, against New Statesman and Nation
Publishing Co Ltd, the publishers of the New Statesman, requiring them to be punished in respect of a publication said to be a contempt of
court.
      The publication complained of is an article in the New Statesman magazine dated 27 July 1979 entitled ‘Thorpe’s Trial: How the Jury
Saw It’. The article contains a juror’s account of significant parts of the jury’s deliberations in the course of arriving at their verdicts in R v
Holmes tried at the Central Criminal Court between 8 May and 22 June 1979. Both the trial itself and the long committal proceedings which
preceded it were sensational and received saturation coverage in the daily press. The jury, having considered their verdicts for 52 hours,
acquitted all the accused.
      The editor of the New Statesman, Mr Bruce Page, was of the opinion that the jury’s verdict did not dispose of a number of important
issues ventilated in the course of the <f, 645Q trial, namely the future of Mr Thorpe and the Liberal Party, the behaviour of senior politicians of
all parties when allegations were made to them about Mr Thorpe’s conduct in 1971, the propriety of the behaviour of certain newspapers in
offer in g lucrative contracts to witnesses prior to their testimony in court, and the workings of a legal system which had operated in a way which
had enabled men who had admitted, through their counsel, to discreditable conduct (albeit behaviour not the subject of any charge in the
indictment) to emerge without a conviction for any criminal offence.
      Mr Bruce Page therefore commissioned two reputable and experienced journalists to write a three part series of articles: the first,
published in the magazine on 6 July 1979, was about Mr Thorpe’s financial career; the second, published on 13 July 1979, was about the
manner in which leading politicians had dealt with Mr Thorpe and the allegations against him made some years before he was charged with
any criminal offence; and the third was to deal with legal issues in the trial, and in particular with the question whether the prosecution should
have proceeded against the accused on lesser charges and whether large payments, escalating in the event of a conviction, by newspapers to
witnesses ought to be prohibited.
      It came to the notice of the two journalists that a juror was willing, without reward, to divulge what had happened in the jury room. He
did this because he felt that some aspects of the case ought to be made public. They interviewed him. Mr Bruce Page was told; he formed the
opinion that the juror’s comments provided important evidence which should be incorporated in the third article in the series. This was done
and the article was published on 27 July 1979. It records the juror as saying, inter alia, that all the jury were agreed that the accused were
guilty of a conspiracy of some kind, that 11 of them, after little more than an hour’s deliberation on the first day, agreed that it was not proved
that there had been a conspiracy to murder and that, on a charge of incitement to murder, the jury could not accept the uncorroborated word of
a prosecution witness who had agreed to accept money from a newspaper, the amount to be increased in the event of a conviction.
       It is accepted by the Attorney General that Mr Bruce Page’s decision to publish the article was taken with the best intentions, that he
honestly believed that nothing but good would result from its publication and that the article would never involve him in proceedings for
 contempt.
       It is conceded that the publication could not in any respect interfere with the administration of justice in the Thorpe case and that, where
 the article refers to the juror’s comments, it is unexceptionable since the words published demonstrate that the jury approached its task in a
 sensible and responsible manner, but it is contended that, despite this, mischief is done by the article by reason of its impact on the
 administration of justice. It is argued that the article involves an interference with the due administration of justice as a continuing process, in
 that the disclosure of what happened in the jury room tends or will tend (a) to imperil the finality of jury verdicts and thereby dimmish public
 confidence in the general correctness and propriety of such verdicts and (b) to affect adversely the attitude of future jurors and the quality of
 their deliberations. It is said that nothing must be permitted to be published which might tend to deter a person likely to be called for jury
 service from playing his full part as a juror in any trial.
       We were reminded that, until a few years ago, it was accepted that the secrets of the jury room had to be treated as secret. The solemn
 obligation by jurors to observe secrecy was well maintained and breaches of the obligation were kept at an acceptable level. It had never been
 necessary to invoke the law of contempt in respect of such breaches, but that law had always been available for use in any case in which the
 administration of justice would have been imperilled. Recently, however, the solemn obligation of secrecy has been shown to be breaking
 down; a considerable number of publications involving jury room revelations, some more objectionable than others, have occurred.
 Accordingly, in view of the apparently diminishing respect for the convention of observance of jury secrecy and the risk of escalation in the
  frequency and degree of the disclosures, it has become right for the Attorney General to invoke the law of contempt in relation to this     646Q
  article in the New Statesman since it represents a departure from the norm and is a serious and dangerous encroachment into the convention of
 jury secrecy.
        On the other hand, it is also conceded that there are strong arguments in support of the view that certain categories of disclosure fall
  outside the law of contempt, eg where serious research is being carried out, but, even then, any disclosures would have to be such as to ensure
  that the trial could not be identified, or where the disclosure occurred in social discussion, but even that could in some circumstances be so
  undesirable as to constitute contempt.
        Accordingly we have been invited to draw a distinction between these categories of disclosure which probably fall outside the law of
  contempt and the general principle of that law and to hold, by applying the general principle, that this article constitutes contempt. The general
  principle has recently been stated in Attorney General v Leveller Magazine Ltd ([1979] 1 All ER 745 at 749, [1979] AC 440 at 449) by Lord
  Diplock:

           \ .. although criminal contempts of court may take a variety of forms they all share a common characteristic: they involve an
       interference with the due administration of justice either in a particular case or more generally as a continuing process. It is justice itself
       that is flouted by contempt of court, not the individual court or judge who is attempting to administer it. ’
                                                                                                                                                       A p p e n d ix   4:




                       WEST STAND



                                                                  BARRIER          No.144
                                                                       §«i* urn.




                                            BARRIER   No.124a

                                                                                                                                              \
       /
SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                       NORTH STAND




              Barriers.., Pre 1979            1981 * 2 radial fences               * * • * 1985 - Removal of some       Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                  posts and rails       No. 144 and some on
              1979...,Additional barriers     1985 - 2 more radial fences                                               S West Terrace




                             -------------------------------------------------------------------------              _




                                                                                                                                                                             "
iA
                                                                                                                                                                                      A p p e n d i x 4:




                       WEST STAND



                                                                                     BARRIER      N o.144
                                                                                       I**




                                                      B A R R IE R ! No, 124a
                                              I   .......                   *|



       /
SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                                                      NORTH STAND




                                                                                                                                        m mmm
              Barriers.,, Pre 1979                            1981 - 2 radial fences              • • * • 1985 - Removal of some                1986 - Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                                 posts and rails                       No. 144 and some on
              1979.,.,Additional barriers                     1985 - 2 more radial fences                                                              S West Terrace




                                       — ——          *----—   ---- ™— ~ —        —           ——             —-   —                 — ——— — —        —    ---------------------
                                                                     -




                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                 .




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix 4




                          WEST STAND



                                                                                               BARRIER               N o.144
                                                                                                       pin «■*<*)

                                                                          fmmmf   |   ■:   |       p a a p |< t* i


                                                      BARRIER
                                                      ■ f n f i l l




                                                                ---------

SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                                                                 NORTH STAND




               Barriers.,. Pre 1979                        1981 -2 radia! fences                                         #.»», ggg .Removal of some   ...»   1986   , Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                                                    posts and rails                   No. 144 and some on
               1979.,..Additional barriers                 1985 - 2 more radial fences                                                                                S West Terrace




          Prepared by The Health & Safety Executive

                                                                      —               ^        ^   ^      ^     .    -
                                                                                                                                                              A p p e n d i x 4:




                         W EST STAND



                                                                m&m

                                                                              BARRIER No.144




                                                  BARRIERf No.124a
                                              I   ....   n •«         ,   *




         /
SOUTH   STAND                                                                                                                                            NORTH STAND




                Barriers.,. Pre 1979                     1981 - 2 radial fences        • 8• • 1985 - Removal of some    “ ™ 1986 - Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                     posts and rails               No. 144 and some on
                1979....Additional barriers              1985 - 2 more radial fences                                               S West Terrace
                                                                                                                                                                     .




                                                                          :       -----------------------------------                      —
