HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B5, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

          25th February, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham» L t d .,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                   INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                             Page


WILLIAM EASTWOOD Recalled

   By THE CORONER (Continued)                   1
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE                  9
   Discussion in the absence of the Jury
   and the Witness                             28
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE (Continued)     34
   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS                65
   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING               65
   Cross-Examined by MR. KING                  65
   Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL               73
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING          80
   Cross-Examined by MR. TOULSON               81
                      FIFTY SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                        MONDAY. 25th FEBRUARY 1991

                         WILLIAM EASTWOOD Recalled

                              Bv THE CORONER
B    Q.    I am not going to remind you of what you were talking
          about last Friday because I expect it is in your mind
          anyway. I think we had really come to the barrier
          basically and in particular the question of testing? -
          A. Yes.

     Q. Were you in Court when Dr. Nicholson was giving
        evidence regarding the barrier? - A. Yes.

     Q. So you heard what he said? - A. Yes.

     Q.   In a nutshell he said you used the rig which you had
          designed yourself and you would agree with that? - A.
          Yes.

     Q. He was quite satisfied with the design which I am sure
        you were pleased to hear. Were there any difficulties
tv      with regard to that rig so far as its actual use was
        concerned, as opposed to its design? Are you with
        me? - A. No, sir, there were no difficulties with
        regard to its use. In fact, I believe it is easily the
        best rig that was in use at any of the grounds round
        the country.

     Q. It had to be correctly adjusted, of course, and set up
        in order to give an accurate reading? - A. Indeed.

     Q. Have you any reason to think in 1988 when it was being
        used, this test on barrier 124A, there was anything
        about either the calibration or the set up which might
        have given erroneous readings? - A. Nothing whatever,
        sir.

     Q. You yourself were not there? - A. No.

     Q. I would not have expected you to be there but I just
        wanted to be sure about that. - A. No, but the rig,
        firstly the mechanism is very good as Dr. Nicholson
        said. The one thing which might have been wrong is the
        calibration of the gauge which tells you the load that
        you are applying. Quite by chance it had been tested
        by a reputable testing house immediately before the
        tests.

     Q. Is there not something to do with one of the joints
        where you have got to either tighten up or loosen a nut
        — I am not an expert on this — which could affect its
        validity? - A. Which could conceivably but which did
        not. When I say conceivably, not by a major amount.
        In order to hold it in position a nut is gently




H
                                                       W. EASTWOOD


      tightened up. This means that there is bound to be a
      little bit of friction on the arms which do this. As
      the arms are pushed to the barrier and rest against it
B     with the jack pushing the two arms need to apply the
      same pressure. There are two lots of two arms on each
      barrier and then there are two lots of four. They need
      to apply the same pressure.  If the nut were grossly
      over-tightened, as the two arms come to the barrier
      rail and they are out of line so that one touches first
      they would not straighten up. In fact, they always
      straighten up because it would be apparent if they did
      not and you were only pressing at one point. Now there
      is bound to be a very slight difference between the two
      loads, very slight indeed, but there will be a very
      slight difference.

          That makes no difference to the load that goes on
      the legs but it could make a slight difference to the
      distribution of the load which, as Dr. Nicholson said,
      is idealised in the case of our rig in that we have the
      arms. They can be adjusted in spacing. They can be at
D     exactly the right spacing to give the equivalent of the
      uniformly distributed load. Now it is conceivable
      there could be a minor error there but it is absolutely
      apparent if that is so because with virtually no load
      on the jack it slowly moves forward on to the arm of
      the barrier, on to the barrier rail. The two arms
      touch it and if one of them was taking all the load, it
      would continue to take the load and the other would
      never touch. Even with the very beginnings of the
      first increment of load, they both come together and
      from then on, of course, as the barrier rail bends one
      moves in front. As it comes back it comes back.

          Again at the end of the test when you take all the
      load off, if the articulation is not working over the
      last part of relief of the load one of the arms,
      because of the stiffness of the nut, they go out of
      line because the rail bends. When they come back they
      gradually come into line and when there is no load at
      all they are perfectly in line on the barrier.   If
      there were any difference in the two loads there would
      be a gap at one side. That can be completely ruled
      out, sir.

    Q. You have also heard Dr. Nicholson describe your testing
       procedure? - A. Yes.

    Q. Which I think one could say you treated each test as
       discrete, would that be right or not? - A. The word
       'test', sir, is that one test cycle.




H
•   A
                                                                      3

                                                            W. EASTWOOD


        Q. I meant each test within a triple test site was treated
           as discrete? - A. That is so, sir.
    B   Q . You heard Dr. Nicholson say that this was certainly a
            view which one could take in the light of the wording
            of the Green Guide but that one could also take a
            different view, that one should take the tests
            cumulatively I suppose would be the alternative. Have
            you got any comments or views on that? - A. Yes, sir.
            It never occurred to me the alternative interpretation
            because it is absolutely standard in structural testing
    C       of this kind, even when it does not involve foundations
            with the uncertainties of ash, which is deep
            biodegrading, in all test where it is merely a steel
            structure the British Standards always require a
            bedding in load test which is ignored. So for that
            reason it never entered my head there might be another
            interpretation and, of course, these tests were carried
            out first by arrangement with the City Council's
            engineers and under their supervision by visits and it
            was their interpretation as well. Of course, whilst
    D       the new test is different from both the interpretations
            of the 1986 guide the new test does have the proof load
            being applied first and the result being ignored. Now
            for all those reasons I believe that we were doing it
            in the way that was intended.

        Q. What you are saying is (a) you believed it to be the
           correct interpretation on your reading of the guide? -
           A. Yes.
    E
        Q. (b) the people who were supervising, by which I mean
           the City Council engineers did not demur from that? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. (c) you take some encouragement from the new guide
           which has a bedding in test? - A. A lovely summing up,
           sir, yes.

    F   Q. It is right — I do not want to get into details of the
           new guide but it has a relevance to a certain extent —
           just so that we can make quite sure; the new guide
           does have a bedding in test, that is right, is it
           not? - A. Yes.

        Q. It differs from the 1986 test in that the bedding in
           test applies a lower load, does it not? - A. Yes, it
           might be as well, sir, to explain that word 'lower'
    G      load. The test load which is applied is an overload.
           The barriers are designed to carry 5 kilonewtons per
           metre. The test load which is applied is 6. Now under
           the new guide the bedding in load is the working load,




    H
                                                        W. EASTWOOD


       the design load, of 5 kilonewtons. Then for the next
       two cycles you overload using the 6.
B   Q . The point I wanted to get at was this; because the
        loading has been altered between the 1986 test 1 and
        the 1990 test 1 it is not possible to do comparisons
        between your test and the new provisions.  Is that
        correct, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, sir, you could not use
        our results to show what would have happened with this
        new test procedure because on the first loading we put
        on an overload whereas this new procedure does not put
        on an overload.

    Q. Just in order to get the new test quite right, I think
       it is right, is it not, that this first test under the
       new procedure, it is possible for a barrier to actually
       fail on that test if it does not reach a specified
       percentage of recovery? That is right, is it not? - A.
       That is so, sir.

    Q. Presumably that would mean, and just correct me if I am
       wrong because I am not an engineer as you will have
       already noticed, that if the movement on test 1 is due
       to the foundations, the ash or sand or whatever it is
       having biodegraded and needing to compact, but the
       failure is more than 75 per cent, you would fail it
       whether it is metal or foundation, is that right? Have
       you understood what I am saying? - A. No, sir. At any
       rate, I think I have understood but do not want to
       disagree with you until I am sure I have understood.
       Would you mind repeating, I am sorry, sir?

    Q. As I understand it, when you apply the test load? - A.
       Yes, this is the first cycle?

    Q. The first cycle. You apply 5 kilonewtons under thenew
       procedures? - A. Under the new procedures.

    Q. You measure the movement and the recovery as you have
       always done? - A. Yes.

    Q. If the recovery is less than 75 per cent and/or
       alternatively you can ignore 2 millimetres? - A. Yes.

    Q. If it is less than 75 per cent of the load then you do
       not ask the next question, why is it less? You say,
       this one has failed? - A. That is so, sir, yes.

    Q. In other words, you cannot tell from that whether it is
       the metal that is at fault or the foundation that is at
       fault? - A. That is so, sir.




H
                                                        W. EASTWOOD


    Q. I think I am right in saying that one of your principal
       reasonings with regard to the testing was that the
B      movement attributable to the compaction of the ash or
       the foundation was not a critical movement because once
       you had compacted it, you would not be able to put it
       out and what you were seeking to test was the metal, is
       that right? - A. That is so, sir. Indeed even on the
       second and third loading when it is something like ash
       you would expect to have, in many cases it depends on
       the ash and it was very variable.  It was tipped from
       the dustbins of the city 90 years ago. It depends on
       the quality of that ash but you may get under
       successive loads a new increment of slight permanent
       settlement but which was not a sign it was going to tip
       over, merely a sign that you were pushing the ashes
       slightly closer together.  If I might just put it
       another way, sir, as I say the British Standard for
       testing steel structures, even where there is no
       foundation involved, you are testing merely a steel
       structure and measuring the deflection, takes the view
       that anything which is welded will on first loading
D      have some permanent deflection which is not
       recoverable. So the permanent deflection you get on
       the first loading may be due to the steel, particularly
       if it is either a new barrier or one that has been
       repaired and may not be a sign of weakness at all
       because of the self-stressing of the welds due to the
       heat and the cool. When you put a load on some
       permanent yield can take place. That happens once and
       if you do not put a higher load on then each time you
       put it on after that you will get a full recovery. A
       higher load, you may again get some permanent set.




                               /Q. If we turn then...




H
                                             W. EASTWOOD


If we turn then to the barrier itself, 124A, it just
happened that it was being tested in 1988, that was a
sheer fluke? - A. Yes.

I think I am right in saying this was not one of your
design barriers - well, we know that because it was
there .... - A. Yes, we believe it was there since
before 1931.

I take it you were satisfied that it had passed its
test? - A. We were satisfied, yes.

There is this anomaly about the three spans and the
fact that a third one does not appear to be recorded,
but can you confirm to me what Mr. Toulson I think
already indicated, Dr. Nicholson, that in the events
the recordings referred to the two spans which did, in
fact, collapse? - A. Yes.  Deflections were measured on
the two spans which collapsed; the one on which the
measurements were not taken, it did have the load on it
but measurements were not taken, was the one that stood
up.

Now, are you able from an engineering point of view to
postulate the reason or the mechanism whereby the two
spans collapsed? - A. Yes, sir.  I am in total
agreement with what Dr. Nicholson put forward.    The two
horizontal rails of the two spans were quite markedly
bent, banana shaped.  This is a clear indication that
they were taken well above the yield point.   Dr.
Nicholson's laboratory tested similar lengths of rail,
similar thickness, the same material, they were able to
take pieces of the two rails and do tensile tests on
them, (a) the two that failed, and (b) a comparable
rail from another barrier which did not fail which was
not badly deformed.  They tested those in the
laboratory; they tested the rails which had not
deformed in the laboratory, and from that were able to
say what stress there would have been in the two which
were on barrier 124(a), which bent, banana-ed out,
before finally collapsing.

So they knew the stress in the metal.   It was a
continuous rail over the two spans with a support in
the middle, and therefore when being bent it would be
bent round that support and then come back like that -
in other words, a double curvature.   The bending over
the support, the bending moment there in fact would be
the greater one. This is technical but it would be.
Now, under the clip at that support there was corrosion
so that the metal was thinner, and Dr. Nicholson's
laboratory carefully sliced through the metal there and
then with microscopes or whatever measured the
thickness of the metal at short intervals all the way
                                                        7

                                               W. EASTWOOD


   round the tube, so they knew how much metal there was
   there.  From the tests on the other tubes from a
   barrier which had not failed they knew the stress that
   that metal could take, and hence they were able to
   calculate how much bending moment, and similarly for
   the central part of each tube.  From that they were
   able to deduce the loads which they believed had been
   applied to the two lengths, the end one and the middle
   one which collapsed, and those loads were well above
   the test load.

   There is no way in which those two horizontal rails
   could have been bent like that at a lower load.   It is
   always conceivable that the legs also precipitated
   failure but they did not precipitate it at a lower load
   than one can deduce must have been applied to the
   horizontal rail.  In other words, the two could have
   happened together, but the rail certainly at the moment
   of collapse, in the view of the Health and Safety
   Executive, had quite a lot higher load than the test
   load. The test load is already a 20% overload; the
   design load is 5 kilonewtons; the test load is 6, which
   is the 20% overload; the Health and Safety Executive
   deduced that it took of the order of 8 or 9
   kilonewtons, which is a more than normal factor of
   safety for a brand new barrier.

Q. So what you are saying is that whatever happened, the
   barrier was subjected to a load which was in excess of
   your test load? - A. Indeed.

Q. I am leaving the barrier.  I have just got one more
   question to do with capacities.  We have spent quite a
   bit of time talking about the capacities and in
   particular the figures which appeared on some of your
   sketches, and I think it was 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000
   for pen 4, whatever those figures mean. - A. Yes.

Q. First question:  do you know whether those figures
   actually refer to capacities in respect of those pens?
   - A. How the figures came to be on the drawing I am not
   sure, except that they were put on another drawing at
   about the time in 1981 when we were first suggesting to
   the Club that separate access routes with separate sets
   of turnstiles, separate toilets and so on for each
   section, might be used, might be introduced.  There is
   in existence, was in the file, a small A4 sketch, two
   versions of it in fact, of 1981, on which figures of
   that kind were first put down, and there are some
   little calculations how many turnstiles, and I suspect
   that those figures first appeared in a discussion over
   the table with Mr. England, the then Secretary of the
   Club, when we first took these sketches to him and were
   asking his advice about how many turnstiles, and he
                                            W. EASTWOOD


probably said over the table, "How many people do you
think there will be in each pen", and some figures were
written down.  From that some calculations were done on
the spot, that you needed three turnstiles or four, and
these were put on the sketches.

I think that is probably the origin, but I think that
is not relevant, sir, because those figures were never
transmitted to the Club for use, or to the Police to
guide them in counting people in.  It would not have
been any use to anybody anyway because there were no
separate turnstiles.  I don't believe that anybody was
at any time in any way misled by any errors that there
may be in them.




       /Q. What you are really
                                     W. EASTWOOD



What you are really saying is that these figures were
guesstimates, not hard, indicators shall we say. Yes? -
A. Yes, that is so, sir, they were not hard indicators.

For discussion purposes and were never actually used
in any proposals? - A. I have searched our files to see
whether at any time we have said to say the Licensing
Authority or the Police that they could rely on these
figures for whatever purpose.

      Those figures I believe sir were not seen until
during the Taylor Inquiry we were asked if we could
produce a drawing of the ground and the one we happened
to produce was the one with those figures on.

m o t h e r words you are saying they existed but they were
not used? - A. They were not used. That drawing was not
used.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Mr. Payne.


              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Dr. Eastwood, I wonder if you would do please what several
other witnesses in the Inquest have done, and that is in
your mind take yourself back to the time shortly before
the disaster and consider what at that time was your
attitude towards the safety of the ground, do you follow
the idea that I am asking you to consider? - A. I follow,
yes.

Now in that frame of mind I am going to put some questions
to you which have been put to a number of other witnesses
for your response please.

      First of all before the disaster did you believe
that the ground was completely safe to be used for a
full capacity crowd? - A. Completely safe to be used for
a full capacity crowd provided it was used in accordance
with the Safety Certificate and provided that there was
not for some reason an enormous crowd outside the gates
to the extent that the gates were then opened and that
those people coming through the gates were allowed to go
in in very large numbers to grossly overcrowd the pen
and it did not enter the mind of anyone, so far as I know,
that that could conceivably have happened.

This is rather a long complicated answer. Are you saying
that you actually did consider those eventualities before
the disaster? - A. No. No, no one could conceivably
have dreamed of them.
                                                           10

                                         W. EASTWOOD



Q. Can you just direct yourself to the question which I
   am asking. Put yourself in the frame of mind that you
   were before the disaster before we knew what we now know.
   Do you follow?
         Now at that time did you believe that the ground
   was completely safe to be used for a full capacity
   crowd without qualification? - A. "Reasonably safe" is
   what the Green Guide says, yes.

Q. Did you believe - here is the second question - did you
   believe that the Leppings Lane terraces in the event of
   an emergency could be safely evacuated? - A. Yes.

Q. Did   youknow that    there was a time which had been worked
   out   for that safe   evacuation? - A. Yes.

Q. What was it? - A. The limit in the Guide is 8 minutes
   but   the Fire Service had worked it out and found that
   there were alternative routes out. One was through
   the tunnel which by itself could take everybody out
   in I think it was just over five minutes, I have not
   got the figures firmly in my head, and the alternative
   if the tunnel was blocked was the two 1100 mm. wide gates
   at the top and they could let everybody out in whatever
   it was, six or seven minutes.

Q. Those are the radial gates? - A. Those in the radial
   fences, yes.
Q. Now supplementary to that question: an emergency by
   its nature is something which does not happen in the
   ordinary course of events, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And the exact nature of an emergency can't be foreseen.
   You agree with me? - A. Yes.
Q. So did you believe before the disaster that whatever
   emergency occurred the terrace could be safely evacuated
   within those times that had been worked out? - A. No.

Q. Well what is your qualification? - A. Suppose somebody
   blew half the terrace up? Suppose somebody allowed an
   enormous crowd to gather outside the gates and then open
   the gates and the pens were allowed to fill so jam packed
   that nobody could move let alone be evacuated ....

Q. Well you are making a case, Dr. Eastwood, which I will
   have to deal with. Did you ever mention any of these
   hypotheses before the disaster to anyone? - A. The bomb
   was the one which was often quoted at meetings with the
   Working Party.
                                                         11


                                    W. EASTWOOD



Q. Well did you believe that in the event of something like
   that happening the terrace could be safely evacuated?
   - a . If a bomb had gone off no. If there was a bomb
   in the tunnel yes* a bomb unexploded in the tunnel, yes.

Q. i am going to have to stop on this point. Did you
   address your mind to the fact that the reason that such
   an evacuation would not be able to take place in the
   event of a serious dire emergency such as you are now
   describing, did you address your mind to the fact that
   the reason that such an evacuation could not happen
   was caused by the enclosures which had been constructed
   across the terrace? - A. Would you mind repeating the
   question?
Q. Yes, did you address your mind to the fact that by the
   divisions on the terrace you had created, you and all
   those responsible, had created a series of pens from
   which in the hypotheses you have just raised, the crowd
   in fact would not be able to escape. Did you address
   your mind to that fact? - A. There are a whole series
   of questions there. First*did I address my mind?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes. I think the Fire Service have made it
   quite clear that they regarded themselves as the lead
   member of the Working Party on these matters, as they
   have with every building, for example, which is constructed,
   they have to approve the plans from the point of view
   of safety.
         I vas not a member of the Working Party. Never­
   theless as the Club's advisor 6ven in those fields where
   I was not the expert I did exercise my mind.
         Now yes, one does realise that the creation of
   pens with a very high fence-at the front is creating
   a possible cage in which people could be trapped and
   hence the extra sets of gates which which were required
   I think by the Fire Service and which were to be open
   and under Police control so that they could be used as
   another means of evacuation.
 Q. Well did you regard these pens as safe in the event of
    an emergency? - A. The pens were regarded by the Working
    Party as reasonably safe as defined by the Guide and
    I agreed with the Working Party.
 Q. So is this the position, that your frame of mind before
    the disaster was that if a serious emergency occurred
    it was foreseeable that the people would not be able
    to escape? - A. It was a reasonably safe pen. The
    Guide says: "Designed for reasonable safety and the
    Guide said and the words, I can read they out if I
    need to, but the gist of them is that it is not
                                 W. EASTWOOD



appropriate to try to achieve perfect safety.   A reasonable
degree of safety is what the Guide asks for.

Well isn't it the case that the danger was being created
by the introduction of the cages. That is what itself
was creating the danger and the inability to escape? —
A. It was a balanced view. The Police successively
suggested the introduction of the various radial fences.
There were good grounds for their suggestions in that
it did enable them to more accurately control the
distribution of people on the terraces.




                          Q. We are talking
                                                            13

                                                W. EASTWOOD


Q.   We are talking about safety. - A. Yes, and equal
     distribution of people on the terraces is a prime
     factor in safety. Now the whole object was that by
     creating the separate pens, and more accurately
     controlling the number of people, therefore, in each
     of the pens, you would create a safer condition.  Now
     obviously creating a pen can have a contrary effect,
     but it was believed overall that the ground was being
     made safer by acting in accordance with what the Green
     Guide was recommending, which was that pens should be
     created.

Q.   Did you express any qualifications about your view as
     to safety before the disaster? Did you say, "Hello,
     hang on a minute, you are creating a danger here in
     certain eventualities"? Did you ever say that to
     anybody? - A.  I did not use those words.  Everybody
     knew in the Working Party that they were taking a
     balanced judgment.  The balanced judgment that they
     took I agreed with.

Q.   Can you address the question.  Before the disaster did
     you ever say to anybody, "We are creating a risk here
     which we have got to accept in the interests of other
     matters"? - A. J am sure that words similar to those
     were used on quite a number of occasions in the
     general discussions which went on.

Q.   Could you or your representatives refer to any record
     or minute in which such a reservation is expressed? -
     A. No, no.

Q.   It is not recorded anywhere, is it? - A. No.

Q.   Nor is it recorded anywhere, I ask you to confirm,
     that anyone in the Officer Working Party, or your own
     firm, or the Club, had ever said that they could
     foresee circumstances in which there could be a risk
     of death by crushing in those pens, is there? - A. No.

Q.   So that was the third question. The fourth question
     is were you aware of any occasion in the history of
     the Club, prior to the disaster, when it had been
     necessary to throw open the exit gates behind the
     stand in order to relieve a serious risk of injury to
     the people outside the turnstiles? — A. Yes.

Q.   When had that happened? ~ A. It was at the semi-final
     in 1981 when about 150 people were evacuated via gates
     at the front-.

Q.   No, you have not followed the question, there is a
     misunderstanding.  1 am talking about the opening of
     Gates A, B and C. - A. I am sorry those gates.
                                             W. EASTWOOD


Those gates.   - A.   Would you now repeat the question
for me?

Were you aware of any previous occasion when those
gates had had to be thrown open to save life and limb
outside the ground? - A. No.

Had anything happened during the time since your
appointment in 1979 to cause you to expect any
circumstances in which a disaster like this could
happen? - A. The word "expect", I would take that out. •

It was chosen deliberately. - A.   I am not going to
reply in those words.  I would never say that any
ground is completely safe.  That would be impossible
to achieve at reasonable cost.   It might be impossible
anyway, whatever the cost, in some grounds.   Now that
is the position, that I believe the ground, always
believed and still do believe, satisfied the
requirement of reasonable safety as laid down in the
Guide.

What is difficult about answering this question? I
will put it again. Had anything happened which caused
you to expect any circumstances in which a disaster
like this could occur? - A. I am trying to get rid of
the word "expect".

What is the problem? - A. It has   a variety of shades
of meaning, if I said I expected   - okay. What I am
saying to you is that I believed   the ground had
reasonable safety as required by   the Guide.

Very well, and we have already established that you
did not record any qualification to that opinion ever
before the disaster? - A. That is so.

Finally on this part of my cross-examination, did you
before the disaster imagine any circumstances in which
there would be an obvious risk of death to spectators
on the terrace from overcrowding? Did you imagine any
circumstances in which there would be an obvious risk
of death from overcrowding? - A. A bomb goes off and
everybody charges in one direction.

I see. Did you record any forecast of that sort
before the disaster? - A. No, Mr. Payne.

I would like to just explore, please, your duties as
the Ground Engineer, beginning with the Safety
Certificate, which is in the black folder at C381, and
the Jury are familiar with the paragraph which
provides for your appointment, which is paragraph 24.
Were you the Engineer who was appointed by the Club
                                              W. EASTWOOD


under paragraph 24 to provide the annual Certificates
of Safety? - A. Yes.

Were you aware that in providing those annual
Certificates of Safety paragraph 24 provides, among
other things, that you have got to certify that the
ground complies with the appropriate provisions and
recommendations of the Green Guide? - A. "... good
engineering and building practices ..." in accordance
with the Green Guide.

Yes. - A. Not other provisions, just those.

Pardon? - A. "... with good engineering and building
practices.... "

Yes, what is your point? - A. I was acting as an
engineer and my role is confined to engineering and
building practices.

I see.   What it actually says, paragraph 24:

     "The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be
     inspected by a suitably qualified Chartered
     Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
     a representative of the County Council within 7
     months of the date of the Certificate and at
     least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
     and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
     each inspection supply to the County Council a
     Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer as to
     the current compliance or non-compliance with
     good engineering and building practices and with
     the relevant British Standard Specifications and
     Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
     provisions and recommendations of the Guide of
     all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
     crush barriers and handrails."

In complying with that direction in the Safety
Certificate, did you think that part of your duty
included looking through the Green Guide to make sure
that the structural parts of the Stadium did comply
with the recommendations of the Guide? - A. As
structures, yes.

What about design? - A. No, it does not say design of
the Stadium.

So wa3 that nothing to do with you? - A. No.  I
obviously had a role, albeit not as an expert and not
as an engineer, in helping the Club, but not as a
member of the Working Party which took all decisions.
                                               W. EASTWOOD


I would like to see if we can get a bit further with
exactly what your duties were, Dr. Eastwood, and I
wonder if we can be helped by a document called
Appraisal of Existing Structures published by the
Institution of Structural Engineers. Are you familiar
with that publication? - A. Yes.




                              /Q. In the course.
                                                             17

                                                    W. EASTWOOD


Q. In the course of your career, Dr. Eastwood, you have
   actually held office, have you, with the Institution of
   Structural Engineers? - A. I was its President, yes.

Q. Did you ever hand in the drafting of this document? -
   A. Indeed, I set up the Committee which drafted it and
   I am named on the front page as one of the persons who,
   from time to time, worked at the Committee.

Q. Does it apply to the appraisal of the structure of
   Hillsborough Football Ground? - A. It applies to the —
   it was not meant for appraising football grounds,
   simply to appraise the structures on the ground it does
   apply.

Q. Perhaps you would be kind enough just to take a copy of
   parts of this? I have not arranged for it all to be
   copied but just those parts that may be helpful to the
   Jury have been copied and so they will be made
   available now. This publication is entitled "Appraisal
   of existing structures" published in July 1980 and we
   start at page 8 under chapter 2, "Procedure". Do you
   see that? - A. Yes.

Q. 2.1 is "Terms of reference" and it says:

      "The first stage is the receipt in writing of a
      brief from the client in which he states his
      requirements, dates for reporting and
      confidentiality.  It is essential to find out
      at the start exactly what the client needs, how
      detailed the appraisal is to be and what use
      the results are to be put. An appraising
      engineer must recognise that he may be called
      in by someone who does not understand or define
      his problem. Thus it may fall to the engineer
      to develop his own brief, together with the
      client."

   For the purposes of your appointment under the Safety
   Certificate do you fall within the category described
   as an appraising engineer? - A. I was carrying out
   duties as set out under the requirements of the ground
   Safety Certificate. The word 'appraisal' does not
   appear.

Q. Is that a serious qualification? Does it rule out the
   application of this document? - A. If this document
   goes beyond what is required in the Safety Certificate
   the answer is yes.

Q. Look at 2.2 to see if this applies, "Points to be
   established":
                                                                 18

                                                         W. EASTWOOD



           "The engineer will need:
B          to clarify the brief and its implications with
           the client and to state these in writing with
           any qualifications."

       Does that apply to your appointment? - A. No, my terms
       of reference were clear.

    Q. So that did not need to be clarified? - A. No.

    Q. Point 2:

           "to define the line of responsibility
           especially when making an appraisal jointly or
           on behalf of more than one party."

       Did you need to define the line of responsibility? - A.
       No, I was reporting to the Club so that they could
       present my Certificate to the Licensing Authority.
D
    Q. Already in the course of my questioning you have
       mentioned the Officer Working Party and their function
       and the Police and their function. Did you ever define
       the line of responsibility between yourself and those
       parties? - A. I never saw any need to define my
       responsibility towards the Police.

    Q. At 2.2, go down to the last little black spot:

           "to reach definite conclusions and to state
           these clearly in a written report..."

       Does your annual Certificate qualify as a definite
       conclusion? - A. Yes, I reached definite conclusions
       and stated them in a written report.

    Q. 2.3 "Responsibilities":

           "No engineer can avoid responsibility for his
           actions. However, if the appraising engineer
           states his opinions and advice clearly, gives
           the bases for these and can be seen to have
           acted wholly objectively and prudently, he
           should have no need to fear legal action
           against him even if his opinions are later
           proved wrong or his advice unsound."

       Over the page to page 9, a little way down the page
       under "Duty of care" does the publication include
       this —




H
                                                                  19

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


            THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I am a bit worried about
       this because firstly I am not sure where it is getting
B      us and secondly I am concerned that we do not want to
       get into a position where we are dealing with the legal
       argumentas to what negligence is or is   not with this
       witness.   What we want to find out is how he saw his
       function in relation to the Club.

            MR. PAYNE: Quite. I was rather hopeful that this
       document might indicate the nature of the function.

            THE CORONER: That is why I have not given it a C
       number, if I can put it like that, but have allowed you
       to put various bits of out it because I am reluctant to
       let it proceed to the Jury because, in fact, it
       contains what is prima facie statements of law.
       Whether they are right or not we do not know.   I am not
       saying that they are wrong.  I am just saying I would
       not want them to necessarily consider these as the law
       on a particular topic.
D           MR. PAYNE: Sir, you will have noticed already in
       quite a brief part of this cross-examination Dr.
       Eastwood has referred already to the functions of the
       Officer Working Party and to the functions of the
       Police. It may be helpful to the Jury in considering
       how this disaster occurred and what the involvement of
       Dr. Eastwood was if they are able to have some picture
       exactly of what his duties were. That is the purpose
       of it.

           THE CORONER: That I think you are right on. You
      want to sort out the inter-relationship of the parties.

           MR. PAYNE:   Quite.

           THE CORONER: I do not object to that. It is just
      that I am a bit concerned that we do not go through the
      legal definitions.

           MR. PAYNE:   No.

    Q. Perhaps I can take this paragraph shortly, Dr.
       Eastwood? If you look under "Duty of care" and go to
       the second paragraph which says:

          "The practice of a profession, art or calling
          which, by its nature, demands some special
          skill, ability and experience..."

      A. Excuse me, Mr. Payne, which paragraph are we looking
      at now?




H
                                                                  20

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


    Q. The second paragraph under ’Duty of care", Dr.
       Eastwood? - A. Right, yes.
B   Q. Which says:

           "The practice of a profession, art or calling
           which, by its nature, demands some special
           skill, ability or experience, carried with it a
           duty to exercise, to a reasonable extent, the
           amount of skill, ability and experience which
           that practice demands."

       I take it you agree with that statement, do you?

           MR. TOULSON: Sir, with the greatest respect,
      whether the witness does or whether he does not is a
      matter of complete irrelevance. That is a pure
      question of law and indeed if one reads the foot of the
      paragraph one has the final paragraph:

           "Further information can be found in Halsbury's
D          Laws of England: Negligence (Vol. 28)..."

           MR. PAYNE:   Sir, in answer...

           MR. TOULSON: I am sorry, the point you have
      taken, sir, is quite right. I have not interrupted
      until now to see whether this was leading up to a
      question which has any relevance to this Inquest.
      Clearly, having not interrupted, when I now hear the
      question which is whether "you agree or disagree with
      that as a proposition of law", that really is an
      inadmissible question.

           THE CORONER: I agree with you, Mr. Toulson, that
      is the point I was trying to make. I do not think it
      matters very much what the proposition of law is or
      whether or not he agrees with it. What we want to find
      out, that I am with you, if I may put it like that, you
      are quite justified in wanting to explore what his
      relationship was with the various parties.  I do not
      object to that.

           MR. PAYNE: Sir, what I have in mind, and I am
      trying to do it in a coherent manner so that this does
      not become a mess which it easily could because it is a
      huge landscape ahead of us, what I am going to do is
      come to the particular paragraphs in the Green Guide
      which may be of interest to the Jury and also to the
      terms in which the annual Certificates by Dr. Eastwood
      were expressed. The Jury will want to know what to
      make of this. They will want to know whether the
      Certificates mean what they appear to say or whether




H
                                                                    21

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


         any qualifications which Dr. Eastwood adds to them are
         qualifications which they can accept. In order to know
B        what the Jury's approach should be I thought it might
         be helpful for them to  see what his own view was before
         this all happened in 1980 about what the functions of
         an appraising engineer actually were.

              THE CORONER: Dr.   Eastwood has not even accepted
         the principle that he is an appraising engineer as yet.
         He has said he is an engineer and an engineer appointed
         under the terms of the Safety Certificate and in so far
         as this document matches that he is prepared to stand
         by it but in so far as it exceeds it he is not. So in
         a sense it will be for the Jury at the end of the day
         to decide in the light of all the evidence what they
         think Dr. Eastwood's function in relation to the
         parties was.

              MR. PAYNE: Sir, of course, I do accept your
         ruling but it would be helpful for the Jury to know
         what an engineer has to do and what his approach ought
D        to be. I took it — and I did not spend time on it —
         that Dr. Eastwood's reluctance to accept the word
         'appraising' was a quibble and I did not think it was
         useful to spend time arguing about a quibble but if I
         need to do that then, of course, I will.

              THE CORONER: What I think you need to do — and
         forgive me because I do not want to sound rude and I am
         sure you will not take it in that way — is to find out
         how he viewed his function (a) in relation to the Club,
         what relationship did he stand to the Club and (b) what
         relationship, if any, did he have to the Officer
         Working Party? Those are the only two parties which
         are, I think, relevant for this purpose. You could, if
         you wish, explore what his relationship to what the
         general public were but I do not think it will get us
         fairly much further forward.

              MR. PAYNE: Just before I leave this document I
         will need to go back to the use of the word
         'appraisal'.

              THE CORONER:   Yes, by all means.

    Q.        MR. PAYNE: Dr. Eastwood, you heard what I said to
         the Coroner just now. I skated over your point about
         appraisal because it seemed certainly to me that it is
         was not one worth spending time on. It is I suggest to
         you absolutely obvious that your function did include
         appraisal meaning, having a look at the ground,
         carrying out tests for the Certificates and preparing
         yourself to give the Certificate that the ground




H
                                                                    22

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


         complied with the requirement of the Safety
         Certificate? - A. It did not include appraisal, Mr.
B        Payne.
    Q. What does the word ’appraisal’ mean? - A. Much wider
       than inspect. The requirement of the guide, sorry of
       the Safety Certificate, it requires a chartered
       engineer, structural or civil.

    Q. I will just interrupt you. Inspection then is an
       aspect of appraisal, is it? - A. That is so.
C   Q. Appraisal, therefore, is a wide word, is it not? - A.
       Yes.
    Q.   Which obviously covers inspection? - A. It is wider and
         I do not see why you wish to widen the argument.   There
         are requirements in the Safety Certificate and I did
         not go beyond those requirements.

    Q. When you wrote this document in July 1980, or had a big
D      hand in writing it, if someone had said to you at that
       time, "Is this document intended to be of any use for
       an engineer who is appointed under a Safety Certificate
       to provide annual Certificates of Safety? Is it
       intended to be of any use?", what would your answer
       have been? - A. The words 'any use’ I would not use.
       What I would have said is that it is something
       completely different. Sir, I wonder if it will help if
       I could, just for a moment? I interpret, as you will
E      have gathered, this requirement of the Safety
       Certificate that I would go round the ground and look
       at the various structures for, in effect, items of
       maintenance. Everything that was done to this ground
       by way of changes was usually instigated anyway by the
       Working Party but after we had been asked to prepare
       some drawings for some change on the ground they were
       sent to the Working Party. We then got formal approval
       from the Licensing Authority and month by month through
F      the year that was happening. I did not regard it as
       being a requirement of the Safety Certificate that I go
       through all that again. The whole object was to make
       sure that the ground was being properly maintained.
       That if a crack occurred in concrete, as I reported
       from time to time, that that should be recorded, that
       if there were signs of excessive rusting here and there
       that that should be recorded. Now, sir, the new Safety
       Certificate under which the Club is presently operating
G      makes all this completely clear and my Counsel does not
       know about it, sir, because he has not been allowed to
       speak to me over the weekend but....




H
                                             W. EASTWOOD


     THE CORONER:    Just a moment - we cannot hear you
because you have turned away from your microphone.
A. I am   sorry.  My Counsel does not know about this. I
am having to introduce it without him knowing, butover
the weekend seeing that this question might come I have
brought with me the new Safety Certificate and I have
copies which can be distributed so you will see that it
is made  absolutely clear it is just inspection and
testing that is required in this Certificate.

Before we do that, if we do it at all, may I just ask
you one further question? Are you saying in effect
that once the Ground was licensed under the Safety
Certificate in 1979, or whenever it was, the
assumption, if I can use that word, was that the
appraisal had been done, that the Ground satisfied the
criteria as laid down at that time, and that your
activity was to ensure that (a) nothing, maintenance in
the terms which you have used, and presumably
substantial changes which might require alterations to
the Safety Certificate if you were instructed to deal
with that? - A. Yes.

Would that be right? - A. Would you repeat that, sir?

I will try. What I said was three things, (1), that
when the Safety Certificate was issued in 1979 after
initial reports, consultation by the Working Party and
formal documentation, that you then took it that the
parties that mattered were satisfied that the Ground
was reasonably safe for its purpose? - A. Yes.

That from that date onward, assuming that there were no
substantial changes in structure, all that was required
for you to do under the Safety Certificate was to
inspect? - A. Yes.

Confirm that things were in order, the concrete was not
broken etcetera? - a. Yes.

But that it was not a requirement for you to go round
the Ground and reappraise it with a view to deciding
whether or not the Safety Certificate ought to be in
force or amended? - A. That is very well put, sir.

That is, in fact, what you are trying to tell us, isn't
it? - A. That is what I am trying to tell you, sir, and
this becomes very apparent from the new, present Safety
Certificate for the Ground, of which I have a copy
here, and extracts which might be passed round.

Well we will see.   Let us see what Mr. Payne has to
say.
                                                                 24

                                                       W. EASTWOOD


     Q»        MR. PAYNE:   Have   you got a copy of the Green
          Guide in front of you? - A. Yes.

B    Q» Could you turn to chapter 1, paragraph 1? It starts
         of, "Scope and Status of the Guide". Do you see that?
         - A. Yes.

     Q.        "This booklet provides guidance to ground
               management, local authorities and technical
               specialists such as engineers on measures for
               improving spectator safety at existing sports
               grounds.  It is a voluntary code and has no legal
               force."

          Are you a technical specialist, such as an engineer? -
          A. Yes. I am only an engineer.

     Q. So did you take it that this booklet provided guidance
        to you on measures for improving spectator safety at
        the football ground? - A. Yes.

]}   Q. I would like you just to see how this introduction
         develops.  Paragraph 2 is "Background to the Guide";
         Chapter 3 is "Historical context"; paragraphs 4, 5, 6,
         7, 8, 9 and 10 are, "General principles of the Guide" -
         do you see that? - A. Yes.

     Q. Now we come to, "Using the Guide".    Paragraph 11 is
        introductory, and now we come to paragraph 12. Have
        you read this paragraph, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Many times
        I would think.   I have not got to it yet.

     Q. I am going to ask you whether you thought this had any
        application to your function as the appointed engineer
        under the Safety Certificate? - A. I have not read it
        through just now.

     Q. Let's read it now:

              "Although some of the safety standards are likely
              to apply to all sports grounds, however many
              spectators are present, it is nonetheless
              important to relate the Guide to the needs of the
              individual ground.  It should be borne in mind
              that in most circumstances, the required safety
              standard to be attained will often relate to the
              maximum number of spectators who are liable to be
              admitted to the ground (or parts of it).   For
              example, a large football stadium with a maximum
              spectator capacity of tens of thousands is liable
              to pose significant crowd pressure risks.   To
              accommodate safely a maximum crowd at such a
              ground might entail substantial remedial work;
              alternatively, consideration might be given to




H
                                             W. EASTWOOD


     accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
     properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
     without having to incur costly repairs or
     alterations.  The first step, therefore, is to
     assess, using the Guide's criteria, how many
     people can be safely accommodated in the different
     sections of the ground given the existing
     condition of the ground (ie determine a safe
     spectator capacity).  This should be done with a
     proper, detailed plan, preferably drawn to scale
     (1:200) of the ground (see Chapter 16)."

Paragraph 13:

     "It follows that in general in a ground where it
     is proposed to retain a high spectator capacity,
     the measures needed to be taken to accommodate
     safely such large crowds are potentially more
     extensive."

What is the answer to the question about whether
paragraphs 12 and 13 fell within the scope of your duty
to provide the annual Safety Certificate? - A. I had
duties in addition to the Safety Certificate.  The
Safety Certificate is quite precise in what it wants.
I was not taking into account in writing the Safety
Certificate ....

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Eastwood, can you move towards
the microphone? - A. I am sorry, yes.  So these are two
completely unrelated things.  One is much larger and
wider and greater than the other.  Now, some bits of
the Green Guide are clearly part of this inspection
procedure, but the whole of this Green Guide is not to
form part of my terms of reference for carrying out
this simple maintenance inspection, which is clearly
defined in the newer Safety Certificate.

     MR. PAYNE:   Did you think that your duties
included having any regard to the first step? - A. The
first step being what?

In paragraph 12 on page 8, about halfway down that part
of the paragraph:

     "The first step, therefore, is to assess, using
     the Guide's criteria, how many people can be
     safely accommodated in the different sections of
     the ground given the existing condition of the
     ground (ie determine a safe spectator capacity)."

and so on. - A. That was not part of the duties for
this inspection.   I did, in fact, assist in what you
are reading there:
                                                           26

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


        "The first step, therefore, is to assess

   The first thing that I did when appointed was to write
   ray report, which was presented to the licensing
   authority on 17th January, 1979.   The opening paragraph
   in that report does not saying I am making
   recommendations, it says I am giving my thoughts.

Q. Can you help the Jury on this question .... - A. No,
   please don't interrupt.

Q. I am so sorry, Dr. Eastwood. - A. I gave my thoughts on
   the numbers of spectators in the various parts of the
   ground.  These were submitted to the Working Party, who
   considered them over many months, at a total of, I
   think, eight meetings, and at the end they changed my
   figures.  I had recommended for Spion Kop 16,000
   spectators.  They increased it to 16,850.  They did not
   tell me why but they were very experienced people and
   it was right and appropriate that they should take
   their own decision.  For the seated accommodation I
   recommended 24,000.  For various fire safety reasons
   that was downgraded by 300 or 400.  It so happened that
   they accepted the figure that I had suggested in my
   thoughts for the Leppings Lane end, but the outcome was
   that they actually put up the capacity compared with
   that which I had suggested.

   Now, they had taken that decision.  It was not for me,
   seven months later, to write them an essay in my
   Certificate saying that they had taken wrong decisions.
   That was not the point of my inspection.   It was to
   look to see if there were cracks in the concrete and
   rust on the steel and things of that kind.

Q. Dr. Eastwood, is the answer to my question, "Yes"? - A.
   I have forgotten your question.

Q. What I was asking you was whether it   fell within your
   duties to consider the first step? -   A. Not as part of
   this Certificate which I issued, the   inspection of the
   state of maintenance of the ground -   the answer is no.

Q. I thought in the course of your answer just now you
   were explaining that you did, in fact, calculate some
   figures for the capacity which were then not accepted
   by other authorities? - A. Yes, "the first step".   You
   have pointed out those words to me, "the first step".
   Did I carry that out? Yes, I did.   The very first step
   that I took was to carry out that calculation.

Q. Okay, well we have got the answer then, the answer is
   yes.^ Therefore, just read on after "The first step
                                              W. EASTWOOD


     "... is to assess, using the Guide's criteria, how
     many people can safely be accommodated in the
     different sections of the ground given the
     existing condition of the ground ..."

Now, when you carried out your first step, of course,
the existing conditions of the ground were that it was
a completely open terrace, wasn t it? - A. My
recommendations were not on the basis -- by a
completely open terrace you mean no pens? - A. That is
right.

Yes. - A. Yes.

That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, that is so.

So you then carried out the first step, and it ran into
a bit of trouble as you have described? - A. Yes.
Trouble is not the word.

When the configuration of the terrace was changed by
the introduction of the radial fences, did you carry
out the first step again? - A. No. There is no
obligation on me to do that at all.  It is for the
licensing authority which required those fences to be
put in. They were not my suggestion, I merely acted as
the engineer who put in appropriate structures, to
match what was required by the licensing authority.

Who in your opinion, Dr. Eastwood, after the radial
fences had been put in, had the duty to assess how many
people can be safely accommodated within the new pens?
- A. The issuers of the Safety Certificate.

     THE   CORONER:   Mr. Payne, can I stop you for one
minute?    I think we have got to stop for a few minutes,
10 or 15   minutes, not too long, and then we will carry
on until   1 o'clock.

                  (Short Adjournment)
                                                     28




             (In the absence of the jury)

      THE CORONER: Before I call the jury in there is
something I want to say.

      Mr. Payne, I will address you because you happen
to be in the process of your cross-examination but it
applies generally.
      I am concerned, if I may put it like that, about
the format of the cross-examination because the thing
that I perceive that we are doing or that we are about
to do, is to sort out the civil aspects of this case
whereas what we are supposed to be sorting out is who,
when, where and how 95 people came by their deaths, so
I am going to, I am afraid, take a much firmer line I
think on the format of the questioning in relation to
Dr. Eastwood.
      I have no objection, as I tried to indicate to you
earlier and this applies to all, to establishing how
he saw his relationship with A, B and C or however many,
well there are only A and B I think, parties. B, how
he viewed his responsibility with for example the point
that you were just coming to, namely the putting on of
the radial fences.
      I have tried to cover those matters myself but I
have no objection to you probing, but in the final
analysis we have got to accept what he says. It is up
to the jury to decide whether they think that makes sense.

      I am not willing to spend an endless amount of time,
because that is what I think we are in danger of doing,
in dealing with the minutiae which in the final analysis
really go to the issue of whether or not there is a
shared civil responsibility. I am not interested in
that in the least bit. The only reason why I am
interested in the civil side, if you like, negligence,
is simply to say to what extent, if at all, it opens
the door to the question of recklessness and that I
think is all that we can do.
      MR. PAYNE:     Would you be kind enough to hear me
for a minute?

      THE CORONER:     Of course.

      MR. PAYNE: One of the difficulties is this: from
the line of questioning which was advanced on behalf of
Dr. Eastwood, particularly when Mr. Lock was giving
evidence, it has been made quite clear and it has
already happened unfortunately, that Dr. Eastwood has
regarded himself through his Counsel as doing more
than merely assisting the Court about his own functions
                                                    29




, and his own responsibilities but has gone over into
  making a positive case against the Police.

       There is no question that a vigorous attempt was
 made through Mr. Lock on behalf of Dr. Eastwood to lay
 the foundations for a case to blame the Police entirely
 for failing to control the overcrowding.

       You will remember the piece of cross-examination
 that I put to Dr. Nicholson for his comment inviting him
 to join the group and although he said it was more or
 less outside his expertise he qualified his answer, he
 went so far as to say that the engineer should have
 some input.
       Well now it is not just Counsel who has done this.
 When I was asking Dr. Eastwood at the beginning of his
 evidence some quite innocuous questions about what was
 foreseeable before the disaster he introduced not
 relevant to the question, he subsequently withdrew it
 and he was able to answer the question exactly about
 whether a risk could be foreseen, he introduced into
 his answer a gratuitous piece of opinion blaming the
 Police.
       Now this is something which I can't just ignore.
 The Police can't ignore this because in the end the
 jury, subject to your direction and what verdicts you
 leave to them, may find themselves, and I am not pre­
 empting what your decision will be, but they may find
 themselves having to consider whether the Police were
 reckless and whether there was an obvious and serious
 risk to the Police and whether the Police were indifferent
 to that risk.

       Now Dr. Eastwood regrettably, and I must say I
 very much regret it because it is quite noticeable that
 the Club in the course of their evidence confined their
 evidence to dealing with their own contribution and what
 they can say, very largely factually, and have not tried
 to advance any sort of positive case.

       Now that is not the case with Dr. Eastwood and it
 is very very difficult for me just to accept what is said
 and to leave it at that without going, I regret to say,
 slightly on the offensive to show that quite contrary
 - and you appreciate the point, I need not elaborate it
 - but quite contrary to the point that is being made
 by Mr. Toulson and then supported gratuitously by
 Dr. Eastwood.

       He had a very substantial input and had the
 obligation to make a very substantial input into the
 assessment of safe capacity and the means of control
 of capacity and accordingly it is by no means only
                                                    30




the fault of the Police in letting the people in, so that
is regrettably the reason for this line and I did not
see any other way .... I mean I would be very happy
just to leave it and pass over it but I don't see I
can just ignore that, apart from the fact that
regrettably I think the damage has already been done
in terms of making a positive case but I quite anticipated
that when it comes to Mr. Toulson examining his client,
and he will be last to go, we may then be hearing more
about it. I don't know whether that is the case, but
whether that is so or not the case has already been
voluntarily made. Now that is the reason for it.

      THE CORONER: I think you do have a point that
Dr. Eastwood did add a point to one of his replies
which was certainly beyond the scope of your question.
It may well have been beyond his knowledge in the sense
of an expert. I think you are right in that regard.
I am not denying that point, but nevertheless I still
feel it is exceedingly important that we confine
ourselves and what I will do, because I think that you
do have a point on that, I will just see if Mr. Toulson
has got anything else to say on this, but what I will
do, I will make it clear to Dr. Eastwood that I do not
wish him to propound explanations as to what the causes
were but to confine his answers to the issue of his
responsibility in the structural engineering capacity
in which he was working and within the terms of reference
under which he was instructed, if that will help you.
I think it will actually, I hope it will.

      MR. PAYNE: I am grateful for that. I would
be grateful if that could be done in the presence of
the jury.
      THE CORONER: Oh yes, I will do that, but I just
wanted to do this discussion without them because it
is a lot easier for us to talk straight down the line,
so to speak.
      MR. PAYNE: May I mention one further point then
in this discussion and that is looking ahead to sub­
missions of law and your direction to the jury and trying
to grapple, as we all are, as we know you are and it is
not an easy problem at all, with what directions should
be given and indeed what verdicts should be left to
the jury as a matter of law.
      Now it is very difficult to face up to what has
to go into the direction without seriously addressing
the question of causation and the only sensible way to
do that is to draw up a list of things which are
capable of being causes and then to see which causes
could be treated as substantive. That is the way it
seemed to shake out to us.
                                                         31




      Now then if this is the way in which eventually
the jury find themselves considering the case, which
seems quite likely, then I am trying to look ahead to
the way in which the directions can be given to the jury
as to how they can approach the evidence and if they
don't have before them in plain terms the duty of the
engineer to assess and give advice and guidance and to
express his opinion about the need to work out capacity
and to provide means of control, if they don't have
that plainly before them then certainly we feel for the
Police that the Police will be being put in an unfair
position.
      That is the reason that I am exploring this and
I would be grateful if I might just take this matter
further with Dr. Eastwood because this is about the
only opportunity that we will have to assist the jury
to form the view which we think is the true view, that
the underlying cause of the disaster is system, it is
the lack of a system of working out the capacity of
the individual pens and providing a means to control
capacity. That is the underlying cause.

      There are other causes and we are not turning
away from that and one of the other causes can be
aimed at the Police for failing to consider in the
agony of the moment the consequences of opening the
gates. I am not ducking that and I am not saying the
whole cause is on the system, but it is a significant
cause, in our submission, and if I can't explore it
with Dr. Eastwood then we are anxious that the jury
won't get the point.
      THE CORONER: Yes, I think I have already tried
to say to you that I do not object to you exploring
with Dr. Eastood (a) his understanding what the effect
of the penning was; (b) how he saw his duty in relation
to that. I think that is perfectly proper that you
should do that, I don't see any objection to that and
what he conceived to be his relationship with the Club
principally in relation to that matter.

      He has given you an answer regarding the Safety
Certificate, paragraph 24, which is his answer on that
point. You tested him and he has stuck by it. Whether
he is right or not or whether the jury are prepared to
accept that interpretation of that paragraph is a matter
for them in the end and also no doubtthey will consider
his answers in the light of what they have heard, but
I think we can get to these points much more directly
and if you like almost more pointedly, if you wish,
and I think it is essential that we do it and that we
don't stray too far round the outer edges otherwise I
will be in trouble and so will all of us in this.
                                                        32




      Mr. Toulson, did you want to say something?   I
should have looked at you first.

      MR. TOULSONs No, sir I am grateful to you for
raising the matter because it was causing me concern and
I was considering what was the appropriate way to raise
it.
      Three pointss one, I would respectfully concur
in all that you have said that it is important that this
Inquest be not turned into an attempt to establish issues
of civil liability.
      Secondly, insofar as Dr. Eastwood may as it were
have thrown down the gauntlet by answers he gave I under­
stand my friend's point and I have a degree of sympathy
with him and would be entirely happy for you to say to
Dr. Eastwood whether in the absence or in-front of the
jury or both that it is very important that this be
kept to its proper confines and that he is not to go
beyond the limits of the question and in particular he
is not to make remarks which might be seen to indicate
a view as to where any responsibility lay. I would wholly
support and be happy with that.

      The third point is this: insofar as it is thought
that I may have been responsible for introducing matters, and
reference was made to my cross-examination of Mr. Lock,
the position is simply this: as my friend Mr. Payne has
indicated to you very clearly a moment ago he who has
been seeking and is seeking to make the case that the
whole cause lay in an inherently unsafe system in that
a system which did not have an individual count of each
person into each of those pens effectively could not be
worked safely and he lay the ground for that in his, as
some may think effective cross-examination of Mr. Lock
on that very point.
      Now I followed on because of course if that line
is being advanced as a positive case the step to the
engineer's door is a very short one and my questions
were directed not to seek to put blame on the Club or
the Police or any other individual, but simply to
address the question whether it is right that a system
which worked in the way that Mr. Lock described, was a
fundamentally unsafe system and I did not seek to put
questions as to who should have operated or who should
have implemented it, my questions were merely directed
to the question whether he found that in practice to
be an unsafe system.



                         Now I understand
                                                        33

                                             W. EASTWOOD


 , n ^ . No? 1 understand that in these matters it may be
  ifficult to draw the line. I do not, with respect,
 believe that I overstepped the line. If it be thought
 that I have done, then I am entirely happy that
 anything corrective should be said in a more general
 way by you, sir, to the Jury, reminding them that
 those wider issues as to civil liability are not in
 issue, but I would respectfully concur and adopt and
 submit that it is very important that we do keep
 ourselves to a tighter framework than we are in danger
 of entering, otherwise we shall become both the Taylor
 Inquiry and the civil proceedings rolled into one.

      THE CORONER: That is what concerns me somewhat.
 Does anybody else want to say anything before I bring
 the Jury back and Dr. Eastwood?

     MR. TOULSON: As the Jury are coming back, can I
indicate that I have no intention, and it follows from
the spirit of what I have already said, in putting
such questions I may have at the end in trying to
point the finger elsewhere. Obviously if and to the
extent that criticisms are made of Dr. Eastwood which,
having been canvassed publicly, require an answer I
will seek to elicit it, but strictly within the
parameters I have indicated.

      THE CORONER: I think you will be pleased to hear
that, Mr. Payne. Mr. Maxwell, I know that I have not
asked you, but I will come back to you. We will
proceed that way and then return to you, if that is
okay.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Thank you very much.

   (The Jury and the witness returned to Court)

     THE CORONER: Ladies and gentlemen, and Dr.
Eastwood as well, we have had a few minutes discussion
because I was somewhat concerned that we were
beginning to stray too far away from what we really
need to do, and I have spoken to the lawyers and we
are trying to home in on matters which are at issue,
because there is a danger that we start thinking about
t«e civil aspects and how do we share the
responsibility in minute detail and we are not really
interested in that.                                  7

     Dr. Eastwood, if I may just say this. To a
certain extent the line of questioning arose, or
certainly was contributed to, by at least one of your
replies because you did, in fact, give the answer ~ I
have forgotten what the question was now - and then
you went on to give a cause as to why the particular
                                                           34

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


     event had happened, and I am not going to repeat that.
     That is strictly, of course, a matter for the Jury.
     They have got to work that out. So what I am going to
     ask you to do, if you would be so kind because it
     would help the lawyers as well, is to restrict your
     answers to as near as possible (a) the question and
     (b) the engineering/structural matters with which you
     are concerned, because obviously if we stray with the
     answer then we stray with the next question.

           I do not want to sound critical and I hope you
     will forgive me if I do sound critical, but I am very,
     very anxious that we do not spend an inordinate amount
     of time on matters which, in the end, will not assist
     the Jury.

          THE WITNESS:   A very kindly but well deserved
     admonition, sir.

           THE CORONER: I do not wish it to be even phrased
     like that. Mr. Payne?

Q*        MR. PAYNE:   Can we go on. We have looked at
     paragraph 12 in the Green Guide and you have given
     your assistance to the Jury as to whose responsibility
     that was, and I want you to now look at the chapter
     which is referred to, Chapter 16 in the Green Guide,
     please, which is at page 64, just to make sure that we
     understand whose responsibility this was. - A. Would
     you excuse me, Mr. Payne, for a second?

          THE CORONER: Are you looking for the Green Guide?
     - A. I am looking for my copy, sir, because it is
     annotated and I would prefer to use it if I can find
     it. I have it now*

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Chapter 16, page 64* This is the
     chapter referred to in paragraph 12 about assessing
     how many people can be safely accommodated, and we do
     not need to go through it because the Jury are
     extremely familiar with the fact that it includes
     various formulae for working out what is the capacity
     for various parts of the ground. Are you familiar
     with this chapter. Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes.
Q. You are? - A. Yes.

Q. Whose responsibility was it, please, to see that the
    ground complied with the estimation of safe ground
    capacity in Chapter 16? - A. The Licensing Authority*

Q.   So that goes, in your opinion, with paragraph 12, same
     answer? - A. Which bit of paragraph 12?
                                           W. EASTWOOD


The important part that we were looking at just before
the adjournment, "The first step is to assess how many
people can be safely accommodated".   You told the
Jury that your view was that that is Local Authority,
and likewise Chapter 16 is Local Authority? - A. That
is so.

Now 101, please:

     "A ground should be divided into sections to
     prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
     spectators. Each section of a ground has its own
     limit of safe capacity (see Chapter 16), and a
     major migration can cause dangerous overcrowding.
     Each section of the ground, for example, each end
     or side, should be self-contained with its own
     entrances, exits and toilet/refreshment
     facilities."

Within whose field of responsibility did this
paragraph lie in your view, Dr. Eastwood? - A. It is
for the Licensing Authority to decide whether a ground
satisfies this Guide, with the provisos of reasonable
safety, etc.

The Licensing Authority again for 101, is it? - A. Not
solely Licensing Authority.

Did you have any responsibility for it? - A.
"Responsibility" again is a difficult word because it
can have various meanings. The ultimate
responsibility is the Licensing Authority, but I did
see to it that each end or side of this ground did
have its own entrances/exits and toilets, etc.

Did you do that for pens 3 and 4? - A. No, because
this paragraph does not apply to pens 3 and 4.

While you are dealing with this topic, can you open up
the black folder at 268. Can you help the Jury,
please, Dr. Eastwood from your point of view as to
whether any of these paragraphs that we have just been
looking at, 12, Chapter 16 or 101, applies to the pens
that we can see in 268? - A. We have just been
considering paragraph 101, Mr. Payne, and I just said
to you that it does not.

So 101 does not apply? - A. Can I help by telling you
which one does, because this will help, I think. The
important words in 101 are those which define a
section of the ground, and it is the third sentence,
sir, "Each section of the ground, for example, each
end or side...."   Now if you will turn to paragraph
206, this is the one which applies to pens 3 and 4.
                                                             36

                                                   W. EASTWOOD

 Q.    Paragraph 206 does? - A. Yes.

 Q.     Page 59. - A. This is the fault of   the Guide, Mr.
       Payne, in that they use the word "section" in each
       one, but they re-define "section".     If we read the
       sentencewhich begins half-way through paragraph 206.
       it says, "Each section should ideally be self-
       contained and should be serviced by its own
       entrance/exits, refreshment facilities and toilets (in
       Keeping with the general principles of general ground
       division           Now that part, in my view, of 206 is
       the one which applies to pens 3 and 4. Paragraph 101,
       which says something different, does not say "ideally"
       it says "should". It then says, "for example, each
       end or side". Now each end and side of this ground
       had its own separate system of entrances/exits,
       toilets, etc. So it fully satisfies 101. Ideally,
       according to 206, there should be certain facilities
       in pens 3 and 4 which were not there.

Q.     Just answer the question. I will come to 206 in a
       minute, but at the moment the question is whether any
       of the paragraphs that we have been looking at - 12,
       101 and Chapter 16 - whether any of those applies to
       the pens in our photograph 268? - A. The words "any of
       those , please would you rephrase the question?

           MR. TOULSON: I just wonder whether this is about
      to become controversial and stray beyond the guideline
      you have indicated because the witness, rightly or
      wrongly, has said that he regards 101 as applying to
      the whole terrace and the sub-divisions as ones which
      should be ideally self-contained or not. That is his
      interpretation. It may be right, it may be wrong.
      The Guide may be ambiguous. Does it assist us to
      develop it further?

         MR. PAYNE: I am perfectly happy with that
    answer.
Q. You have given an answer for 101, Dr. Eastwood, that
    101 does not apply to our C269. Now what about 12,
         first step       paragraph? Does that apply to
    C-68 in your view? - A. Yes. I have no means of
    knowing whether the Working Party in requiring the
    various pens to be constructed had done as it says in
    12, but it was their duty, they were requiring the
    changes. It was their duty, the first step should be
    to consider the capacity, and they may have done that.

Q.    To assess, very well, that is very helpful. You have
       given the answer. The Officer Working Party should
       have applied the first step to work out how many
      people could ----
                                              W. EASTWOOD


 t        ^^ELL:     May I interrupt now because the
JU>cal Authority are now disadvantaged by such replies.
  j f1S no^ a raa*-ter that is of concern to this Jury,
and for the same reasons that Mr. Payne felt
disadvantaged by what had happened earlier in respect
of replies that concerned the Police, the matter is
now being opened up so far as the Local Authority's
responsibility is concerned, and it     is anarea where
you told us you did not want to go.

      THE CORONER: Not entirely, I think, Mr. Maxwell.
 If the witness were to go on to say, "And what is more
 I think it is entirely the fault ofthe Local
 Authority that this disaster has happened”, then I
 would be with you entirely because that is it
 precisely, but if the witness said, "My understanding
 of the Green Guide in relation to the pens is that
 this was a request which was initiated by not the
 Local Authority, by the Officers Workin® Party", I
 think is what you are saying, "then it is the
initiator of that request, particularly if it happens
also to be the licensing advisory body and the
Licensing Authority, who must be satisfied that the
criteria had been met. I was simply a tool." That is
how I understand his evidence on that matter. Whether
he is right or wrong, that is another matter, but he
is entitled, I think, to say that because he is not,
in fact, saying responsibility lies with anybody. He
is simply saying, "The responsibility was not with me
m these circumstances". That is how I have
understood his reply. Of course, I may have
misunderstood his reply, but that is the way I have
understood both the questioning and the reply on that.

     MR. MAXWELL: The question would be, sir, to what
issue this Jury have to consider is such evidence
relevant? The issue that matters is how the deceased
came by their death. This witness's interpretation of
a guide, his understanding of what it means, will not
be relevant to that issue.




                              /THE CORONER:   To a.
                                                                    38

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


               THE CORONER: To a limited extent but I do not go
          with you the whole way on that. I think it is a
jj        relevant consideration to be able to work out how, if
          you like, the whole principle on which I proceeded is
          in order to understand how it happened we have to
          understand the inter-relationship of the various
          parties within the limits which I am trying to maintain
          but I think there is a relevance if you are assessing,
          say, the responsibility of party A, whichever party
          that may be, it is right and proper when you look at
          that to also look to see how that responsibility has
          been affected by the activities, inactivities or
          otherwise, of parties B, C, D and E, or however many
          you wish. So I think there is a relevance there. What
          would be inappropriate would be for the witness to draw
          the conclusion. He can say, "I did not consider that
          to be my responsibility" and I think he can say, as he
          has done, "and the reason why I say this is because I
          was not the initiator" but I do not think you can go on
          much further than that. I go with you thus far but not
          all the way.
     Q.        MR. PAYNE: Dr. Eastwood, what we have in relation
          to Pens 3 and 4 illustrated on 268, just to summarise
          the position, as I understand it, your view was that
          paragraph 12 did apply, that is the first step about
          assessment of capacity, and that it was up to the
          Officer Working Party and City Council to take that
          step? - A. No, sir. You see, this guide which you have
          given to me was not in existence when those pens were
          created.
     Q. But when they were, Dr. Eastwood. You are not giving
        the answer to the Jury that once the layout has been
        made then if a subsequent guide comes in, in
        comprehensive terms like this, it can just be ignored
        because the layout is already there and so that the
        guide has not got any application to it? - A. No, Mr.
        Payne. You were inferring that this guide said that
        when those pens were created what this guide said
        should have been taken into account. This guide was
        not existence and so my answer was no and I gave the
        reason, because it was not in existence.

     Q. We are just wasting time, are we not? This guide was
        brought in, as we know, in 1986 as an update of the
        previous guide which it very closely followed and after
        1986 it was the duty among others, looking at paragraph
        1, of technical specialists, ground management and
        local authorities to put this guide into effect, was it
        not? - A. That does not alter my answer and part of
        what you said then is not correct but I would not want




H
                                                                   39

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


         to go down the road. They do not closely follow in
         this particularly regard, the two guides.
B   Q. Dr. Eastwood, have this guide was brought into effect
       do you or do you not accept that after it was brought
       into effect then its provisions did apply to the
       ground? - A. That is so.

    Q. What is wrong with my summary of what you have said in
       evidence? Firstly you are saying, as I understand it,
       that paragraph 12 does apply to Pens 3 and 4 in your
       view and secondly the responsibility for paragraph 12
       applies to the Officer Working Party and City Council.

              MR. TOULSON: Before there is an answer to that,
         if it be profitable to pursue this at all which in my
         submission be no, if it is helpful to get the witness'
         view then I think my friend ought to ask which bit he
         is speaking about in paragraph 12. If he is asking the
         question, for instance, based on sentence 1, do you
         agree that the guide ought to be related to the needs
D        of the individual ground? Then I do not suppose it is
         a very controversial question.  If he is asking about
         the final sentence, "do you agree that at the time when
         radials were introduced somebody ought to have given
         attention to the individual numbers which could be
         accommodated in which particular pen and, if so, who
         was it?" then that is a very different question and if
         it is a relevant question, if it is a question that an
         answer is wanted to, then at least the question ought
         to be put in that form but with the greatest respect,
         simply to put a broad question, "did paragraph 12 apply
         and, if so, whose responsibility was it for imposing
         it?" really does not take us anywhere.

              THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Payne was aiming at the
         last sentence.

              MR. PAYNE: Quite. I am only talking about the
         first step. I thought that was perfectly clear.   I
         hope the Jury understood that if nobody else did.

              THE CORONER:   I understood it.

    Q.        MR. PAYNE: We are talking about the first step,
         Dr. Eastwood. Do you understand that is what we are
         talking about? - A. It depends when the first step.  If
         you mean the first step before the pens are created
         then the answer is no because it was not in the guide.
         If you mean the first step after the guide came out and
         the pens were already in existence, the answer is yes.




H
So it does apply and it is the duty of the Officer
Working Party and the City Council. Is that what you
are saying? - A. I understood that immediately the
guide came out the Officer Working Party and the City
Council did set out to do just that and I was told so
on various occasions.

You mean yes? It is the duty of the Officer Working
Party and City Council? - A. Yes.

I want you to look at your Certificate, your 1988
Certificate, Dr. Eastwood just to see what
interpretation the Jury should place on that and this
is a document which is not yet before the Court. This
is your Certificate dated 2nd August 1988.

     THE CORONER: This one I am prepared to give a C
number to. The other document which we did not give a
C number to we are going to retrieve from you because
it does not form part of the proceedings but this one I
think we will give a number to.

     MR. JONES:   C.508.

     MR. PAYNE: This is your Certificate dated 2nd
August 1988, is it, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes.

Headed "Sheffield WEdnesday Football Club PLC, Annual
Inspection of Hillsborough Stadium as required by the
Certificate of Ground Safety"? - A. Yes.

It is your Certificate and so would you mind reading it
out please? - A. It says:

    "On 18 July 1988, I made an inspection of the
    ground during the time that this year's quota
    of crush barriers were being tested by my firm.

    The results of the crush barrier testing are
    given in a separate report of today's date.

    I made a visual inspection of all the main
    structural features of the ground. Particular
    attention was paid to gates and entry and exit
    routes and to boundary walls and fences. No
    significant defects were noted.

    The roof of the South Stand was inspected from
    the ground. No deterioration in its condition
    was observed.

    I certify that in my opinion the various
    structures on the ground are in a satisfactory
                                                                  41

                                                        W. EASTWOOD


            condition and appropriate for the stadium to be
            used to the full capacity as laid down in the
B           Certificate of Ground Safety."

     Q. With your signature. Now when you wrote that
        Certificate, Dr. Eastwood, were you aware then that the
        schedule to the Safety Certificate had remained
        unamended since 1979 giving the original capacities of
        the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. I could not say whether
        I was aware at that time because I did not have cause
        to look at the Certificate that often.

     Q. So does that mean you did not apply your mind to what
        the various capacities were? - A. Because I was
        carrying out an inspection and not an appraisal.

     Q. You actually say in say in your Certificate that it is
        appropriate for the stadium to be used to the full
        capacity as laid down in the Certificate of Ground
        Safety? - A. I am saying that the structures, and I am
t\      obviously meaning the condition of the structures
        because I am carrying out an inspection such as looking
        up the roof to see if it is rusting, that the
        structures on the ground are in a satisfactory
        condition and, therefore, appropriate to use.

     Q. If you did not know what the capacity was at that time
        in the Certificate how were you able to give this
        Certificate? - A. Because it was not my role to decide
        the capacity. The capacity is laid down in the
        Certificate of Ground Safety and I was doing an
        inspection, not an appraisal.

     Q. Did you give any consideration when you wrote this
        Certificate to the fact that there was no separate
        capacity for the new pens on the terrace? - A. I did
        not give any special consideration. Everybody knew
        that.

     Q. Did you think it was necessary at the time that you
        wrote this Certificate for consideration to be given to
        separate capacities for the pens? - A. There was no
        necessity until there were separate entrance routes for
        the pens.

     Q. Just explain that answer? - A. There is no point in
        setting a capacity for each pen in terms of numbers if
        there was no proper means of counting how many were in
        there.

     Q. Do you mean if there had been a means of counting how
        many were in then it would have been necessary to
        certify the capacity? - A. It would not have been




H
                                                                     42

                                                            W. EASTWOOD


       necessary to put it in my Certificate. My Certificate
       has nothing to do with any of those issues.
B   Q. No, but the question I am   asking   you please is the one
       related to the answer you   gave a   moment ago. You said
       that no capacity had been   worked   out for the separate
       pens because there was no   way to   control that capacity?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you mean by that then that if there had been a way
       to control capacity then it would have been necessary
       to work out what those capacities were? - A. No, say
       that again, sorry? If there had been, yes, but not as
       part of — it would not in any way have appeared on my
       Certificate.

    Q. What is the purpose, do you think, of the provisions in
       the Green Guide which direct specialists to work out
       the capacity of areas within the ground? What is the
       purpose of it? - A. So that those numbers can be put on
       the Safety Certificate and adhered to.

    Q. To avoid the risk of overcrowding? - A. Yes.

    Q. If it would be necessary to work out capacity, if
       capacity could be controlled, if that would be
       necessary, how is it they can just be left uncontrolled
       without any capacity being worked out? Is that safe? -
       A. It makes no difference whether it has been worked
       out or not, Mr. Payne.

    Q. Let us just follow up the point you are making. Let us
       just suppose that one of your schemes had been put into
       effect so that capacity could be controlled? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then a capacity would have been worked out for each of
       those pens? - A. Would have had to be, of course.

    Q. The turnstile count would have shown at any time how
       many had gone in? - A. Yes.

    Q. So that at any time those responsible for operating the
       ground would know how close to capacity any individual
       pen was? - A. Yes.

    Q. That would be necessary to control the capacity in the
       interests of safety? - A. Yes.

    Q. In the absence of any turnstile or separate
       arrangement, why does not the same apply? Is it still
       not necessary to control the capacity of the pens? - A.
       Mr. Payne, the word in the guide is 'ideally'. I did
       refer you to that clause.  It does not say it should.




H
                                                                  43

                                                         W. EASTWOOD


        I have done my job in that I have prepared various
        schemes which would have done exactly that which would
£      have given separate entrances and exit routes which
        would have provided separate toilet facilities, all
        those things. Now for one reason or another they were
        not put in, whatever the reason may be, but that is not
        in contravention of the guide which use the word
        'ideally'. Not 'should' or 'preferably' but 'ideally'.

     Q. Did you give any warning or qualification in any of
        your Certificates saying that there is no means to
        control the capacity in these pens? - A. Mr. Payne,
        everybody knew that I would like to see a special entry
        facilities for each pen. I tried twice, in 1981 and
        1985. That was my view, that ideally you should have
        separate entrances and exits and in those circumstances
        you then needed capacities calculating.

     Q. What is the answer to the question? When your schemes
         were not accepted did you say, "Hang on a minute.
t\      Without a means of controlling capacity we have got no
u       control over how many people go into these individual
         pens"? Did you say that? - A. No, I did not say, "Hang
         on a bit". Right from the very beginning of all the
         discussions, right back in 1979, this was a topic of
         discussion at the various Working Party visits and
         meetings. Everybody knew that this was so.

     Q. What was so? - A. That there was no accurate means of
        controlling it. It had to be done visually.

     Q. When you say everybody knew this, just run round? - A.
        Everybody.

     Q. Who is everybody? - A. Everybody on the Working Party
        plus the Club and me when we attended their meetings by
        invitation.

     Q. And also presumably the Football Association who chose
        this ground for big events? - A. I have no idea what
        the Football Association do.

     Q. Everybody on the Working Party means the Fire Service,
        the Local Authority and the Police? - A. The Local
        Authority is a very broad description.




                        /Q. Representatives of the---




H
                                                          44

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


Q. Well representatives of the Local Authority and the
   Police? - A. I don't want to quibble but the Ambulance
   Authority and the Health Authority from time to time
   were represented at the Working Party.

Q. So all these official bodies then, it is your evidence,
   is it, Dr. Eastwood, all these official bodies knew
   that there was no means of controlling the capacity in
   the pens? - A. I don't know whether they knew. I don't
   know. What I am saying is it was a matter of
   discussion on many occasions.

Q. And the discussion proceeded on the basis that there
   was no means of controlling the capacity, that is what
   you are saying, isn't it? - A. The licensing authority
   proceeded along that route, yes.

Q. So the upshot of it, do I understand your evidence
   correctly, is that all the bodies that you have just
   mentioned, in their discussions, were leaving it up to
   the Police on the day, by a lookout system, just to
   keep an eye on the pens to make sure they did not get
   took overcrowded?

          MR. TOULSON:   Does my friend wish to pursue that,
     because he is now actually getting the Witness to
     express a view on the very area that we have been
     trying to keep him off?

          MR. KING:   Sir, he ought to investigate it, but
     it is a matter I am entitled to investigate in the
     light of the questions.  I have kept very silent, sir.

          THE CORONER:   Yes. That does not necessarily
     mean that you can explore the questions.

          MR. PAYNE:   If no one is going to follow this up
     then I won't, but I must say I did rather think that it
     might be a topic which might arise later on.

          THE CORONER:   I think that the way to put it is
     to ask Dr. Eastwood what was his understanding how the
     capacities of various sections of the terracing were to
     be controlled.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   You heard the formulation of the
     question? - A. Yes.

Q. What is the answer? - A. By the Police watching the
   situation as it developed and closing off entrance
   routes to various pens at appropriate times.

Q. Can you help about this? From your knowledge of the
   Green Guide, and you have made plenty of qualifications
                                             W. EASTWOOD


about the bits you are not responsible for, but from
your knowledge of the Green Guide does it say anywhere
in it that instead of the Chapter 16 formulae you can
have a system with lookout, with the Police or Stewards
or some officials just having a look at the terraces to
see when they think they are full? - A. Only by
implication.

Where does it say that? - A. The clause which I
referred you to which says that ideally there should be
separate entrances and exits etcetera, and by
implication obviously if they are ....

That is 206, is it? - A. Yes. If we don't have that
ideal situation there is no other alternative.

It doesn't say .... - A. I said by implication.

If you seriously put this forward you had better
identify it. Where is the implication? - A. One can
have two ways. One is to have the separate set of
turnstiles ....

No, sorry, I know that but where is the implication in
the Green Guide? Point to the written words in the
Green Guide and explain how the implication arises? -
A. It is the ideas rather than the words.

There are no words, you mean, you can point to? - A.
Well, I am saying to you ....

I don't want to trap you into an embarrassment.  I
suggest to you that there is absolutely nothing in the
Green Guide which says that you can rely on lookout.
That is the case, isn't it? - A. What I am saying to
you, Mr. Payne, is that there is only one alternative
to the ideal and that is to rely on lookout, or of
course, there is another alternative and that is to do
nothing at all.

Well, they are not very safe, are they for ....

     THE CORONER:   No.   I think we will pause for
lunch.

               (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                   46


                                    W. EASTWOOD



Q. Now, Dr. Eastwood, just give the jury the benefit of
   your comment on some of the documents which are in the
   bundle would you please, beginning with C474. This is
   one of your 1985 schemes, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And I am going to take it as representative of the
   schemes although we know that there is a variation from
   one to another, but the effect is common to all, namely
   that you are providing a separate means of access to
   the various segregated pens on the terrace. Right?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Now just run round this plan just very briefly. Start
   over on the left-hand side, more or less where Gate C
   is today. Do you see there is a gate there indicated
   there on the sketch marked "6m", that wiggly line just
   inside the "VISITING SUPPORTERS SOUTH WEST TERRACE"
   entrance? - A. Yes.

Q. Then on the central terrace entrance there is another
   wiggly line next to those five turnstiles for the
   centre terrace marked "VISITING SUPPORTERS CENTRE
   TERRACE"? - A. Yes.

Q. A wiggly line that looks as if it is marked 5 or 6m,
   so that is another concertina gate, is it? - A. The
   concertina I think is diagrammatic.

Q. A diagram of a concertina gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Then on the wide rank of turnstiles if one looks at
   the first four of them which lead to "HOME SUPPORTERS
   WEST STAND", they have got a diagrammatic concertina
   gate marked "8.25m" slightly down that partition wall?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Then the centre entrance for "HOME SUPPORTERS NORTH
   WEST TERRACE" they have just got a row of turnstiles?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And access into their section from the two side sections
   by means of those diagrammatic gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Then finally the "HOME SUPPORTERS NORTH STAND" have
   got their own diagrammatic concertina gate at the end
   of the row of turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't know how important anybody may think this point
   is but I am just going to touch on it briefly. We know
   of course that at the day of the disaster the con­
   figuration behind the Stand was not as shown here?
   - A. That is so.
                                                       47


                                      W. EASTWOOD



Q. And we know in fact there were three concertina gates,
   A, B and C, don't we? - A. Yes.

Q. And we know that the orders which were given were:  "Open
   the gates" and that the gates were opened, C on the left-
   hand side as we look at this diagram, B in the middle
   approximately where the 8.25m. one is and A at the far
   end? - A. As I understand it, yes.

Q. Of course that is something you have been told? - A. Yes.

Q. Fair enough. The jury have heard that first from witnesses.
   Now then just to dwell for a minute: suppose that the
   configuration of the turnstiles and segregated access
   was as put forward in this possible modification drawing
   in 1985, suppose that at the day of the disaster it had
   been as we see it here at C474, do you follow? - A. Yes.

Q. Then we have got to imagine a huge crush outside, and when
   the order was given "Open the gates" suppose that these
   concertina gates were then opened, do you follow? - A. Yes.

Q. Now if this diagram had been implemented, by that time a
   certain number of people would have come through each
   set of turnstiles, wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

Q. And that number would have been counted through the turn­
   stiles, obviously we have been over that before? - A. Yes.

Q. And the number, we have been told, would have been flashed
   up on the monitor screen in the Club's Control Room? - A.
   Yes.
Q. So by the time that the order was given to open the gates
   there would be shown on the television screen in the
   Club Control Room the number of how many it was that had
   gone into each of these sections? - A. Yes.

Q. So that those responsible for controlling the ground
   would have had available to them at that moment information
   as to how many were in each section? - A. Yes.

         THE CORONER:   What is it?   Mr. Payne, I am sorry ---

        MR. PAYNE: Well I have heard it suggested during
   the course of the Inquest that opening Gate C would not
   have made any difference if any of these configurations
   had been adopted and I am just spending a moment just
   to address that point.

         THE CORONER:   I don't actually remember hearing
   that, Mr. Payne.
                                                              48


                                          W. EASTWOOD



       MR. PAYNE: I can't remember who it was that
  mentioned it, but if it is not going to arise as an issue
  then I won't spend time on it.

           THE CORONER:     I don't think it is an issue.

           MR. PAYNE:     Very well.   I am very happy to accept
   that.

Q. Thank you very much, Dr. Eastwood, I am sorry to spend your
   time on that.

         Now go on to the next topic which is at C483 please
   on which your comment will be helpful.

         This is the memorandum that I expect you are quite
   familiar with, Dr. Eastwood, aren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. I think we only need to look at C483B, the response which
   was given on your behalf to the enquiry from the Club and
   we only need to look at item (3). I would like you just
   please to follow this item and then to explain to the
   jury what you meant by it.

           "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
           Leppings Lane end as it is providing police
           have gates under Wfest stand open so that
           people can distribute throughout the terrace
           evenly."

  What did you mean by that please? - A. I did not write
  it.

Q. No, well it is from Mr. Strange? - A. I did not write it.

Q. Did you say that? - A. No.

Q. Perhaps we had go back to the question. Go back to the
   previous page, C483A. The question is at item (3):

           "Has any account been taken for alterations
           done on Leppings Lane over last few seasons?
           Is the 10,200 or so figure still correct?
           I said ..." that is Mr. Strange       that in
           my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better
           do it now than later. It could also affect
           ticket sales for Coventry game. She will
           speak to Graham."

  Now at the top of the page under "MEMORANDUM" in the boxes
  we can see that is from "Sharon", Mrs. Lane, to "EA Strange"?
  - A. J.A. Strange.
                                                             49

                                     W. EASTWOOD



Q. And "WE",   that is you, isn't it? - A.That is me.

Q. And it is ticked? - A. Those initials are my initials.
   I wrote them and ticked it.

Q. Does that mean you saw the question? - A. Yes.

Q. But you say the answer is not the one you gave? -    A. Yes,
   that is what I said.
Q. Did you give any part of this answer 483B? - A. Some parts.

Q. Explain to the jury what you say about it? - A. The first
   thing I arranged with Mr. Strange, and obviously this is
   one of several things, but     when wecame to discussthis
   one the first thing I said     was didhe know whetherthe
   new Safety Certificate had     yet been issued and hisanswer
   was as he understood it it     hadn't.I then   said:"We
   always work to the Safety Certificate. It is not for us
   to alter the figures on the Safety Certificate" and so
   the Club would be perfectly right to work in accordance
   with the Certificate. Now that is not leave it as it is,
   it is a very different sentiment.




                            Q. Before you move on .
                                            W. EASTWOOD


 Before you move on, what is the difference between,
  ur. Eastwood says, 'Leave the capacity at Leppings
      as ^ is'"? You did not say that, you are
 telling the Jury? - A. I said, "Work in accordance
 with the Safety Certificate".

 What about the next part of the answer? - A. I
 reminded Mr. Strange that the Club should be told
 that, of course, one of the conditions of putting in
 the radial fences was that the gates at the top of
 those radial fences, which were of course the
 secondary means of escape, must be open and under
 control.

 So that bit is correct then? "Providing Police have
 gates under West Stand open", is correct, is it’ - A
 Yes.

You did say that? - A. Yes.

What about the last part? - A. This is Mr. Strange
misunderstanding, I think, what I had said to him
perhaps before. I had explained that it was important
that there should be a uniform distribution throughout
the terrace, and that part of ensuring that you could
not get overcrowding in one pen was to have these
gates open with the Police there, so that if there was
accidental overcrowding they could get people out of
the overcrowded pen into the neighbouring pens.

You mean you actively positively directed your mind to
the risk of overcrowding? - A. Of course.

But Mr. Strange has got it down wrong. What Mr.
Strange has got down is you said, "The reason for the
gates is so that people can distribute throughout the
terrace evenly"? - A. The whole point of having Police
there was to make sure that they couldn't distribute
by themselves, but could be distributed by the Police.

Mr. Strange has got that rather round his neck then,
has he? - A. It is very cryptic, recording a
conversation which lasted several minutes and, of
course, not realising that it might be quoted here,
and you will notice that it does not have my initials
on it, I never saw it.

It is quite a serious point, though, is it not? - A. I
do not see why it is serious. I do not see why it is
causative in the present case, Mr. Payne.

Do not worry about causative. It is quite a serious
question that you are being asked by the Club, and it
is quite a serious answer that is being given, "Leave
                                                              51

                                                  W. EASTWOOD


       everything as it is"? — A. No, that is not what I
       said. I said, "Work in accordance with the Safety
       Certificate", Mr. Payne, which is a very proper advice
       to give to the Club.

 Q.   Did it ring a bell with you when you were asked this
      question that the Safety Certificate was rather out of
      date? - A. It more than rang a bell. This is why I
      said to Mr. Strange did he know whether the new one,
      which had been discussed by this time for a full year
      or so - yes, not a full year, but the new Licensing
      Authority had been set up in April 1986 and this was
      March 1987, nearly a year, and it was known through
      that period that special inspections were being made
      at the ground with a view to issuing the new Safety
      Certificate. We were not a party to those inspections
      or to the discussions that were going on, but I did
      ask, "Has the Safety Certificate been revised yet?"

Q.    Who did you ask that? - A. Mr. Strange, and he said he
      understood it had not.

Q.    So you said, "Leave the capacity as it is"? - A. No.
      I said, "Work in accordance with the Safety
      Certificate".

Q.    Very well. - A. Mr. Strange wrote this memo four days
      after the discussion with me and it would not be very
      clear, perhaps quite so clear in his mind, four days
      later as it would have been if he had written the memo
      immediately after I spoke to him.

Q.    Very well. You have given your answer about that.
      Now go to the Safety Certificate again, please, and I
      want you to just comment on one particular matter
      about it, C381, page 10, that is Schedule 3. - A. I
      have it, Mr. Payne, thank you.

Q.    You see the crowd capacity schedule? - A. Yes.

Q.    You see the North-West Terrace, last-but-one entry.
      2,900? - A. Yes.

Q.    I take it you know, do you, that recently that
      capacity has been amended by an amendment to the
      Certificate on 24th November 1989 to 1,500? - A. Yes.
Q.    That has just about halved? - A. Yes.

      ?2Qdoes that mean that for the period between 1979 and
      1989 the North-West Terrace figure of 2,900 was
      actually wrong? — A. I am not wanting to give a long
      answer, Mr. Payne. You are not comparing two like
                                              w. EASTWOOD


 figures. The 1,500 is on a completely different basis
 from the 2,900.

 You had better show us where it is then on the
 diagram. Look at 274. — A. I know the plan you are
 referring to.

 Just look at 274 to see what area we are talkin'*
 about. - A. Yes.

Which area is referred to in the Safety Certificate on ’
274? - A. The one that has "lighting tower" written
just to the right-hand side of it.

The white bit? - A. The white bit with the words
"lighting tower" and the lighting tower shown.

Right, and which bit is referred to in the amendment
on 24th November 1939? - A. In part this drawing is
wrong that we are looking at, and part of the area was
excluded in the new Safety Certificate because it
entailed looking through the glass wall at the end of
the North Stand. It had always been the practice to
have spectators in that triangular shaped corner
there. It had always been the practice and now it was
considered that as it was not such a good viewing area
it should be excluded.

Can you demonstrate on the screen which bits are
included in the two different Certificates, please? -
A. Yes. This is the area that we are considering and,
of course, the shape is wrong there. There are
corners, indentations, it is an idealisation, but
people standing in this area here have to look at that
corner flag through the glass screen along the end of
the Stand, and now that area has been excluded from
the Safety Certificate. That is part of the reason
for the reduction to 1,500.

Before you move away   from the screen, is there any
other reason for the   reduction to 1,500 that you want
to mention while you   happen to be there? - A. I have
mentioned the shape,   although not quantitatively, just
qualitatively.

Has the shape changed? - A. No, the shape is not like
that. The shape has not changed and it is not like
that and never was. This is an idealised drawing.

Thank you very much, Dr. Eastwood. - A. I did not
prepare that drawing.

No, quite. You know Hr. Bownes, I suppose, do you, of
the City Council? - A. ilr. Bownes?
                                              W. EASTWOOD


Bownes, yes.   - A. Yes.




                   /Q.     His evidence was
                                                                 54

                                                        W. EASTWOOD


    Q. His evidence was that it was this area, the white area,
       on 274 which had previously been assessed as 2,900 and
B      had recently been reviewed to 1,500? - A. If that is
       all he said he was incorrect and incomplete.

    Q. Is part of that area now fenced off then so that people
       cannot go in it? - A. A rope was placed across.

    Q. Was placed? - A. Nobody uses that pen now anyway but
       when it was brought back into use for a short time a
       rope was placed across. In fact it is now used I think
       and regarded by the Police as a contingency area and
       there was at the matches where it was a contingency
       area a rope across. There is another reason for the
       1,500, of course, Mr. Payne, which I have not yet gone
       into.

    Q. By all means, Dr. Eastwood. A third factor is that the
       1,500 was calculated with the 15 per cent reduction
       required by Lord Justice Taylor’s report and that means
       not a 15 per cent increase but another 17 per cent and
       so the 1,500 would have been about another 220 on top
       of that but for Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendation.
       There were three components and it was the wrong shape.

    Q. During the period of ten years from 1979 until the
       amendment in 1989, would it have been in compliance
       with the Safety Certificate to allow 2,900 people into
       that area? Would that have complied with the Safety
       Certificate? - A. It would have complied with the
       Safety Certificate but nobody could count them.

    Q. No, that is a problem we have been trying to grapple
       with earlier on. If there had been a means of counting
       them then it would have been all right to let 2,900 in,
       would it? - A. If there was an error it would soon have
       become apparent that there was an error with the
       overcrowding.

    Q. The overcrowding would demonstrate that the Safety
       Certificate was wrong? - A. Yes.

    Q. That is one of the problems about the look out system,
       is it not? - A. Yes, the capacity prior to the Safety
       Certificate laid down by the Police in the Chief
       Constable’s letter of 30th September 1970 to the Club
       was that that corner could take 3,000. That was the
       Police figure and it was reduced in the new Safety
       Certificate by 100 to 2,900.

    Q. What about all those years when Mr. Lock was in charge
       of the ground? From his point of view he thought it
       was 2,000 I think in that top section?




H
                                                                 55

                                                        W. EASTWOOD



            THE CORONER:     No, I do not...
B          MR. PAYNE:      Yes, very well.

    Q. Go on then please. You have given your comment about
       that change, Dr. Eastwood, and now look at 265 would
       you please? - A. Yes.

    Q. What is your comment about these doors, Dr. Eastwood,
       bearing in mind the provisions of the Green Guide that
       doors on exit routes should open outwards? - A. Those
       do not open outwards.

    Q. Did you notice this before the disaster? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you think that they were safe? - A. It is not my
       province but they were discussed and I was satisfied
       with the views of the Fire Service who were the prime
       arbiters of matters of ingress and egress. This is
       their great proficiency. They did not want them taking
       out provided, as I understood it, they were locked
       open.

    Q. When did you first hear about the so-called system of
       closing these doors when the pens were populated? - A.
       Some time after the disaster. I knew nothing about it
       before the disaster.

    Q. If you had heard about it, what would your comment have
       been? - A. I would have asked why they were not using
       the gates which I provided at the bottom end of the
       tunnel which did open outwards. That is why they were
       provided.

    Q. Are they the ones we can see at the far end in 265? -
       A. Yes. They open outwards as they should and I
       provided those for this very purpose of closing off the
       pens.

    Q. What about the ones in the foreground in 265? - A.
       They...

    Q. I am sorry but just let me ask you the question.   If
       you had heard they were being closed for up to half the
       match at a Semi Final when the pens were heavily
       populated, what would your comment have been about
       that? - A. I do not know what my comment would have
       been but I might well have just asked at some time
       whether this had been thought about and whether it had
       been approved by the Fire Service.




H
                                                                56

                                                       W. EASTWOOD


Q. Would you have regarded it as safe? - A. Undesirable is
   what I would say but it is for somebody else to say
   whether it is safe.

Q. Is this a matter which really requires any particular
   expertise? - A. It is not an engineering matter.  It is
   not my expertise. As I have explained before, it may
   be is not realised by the general public but every
   building which is built nowadays, every facility which
   is provided, when you apply for planning consent a set
   of the drawings are sent to the Fire Service and they
   are very expert and very reliable indeed in providing
   the appropriate guidelines as to means of getting in
   and getting out of buildings particularly in an
   emergency.

Q.   Your answer is, yes, it is something which requires
     special expertise to understand whether or not it is
     safe to shut these gates? - A. Yes.

Q.    Just run through the means of escape, would you please,
     just to collect them together at one point during the
     Inquest, as set out in the Green Guide, and give the
     Jury the benefit of your comments about the means of
     escape provided from pens 3 and 4? They crop up at
     various places during the guide starting at 16. - A. I
     think I have misheard you, Mr. Payne.

Q. Paragraph 16, page 8? - A. Yes, I have got the right
   page.

Q. The guide under the heading, "the problems" is
   addressing various problems and 16 describes:

        "The second type which is far more important
        and involves crowd pressures. When large
        crowds are present and densities are high,
        pressures build up within the crowd either
        through motion or swaying which makes it
        difficult, or even impossible, for individuals
        to control their own movements. Under these
        conditions crowd pressures can escalate to a
        dangerous level and if a person stumbles or
        falls the crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or
        stop to help. Since this type of danger arises
        from crowd pressures its remedy lies in their
        removal or restraint within safe limits. These
        dangers arise in particular on terraces and in
        exit routes, and so careful attention must be
        paid to restraining surges and similar
        pressures on the terrace and to ensuring free
        movement throughout the exit systems. Such
        free movement is dependent upon the capacity of
                                                               57

                                                       W. EASTWOOD


       all the various sections of the exit systems
       and interactions between them."

   Can you give your comment, Dr. Eastwood, on the free
   movement throughout the exit system available for
   people at the front of pens 3 and 4? - A. They had
   perfectly free movement if there had been enough space
   between individuals for them to be able to move.

Q. In an ordinary case when those pens 3 and 4 are
   populated in an ordinary match, such as occurred over
   the 10 years leading up to this disaster, once somebody
   is down at the front of pens 3 and 4, do you think they
   have free movement throughout the exit systems? - A.
   Yes.

Q. 21 please and I am going to start halfway down this
   paragraph after the words "(chapter 4)". It says:

       "Design, layout and signposting of exits and
       exit routes require particular attention..."

   A. I am sorry, can I have the paragraph?

Q. Page 10, paragraph 21, about halfway down paragraph 21
   after the words "(chapter 4)" it says:

       "Design, layout and signposting of exits and
       exit routes require particular attention to
       ensure that they can safely cope with the
       number of spectators who will use them at the
       end of an event or in an emergency— "

   Do you think the exit routes up the tunnel and through
   the radial gates could safely cope with the spectators
   at the front of pens 3 and 4 in an ordinary case over
   the decade that we are talking about? - A. Yes, and
   they did.

Q. What, in an emergency? - A. Well, not in an emergency,
   of course, but they were able to discharge people in
   less than the eight minutes required in an emergency.

Q. Are you aware of any other emergency occurring between
   the date of the Safety Certificate and the disaster in
   1989 apart from the overcrowding incident in 1981? - A.
   No.

Q. Paragraph 53 please:

       "Care should be taken in the planning of exit
       systems to ensure that in the event of an
       emergency which blocks the usual exit route
                                                W. EASTWOOD


    spectators will be able to use an alternative
    exit route including, where appropriate,
    forward evacuation on to the pitch."

What alternative exit routes were provided? - A. The
exit routes which were provided were the two gates at
the top of the two radial fences leading in north or
south directions.




                          /Q. Were they sufficient to.
                                             W. EASTWOOD


Were they sufficient to enable the crowd to escape in
an emergency? - A. Yes. The calculated widths were
comfortably in excess of those needed to get the
spectators out in the 8 minutes recommended in the
Guide.

Right, 96, please, page 32.   This is the 12 metre rule.
- A. Yes.

Were the spectators at the front of pens 3 and 4 within
12 metres of a gangway or exit? - A. Some of them were.

Not many? - A. It depends how you define front, but
about half the people along the front fence actually
touching it were within 12 metres of either the wing
walls of the tunnel - it is only 13 metres back to
front, and those walls are more than 1 metre long - so
a major proportion were within 12 metres even though
they were touching the front fence.

Just look at C276. Have you scaled off this drawing
from a scale shown in the top left hand corner, 5
metres? - A. No, but I have a scale here and I could do
it.

Use it if you wish to do so. The people at the front
where unfortunately the biggest collection of blue
spots is, are all more than 12 metres away, aren't
they, from an exit, or a gangway? - A. Not in a
straight line.

The people as we look at gate 3, for example, to the
left of gate 3, they are considerably more than 12
metres aren't they? - A. When you say considerably
more, I will scale this, Mr. Payne, just to say how
much more. 1.8 is equal to 5, so that 10 is 3.6, and
another two-fifths of 1.8, we are talking of about 4.2.
Up to about 40% of the way across the front fence, up
to about 40% along, they are within 12 metres of the
corner of the wing wall of the tunnel, and by the time
they get there that is the exit.

This 12 metres in paragraph 96 in the Green Guide, do
you think that is intended to be treated as a maximum?
- A. I don't think anything in this Guide, unless it is
something which is absolutely crucial, was meant to be
treated as a maximum. There are the various sentences
at the beginning of it, which I am sure have been
quoted, where some interpretation is allowed in the
Guide.

What do you think is the purpose of arriving at any
particular figure, such as 12 metres in paragraph 96? -
A. Sometimes it is directly for safety; sometimes it is
                                              W. EASTWOOD


very indirectly, such as, is this something which would
cause irritation to members of the crowd?

What do you think this one is for? - A. The irritation
one.

This is irritation? - A. Yes.

Not a safety provision? - A. I don't think it makes one
iota of difference to safety, Mr. Payne, whether you
walk 14 metres or 12 across the terrace. You have 8
minutes in which to do it and it works out at one
stride every 30 seconds, and it is very slow movement.
It does not make any real difference.

Isn't the point that somebody at the front of a terrace
like this one, pen 3, where there is no gangway, if
they want to get out they have got to make their way
through the crowd, which can be thickly packed, can't
it? - A. Yes, and I mentioned that that can be very
embarrassing to, say, someone who wishes to go to the
toilet, if the distance is too big.

Do you know if any attention was given to this
paragraph 96 by anyone before the disaster? - A. Yes.
I wrote my report in January '79 and pointed it out in
the clearest possible terms to the Working Party. They
inspected on several occasions and they decided that
this was one of the matters on which some judgment
could be brought to bear.

I am sorry, Dr. Eastwood, that won't do. Your report
in 1979 was written before the radial fences were put
in, wasn't it? - A. It still applied that we were more
than 12 metres from the exit.

One of the things you pointed out in your report, which
we can get out if necessary, is that people could make
their way quickly and easily across the terrace, and
for that reason the 12 metre rule was not very
important. That is what you said, wasn't it? - A. Yes,
and the same thing applied ....

That is what you said, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

It is quite a different situation from what we have got
here, once the radial fences are in? - A. In pens 3 and
4 the people going out of that tunnel exit were going
to in many cases be making their way an even shorter
distance across the terrace. Prior to the fences being
in people from a wider distance came to that tunnel.

Very well. 178, please. I draw to your attention
before we look at 178, Dr. Eastwood, that so far you
                                            W. EASTWOOD


have not found anything wrong with the means of escape
or exit systems as referred to in the Green Guide. Now
look at 178:

     "'Means of escape' is the structural means whereby
     a safe route is provided for people to travel from
     any point in a structure to a place of safety
     without outside assistance.   In a sports ground
     the means of escape in the event of an emergency
     will usually be the same as the normal egress
     routes plus any additional 'route' of forward
     escape on to the playing area. The kind of
     emergency most likely to occur at a sports ground
     is fire but other types of emergency, such as bomb
     threat, may arise which might necessitate the
     evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
     spectator accommodation.  It is the management's
     responsibility to ensure that all exit routes for
     use in an emergency are capable of being safely
     and effectively used at all times when the ground
     is occupied."

Now what is your view about that, Dr. Eastwood? Did
pens 3 and 4 comply with 178? - A. Within the context
of the Guide and the encouragement to use professional
judgment and commonsense, whoever took the decision
that the means of escape were adequate for these pens
was in my view properly working in accordance with the
Guide.

So if you had been asked before the disaster you would
have said that the layout did not clash with anything
in 178? - A. I believed that it satisfied it very well
indeed because the tunnel by itself made the pens
capable of being evacuated in well under the 8 minutes.
When you had not just the tunnel but the other exit
routes, which could be used instead, and they also
enabled evacuation within 8 minutes, that seemed to me
to be good. I should, of course, point out that the 8
minutes is on the basis of the 5.4 people per square
metre.

Yes. The Jury may be wondering, a lot of these
provisions are talking about an emergency, aren't they?
- A. Yes.

We have been over before that an emergency is something
which does not happen in the ordinary course of events?
- A. Yes, and it says fire, other types of emergency
such as a bomb threat. These were taken into account.

They are only examples, aren't they? - A. They are
examples, of course, they are not the only ones, but
                                              W. EASTWOOD


they were taken   into account.  I know this because I
heard the Working Party discuss these matters.

Very well. Let's see if there is anything else.     Look
at 206, please.

       THE CORONER:   Have you got a lot more, Mr. Payne?

     MR. PAYNE:     Two more after this one. Sir, I hope
you think it ishelpful to do this. There    has not been
another occasion during the Inquest when the particular
paragraph dealing with means of escape have been
collected together.

206:

       "Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly
       controlled in order to give the police the fullest
       opportunity for crowd control."

Of course, that is the reason for these radial fences
going in in the first place, isn't it, Dr. Eastwood? -
A. One of the reasons.

       "Less problems occur when terraces are subdivided
       as far as possible into sections by use of both
       radial and lateral barriers or railings which
       should comply with the strength requirements set
       out in Chapter 9. Each section should be ideally
       self-contained and should be serviced by its own
       entrance/exits, refreshment facilities and toilets
       .... Special care is needed to ensure that
       sections and subdivisions are provided with
       sufficient exits for use in an emergency."

So what is your comment about that? Were there
sufficient exits for use in an emergency here? - A. In
my view, yes.

209 - I suppose the same applies:

       "Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as
       possible in normal circumstances while at the same
       time ensuring that the police have effective
       access to the terraces for the purpose of crowd
       control and enabling the pitch to be used ... in
       the event of a serious emergency."

Now could the pitch be used here in this serious
emergency? - A. Yes.

The evidence, as I expect you know, Dr. Eastwood, is
that once the gates were opened there was such an
effort to try and get out of the gates, so many people
                                             W. EASTWOOD


trying to get to the gates, that that in itself caused
such congestion that it blocked the exit? - A. That
was, of course, a product of there being far more
people in the pens than anybody had anticipated.

You say that but .... - A. Let me finish, Mr. Payne.
In the Guide we are talking for the normal packing of
spectators, and with the 5.4 it would obviously have
been easier to get out. It is possible for any exit to
get jammed if there are far, far too many people.

The Jury will hear your answer and make up their own
mind about it but I suggest to you that, in fact, if
the terrace is filled to the 5.4 capacity which you
helpfully refer to because that is what ought to have
been worked out for these pens, if it had been filled,
and if there had been an emergency, and if those
perimeter fence gates had been opened, then it is
highly likely that the people would have behaved as
exactly they did, which is that they would have all, or
those in the vicinity, would have rushed to try and get
out of the gate at the same time, the narrow 1.1 metre
gate, causing just the same kind of congestion? - A.
Yes, but you do have to bear in mind that the people
who required those gates, and only one of them was put
in during my time as the engineer, none of them were
put in after this Guide came out with regard to widths.
At the time when the one was put in under my control,
as the engineer, the best I could refer you to is the
minutes of the meeting on the ground, on 7th August
1985, when there had been correspondence as to the need
for an extra gate, the one numbered 4, and I wrote back
saying, "I am not sure where you want it but I will be
at the meeting of the Working Party on 7th August, it
can be discussed then". It was. It was pointed out
where it was to go and I asked, "What size?", and was
told, "Exactly like what we now call 3 and 5 , and it
was made, within 10 millimetres, the same as 3 and 5,
at exactly the place where the Working Party asked me
to put it.

Do you accept now that these gates clearly are not
adequate to provide effective access on to the pitch in
a serious emergency? - A. I would not use those words,
Mr. Payne.

What is the answer to the question?   I am looking at
209. - A. The answer is no then.

Very well, they are not adequate? - A. No, that is not
what I said.

Are they adequate to provide access on to the pitch in
the event of a serious emergency? I suggest to you
                                            W. EASTWOOD


they are quite plainly obviously not. - A. They were
not meant to be the emergency exit route. They were
the second emergency exit route and there was no need
for a second one. The Green Guide is satisfied with
the one that was provided.

So suppose we go back before the disaster then, now
that we have run through the Green Guide and looked at
the means of escape provisions, and you had been asked
this question, "Are the means of escape adequate in the
event of a serious emergency in pens 3 and 4?", would
you have said, "Yes"? - A. I amnot an expert on it but
what I would have said is that I believed that what the
Fire Service have recommended to the Working Party, and
it has accepted, is completely reasonable.




          Cross-examined by MR. ISAACS
                                                    65

                                     W. EASTWOOD



                 Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Dr. Eastwood, am I right when Iv.say to you you never had
   any discussion with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
   about any of these matters? - A. That is correct.

        MR. ISAACS:    Thank you very much sir.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Dr. Eastwood, am I right that you never had any discussions
   of any kind to which reference has been made with
   Superintendent Murray? - A. I don't know Superintendent
   Murray, sir, but I think the answer is no, I never did
   as far as I know.

        MR. MANNING:    Thank you.


                  Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. C268 please sir. That, Dr. Eastwood, is a view of the
   pens. Do I understand your evidence correctly, Dr. Eastwooa,
   that you were agreeing with the suggestion put by my
   learned friend Mr. Payne to you that the effect of the
   radial fences, the introduction of the radial fences was
   to separate that wide terrace into separated penned
   sections? - A. Yes.

Q. One does not have to be an engineer to understand that,
   it is obvious from just looking at the layout, isn't it?
   - A. Sorry, it is nothing to do with engineering.

Q. No, quite, I speak as a layman in all these things,
   Dr. Eastwood? - A. I speak as a layman in this ....

Q. Just looking at the layout with the naked eye it is
   obvious that it has been divided into sections? - A. Yes.

Q. And indeed you yourself indicated that it was obvious
   that you could have a situation where people could get
   trapped when you have sections like that? - A. I don't
   think I used the word "trapped".

Q. Well let me just remind myself exactly what you said
   because it was in answer to my learned friend Mr. Payne.
   - A. I am prepared to go along with it because I would
   not object to it. It is obviously conceivable that
   people could get trapped.

Q. What you said this morning, Dr. Eastwood, was if you
   create pens with high densities at the front you could
   have a possible cage where people could be "trapped"?
   - A. That is so.
                                                      66


                                    W. EASTWOOD


Q. Thus when one looks at the wide terrace now divided into
   sections it is obvious, isn't it, that you have got to
   look at each section as a separate area of spectator
   accommodation? - A. Yes.
Q. And again that is not a matter of engineering, it is a
   matter of commonsense just looking at the layout, isn't
   it? - A. Yes.
Q. You told us that in those circumstances ideally - and you
   used the word ideally with reference to paragraph 206 in
   the Green Guide - ideally in order to control the numbers
   going into these separate sections of spectator accommodation*
   ideally one would want to have a system of ssparate entrances,
   turnstiles, someone can count them in, ideally? — A. Ideally.

Q. But if that ideal did not come about and that ideal was
   not there, it was still necessary to have some sort of
   system to control the numbers going into each of these
   separate spectator areas of accommodation? — A. Yes.

Q. It would not be a matter of just washing one's hands of
   the whole affair and sayings "Let the spectators go
   where they will"? - A. Unacceptable.

Q. Why is that unacceptable? - A. For the very reasons which
   I gave. First it is very undesirable with an open pen,
   an open terrace, that once you have split it into pens
   to let people go where they will you could end up with
   the situation that we unfortunately did end up with.

Q. You told us, didn't you, that you regarded one of the
   paramount objects of safety was the even distribution
   of fans? - A. I don't know whether I used the word
   "paramount" but yes.

Q. Prime object I think you said? - A. Yes.

Q. But you also told us that you did not regard, for example,
   the radial gates at the back and the purpose of the Police
   being there or having them under their control, you did
   not regard the purpose was to ensure that the fans
   distributed themselves, quite the opposite? - A. Quite,
   except I did make the exception that prior to any pen
   being full it was perfectly reasonable for spectators
   to be permitted to transfer from one pen to the other.

Q. But the essential point you are making to us is that it
   would be totally unacceptable as a means of controlling
   the numbers going into these separate areas of spectator
   accommodation simply to allow spectators to distribute
   themselves to find their own level. That is totally
   unacceptable from a safety point of view, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.
                                                       67

                                    W. EASTWOOD



Q. Now it follows from that, you knew of course that this
   ideal situation of controlling the numbers was not
   going to be operated following the introduction of the
   radial fences because it wasn't. That is right, isn't
   it? - A. At the time that the radiaL fences were
   introduced the word ideally, in fact this whole reference
   to separate entrances etc. was not in the Green Guide.

Q. Of course. Forget about the Green Guide for the moment.
   Irrespective of the Green Guide you have agreed with me that
   just looking at the division of the terrace into separate
   spectator areas that it is important to control the numbers
   going in to avoid overcrowding. That is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.
Q. And even if you did not have the Green Guide in front of
   you an ideal way of doing that if you sat down and thought
   about it was to have separate entrances and turnstiles
   and so forth, but if you did not have that ideal way you
   still had to have some other system, didn't you? - A.
   You do have   to, yes, you can't abdicate.

Q. You were conscious yourself of   the need for   some other
   sort of system? - A. Yes.

Q. Had you received any assurances that there was going to
   be another sort of system in operation on match days as
   designed to   avoid overcrowding in the pens? -    A.   Idid
   not receive   written statements to that effect    fromanybody
   but in the discussions which were held with the Working
   Party on its visits to the ground this was clearly in
   everybody's mind.

Q. What was "clearly in everybody's mind"? - A. That there
   would have to be monitoring. The Police in their written
   memo, in 1981 when the first radial fences were put in
   said that these radial fences would permit, and the
   words were: "more accurate control". Now the word
   "accurate" must have numbers in it and they were clearly
   wanting to properly distribute the crowd.

Q. Mere monitoring of its own is not a system, is it, just
   monitoring. You have got to have something more than
   mere monitoring? - A. My definition of a system would
   include somebody looking at those pens. If that were not
   to be done then there is no system; if it is done there
   is a system.

Q. But in addition to monitoring the pens you have got to
   have a system for closing off the pens? - A. Yes.

Q. You have got to have a system when you have closed off
   the pens to ensure that people don't get into the pens
                                                          68


                                   W. EASTWOOD



  which have been closed off? - A. Yes, this is why the
  two gates were put in at the top of 3 and 4.

Q. And you have got to have a system in an emergency to
   allow people out of the pens which have been closed off?
   - A. Which in fact was provided by the two gates at the
   top of the radial fences.

Q. Of course the two gates at the top alone would not be
   sufficient to stop people getting in or encourage people
   to get out if they are simply left open. You would have
   to have something more in the system than just leaving
   the gate open, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. What is the something more you would have to have? - A.
   Yes, the instruction that I got or the Club got from
   the Licensing Authority in 1981 was that the gates were
   to be open and under Police control and that is repeated
   in the Minutes of the meeting held on site on the
   7th August 1985 where the Minute records that part of
   the picture in considering the exit gate on to the pitch
   was that the big gates at the top of the radial fences
   would be open and under Police control. It was minuted.
   That was in 1985.
Q. So is it your evidence to us therefore, Dr. Eastwood,
   that the overall capacity of the terrace which had been
   fixed at 10,200 in 1979 continued to be a safe capacity ....
   A. 10,100 I think.
Q. So be it, sorry if I have misled you, that capacity
   continued to be a safe one notwithstanding the intro­
   duction of the radial fences and the introduction
   of these separate areas of spectator accommodation, so
   long as there was a proper control of the packing of
   the spectators into the individual pens? - A. Yes, as the
   whole argument for putting them in was that it was making
   the terrace safer, when they went in one would not expect
   that there would be a need to reduce the number of
   spectators.

Q. Well the emphasis I want to put to you, and tell me if you
   are right or wrong, that you understood notwithstanding
   you knew there was not any separate control of the
   numbers going in by reference to separate entrances, be
   it 1981 or 1985, that there would continue to be some
   proper method of controlling the packing of the individual
   pens? - A. Yes.

Q. Isn't it right that you actually got an assurance from
   the Police that they were able to control the packing
   of these pens notwithstanding the existence of these
   radial fences? - A. I cannot recollect having an
   assurance in such clear terms at any rate that is
   recorded in writing.
                                  W. EASTWOOD



Well can I just show you and jog your memory page 46
of what you said to Lord Justice Taylor at his Inquiry.
It is Day 27 I understand of the Inquiry, page 46, and
perhaps just for convenience one could have page 47 with
it sir because it will save time. Sir, I am looking
at page 46, letter P sir.




                   THE CORONER:   I dont think
                                                           70

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


         THE CORONER: I do not think it adds very much to
    what we already know, Mr, King, but if you wish I will
    let him have a look at that..

         MR. KING: Sir, it may do, in the light of
    suggestions being made on behalf of the Police as to
    their understanding of what was being expected of
    them, but I may be wrong, sir.

         THE CORONER: I think we can check with him
    whether he can remember this matter, but it is exactly
    the same point on which I stopped Mr. Payne, only the
    other way round this time. So we are not going to go
    too far down that road.

         MR. KING: Save it is a piece of factual evidence
    which goes to the state of knowledge within the Police
    of the need for control of the pens.

         THE CORONER: No, it is a state of factual
    knowledge which goes to the state of knowledge within
    Dr. Eastwood's mind.

         MR. KING: With respect, sir, we have not heard
    his answer yet.

         THE CORONER: Indeed.

         MR. KING: But if his answer isthat thePolice
    had been assuring him, whoever was assuringhim from
    the Police had a state of knowledge.

         THE CORONER: Let us see what   he says.

         MR. KING:   Thank you, sir..

         THE WITNESS: I think it is a question somewhere
    between E and F, is it?

         MR. KING: Yes. - A. I said then, "The Police
    had been assuring us that they would control the
    packing in these pens, the switching from one pen to
    another". I did say that and this is the kind of
    thing which was said in discussions and at Working
    Party meetings, but, as I said to you a minute ago, I
    do not have such a statement recorded in writing.

•   Dr* Eastwood, I was not concerning myself at the
    moment with whether there was any written memorandum
    of these assurances. I first wanted to investigate
    whether or not the evidence you had given to Lord
    Justice Taylor was correct that, "The Police had been
    assuring us that they would control the packing in
                                           W. EASTWOOD


these pens, the switching from one pen to another".
Is that correct evidence? - A. That is so.

You say that this assurance had come up in discussions
at the Officer Working Party? - A. That is the times
when it would most often come up, but there were, of
course, other occasions when there were meetings at
the ground which were not full meetings of the Officer
Working Party. We often met the Police, Fire Service,
or building surveyors, or other people.

Do you know yourself who of the Police was the Police
who were giving these assurances at these meetings? -
A. I have the difficulty that I do not remember faces
very easily. I said a few minutes ago I do not think
I have ever met Superintendent Murray, but I may have
met him many times. I am in the difficulty that when
there are no written minutes I often do not know who
the person is that I have had the informal discussion
with.

But none the less it would be whoever was holding
himself out as representing the Police at those
discussions? - A. Yes.

It is important, therefore, that I understand what you
are saying. First of all, you are saying to the
Inquest and the Jury that the introduction of the
radial fences and the pens was such that it was
necessary to have a continuing means of control over
the packing of the pens? - A. Monitoring and control.

It is not simply a casual look; you have to have a
system of closing off, of moving from one pen to the
next, do you not? - A. Yes.

Of observing whether or not one pen is fuller than the
other pen, distribution across the terrace? - A. Yes.

It would demand, a system of that sort to be safe,
thought as to where you would position people to
monitor?

     THE CORONER: No, I am sorry, that clearly is not
an engineering question. It may be very interesting,
but I do not think so. In fact, I will stop you at
this point and we will have a 10—minute break, and
then we will press on.

    MR. KING:   So be it.

                ((Short Adjournment)
                                                           72

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


Q.        MR. KING: Dr. Eastwood, I just want to make sure
     I understand your evidence as to these assurances
     which had been given to you. Do I understand that
     these assurances had been given at these various
     Working Party discussions, and so forth, right up to
     1985? - A. Yes, "assurances" is a strong word to use -
     discussions. It was understood by everybody and was
     taken aboard by the Police that they were going to
     monitor and control the numbers.

Q.   You say it is a strong word. If you had yourself been .
     told that there was going to be no system undertaken
     by whoever took the responsibility for the control of
     the numbers going into these separate areas of
     spectator accommodation, the pens, at matches after
     the installation of these radial fences, what would
     your reaction have been? - A. It must not be allowed
     to happen.

Q. In all the discussions which you were present at, the
    Officer Working Party and similar, did the agency who
    said that they were undertaking this responsibility
    for the control and packing of the pens, you say, the
    Police, ever say to you or to anybody in your hearing,
    "Wait a minute, this can't be done. We haven't got
    the means to undertake this responsibility"? - A. No.

Q.   You told us that everyone knew that there was no mean?
      of counting the individual numbers into the individual
     pens as separate areas of accommodation, that is what
     you told us? - A. Yes.

Q.   In fact, it is a fact which one does not really have
      to be told about because there just was not a method,
     was there? - A. That is so.

          MR. KING:   I have no further questions, thank
     you, sir.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, are you ready, or do
     you want more time? We have moved rather fast to you.
     Do you want to gather your thoughts and I will let Mr.
     Russell go and then you next?

          MRS. McBRIEN: I am sorry, Mr. Toulson did
     mention to me that he was going to ask to go first.

          THE CORONER: Mr. Toulson will go last.

          MR. TOULSON: Yes, absolutely. We had a short
     discussion while you rose because it seemed to me
     there might be a possibility that we would not quite
     finish today, but all but, and I asked Mrs. McBrien
     whether she would be happy with me going before her in
A
                                                             73

                                                     W. EASTWOOD


         those circumstances in order to get away today, and
         she expressed herself delighted if that arose. But I
B        think Mrs. McBrien would be very happy if Counsel
         proceeded before her to give her a few more moments
         time.

               THE CORONER: If Mrs. McBrien is happy with that
         and   you are happy with that, I am content.

               MR. MAXWELL:   Can I fill the gap?

               THE CORONER: Yes, you fill the gap, Mr. Maxwell.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

    Q.   Dr. Eastwood, the learned Coroner indicated that the
         Jury may be concerned here with the inter-relationship
         of the various parties who were on the Officer Working
         Party. Now I would like to consider that, first of
         all, in general terms. You were not formally a raerabe-
D        of the Officer Working Party, were you? - A. Leave out:
         the word "formally" - I wasn't a member of the Working
         Party.

    Q.   But you had had dealings with those who were members
         of the Officer Working Party from time to time? - A.
         Yes.

    Q.   In your dealings with those persons - and I mean the
         Police, the Local Authority, the Fire Service - did
         you find and was it your experience that those persons
         were, putting it generally, conscientious? - A. Very
         conscientious.

    Q.   And that they were concerned about matters of safety?
         - A. Yes.

    Q.   And that they were willing to do whatever was
         necessary to improve safety at the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That would involve, would it not, avoiding or
         preventing any risks arising? - A. Yes.

    Q.   If I asked you the same series of questions with
         regard to your experience of the Club, would you say
         exactly the same? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Safety conscious and conscientious? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That is looking at it generally. Now let us be a
          little more specific. If anyone in the Officer
          Working Party had ever been concerned that some risk
          was likely to arise that would affect football fans,
          would you expect that to have been mentioned and


H
                                           W. EASTWOOD


discussed? - A. I am sure there were many such
discussions. There were many occasions in my
experience where there was not complete unanimity on
every detail of what was being carried out.

You are an engineer, a professional man, and you are
concerned as such with matters of safety, are you not?
- A. Engineering matters of safety.

Yes, and your firm was concerned with engineering
matters of safety? - A. Yes.

If you had become aware of any risk that affected the
ground, you would have mentioned it to the Club or,
indeed, if you were dealing with the Officer Working
Party to the members of that Officer Working Party? -
A. I did, yes.

May we look, please, at this stage at.the Safety
Certificate and turn to condition 24, this is C381. I
think it is on page 7 of this document. What I want
to do, Dr. Eastwood, is look at this in the context of
your annual Certificate, that which was given in
August 1988, but I begin by drawing your attention to
condition 24 and its precise terms:

    "The Holder", that is the Club, "shall arrange
    for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
    qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or
    Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
    County Council within 7 months of the date of the
    Certificate and at least once in each period of
    12 months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon
    as possible after each inspection supply to the
    County Council a Certificate by the said
    Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance
    or non-compliance with good engineering and
    building practices and with the relevant British
    Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and
    with the appropriate provisions and
    recommendations of the Guide of all structural
    parts of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers
    and handrails", which had separate provision made
    for them did they not? - A. That is so.
                                                                   75

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


    Q. It is a very long sentence. Some of it is in legalese,
       no doubt some of it is in local authority speak but the
B      intention behind it is quite clear, is it not? It is
       to provide for the annual inspection and so far as
       possible a clean bill of health or otherwise after that
       inspection? - A. An inspection of the structure is to
       make sure that they were being properly maintained and
       that unforeseen weaknesses had not developed.

    Q. Now could you look at your Certificate, C.508? - A.
       Yes.
    Q.         THE CORONER:  That is the one that we showed you
         this morning. - A. Yes, but I would like to have it
         open.
    Q. Yes, indeed.    I am just reminding you which it is. - A.
       Yes.

    Q. It is the Certificate of 2nd August 1988. You had this
       read out to you this morning and you read it out
D      yourself I think. I do not ask that that be repeated
       but you avoid there, deliberately or not, the precise
       language of Condition 24, do you not? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You do not use those terms? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You put it much more matter of factly and to the point
         by saying that the ground structurally was safe? - A.
         Yes.
    Q. Was that your professional judgment? - A. Yes.

    Q. It was obviously an honestly held belief on your part,
       was it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. One based upon objective grounds? - A. Yes.

    Q. If you had any cause to think there was a matter of
       concern would you have stated it in that Certificate? -
       A. If any of the structures had deteriorated in
       condition I would have brought it out as I did from
       time to time and indeed possibly in this Certificate.
       No, I merely mentioned specifically the roof of the
       South Stand which has defects.

    Q. Now I would like to ask you about your expectations
       arising from your knowledge of the inter-relationship
       between members of the Officer Working Party, the Club
       and specifically the Police in this context;  I am
       asking you first of all about your expectation with
       regard to that inter-relationship before the 15th April
       1989? - A. My expectation?




H
A
                                                                  76

                                                          W. EASTWOOD



     Q. I will come to the question. Was it your expectation
B       that the Police would be primarily responsible for
        crowd control? - A. Yes.
     0. They would be responsible for monitoring the crowd? -
        A. Yes.
     Q. For keeping observation on the crowd? - A. Yes.

     Q. Careful observation? - A. Yes.

     Q. Watching the crowd as it grew? - A. Yes.

     Q. Was it your experience before the 15th April that that
        expectation was fulfilled? - A. Yes.

     Q. Week in and week out? - A. Yes.

     Q. League games, Semi Finals, the lot? - A. I have never
11      attended a Semi Final but Mr. Strange of my staff has
        attended several of them and he had a watching brief-

     Q. In that context would you open up the Green Guide at
        page 31, chapter 8, and it is the headnote under
        "terraces and viewing slopes". It says:

            "Arrangements should be made to encourage the
            even distribution of the crowd on the terraces
            to provide ease o£ access and egress; to
            control and facilitate movement, particularly
            i£ a local emergency should arise during the
            event; and to contain pressures be£ore they
            reach dangerous proportions. The provisions
            set out here will assist in achieving these
            conditions."
        First of all, reading that, is it your interpretation
        that the provision set out in chapter 8 are to
        guarantee that those conditions will be achieved? - A.
        Guarantee is too strong a word.

     Q. They will assist in achieving? - A. That is so, sir.

     Q. Is it your understanding that the arrangements which
        are referred to, arrangements to encourage, control,
        facilitate, contain pressures, those arrangements
        require human intervention? - A. Indeed, sir.

     Q. The persons who were to achieve that were whom?

             THE CORONER:   Well---




H
                                                               77
                                                     V?. EASTWOOD


Q.        MR. MAXWELL: On your expectation and your
     experience of the inter-relationship between the
     parties who were on the Officer Working Party? - A. The
     Police, sir.

          MR. PAYNE: Before Mrs. McBrien and Mr. Toulson
     proceed, I wonder if I might just ask a question on the
     point which has occupied quite a lot of Mr. King's
     cross-examination and now has reappeared again about
     the Police responsibility for visual impression? It is
     quite a short question.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.

               Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Q. In the black folder, will you look again at the Safety
   Certificate at C.381, page 3 of our copy, paragraph
   3? - A. Yes, I am sorry, Mr. Payne?

Q. The Safety Certificate, C.381? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Page 3 which is headed "Schedule 2, general terms and
   conditions" and I am looking at condition 3. Have you
   found it? - A. Yes.

Q. It says:

         "The number of spectators admitted to the
         Stadium and to the several areas of spectator
         accommodation within the Stadium shall not
         exceed the figures specified in Part 1 of
         Schedule 3."

     That, as we know, is at page 10. Just look at page 10
     as a visual aid and do you see there that each area of
     spectator accommodation is given its exact number? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Suppose at the time that this Certificate was first
   being issued you had been part of a group of people
   having a look at the Certificate and its terms, and
   someone had asked a question about paragraph 3, "The
   Certificate says that the numbers going into these
   areas of spectator accommodation shall not exceed these
   various figures. How are we going to see that they do
   not exceed these figures?" and suppose somebody had
   asked that question in a group of which you were a
   member. Suppose somebody else in the group had
   replied, "Oh well, it is all right. What we are going
   to do is that we are going to have some Policemen there
   and they are going to just keep an eye on the crowd and
   they are going to see when the terraces fill up a bit.
                                                                   78

                                                         W. EASTWOOD


        When the Police think they get up to 7,200 on the West
 .     Terrace, they will say, 'Right, that is enough. No
B|     more in'." Suppose that little scenario had happened,
        what would your comment have been? - A. My comment,
        would have been that the Safety Certificate is
        unrealistic in trying to separate the West Terrace from
        the North West Terrace.

     Q. Because there is no way of assessing the numbers going
         on to either? - A. That is so.

     Q. As the ground was laid out. Right, we have got to add
         the two together, have we not, and we get 10,100? - A.
        10,100.
     Q. Apply the same test that I am asking you to consider.
        Supposing someone said, "To get the 10,100 we are just
        going to have some Policemen keeping an eye on it and
        when it gets to about 10,100 the Police will be able to
        tell just by looking at it and so to make sure thait the
        numbers do not exceed these figures under paragraph 3,
        condition 3, that is going to be our system”. Whait
        would your comment have been about that? - A. It is an
        irrelevant question because that was not the systeim.
        The 10,100 was monitored.

     Q. Precisely.  It was monitored through the turnstiless? -
        A. Yes, not in the way, of course, as on the day of the
        disaster because there was no computer counting.

     Q. But it is controlled, is it not? - A. Yes.

     Q. That 10,100 cannot be exceeded because the turnstiles
        control it, right? - A. It was exceeded in 1981.

     Q. Yes, but it should not be exceeded if somebody keeps an
        eye on the turnstile count? - A. Yes.

     Q. When the terraces were divided up into these pens now
        in answer to Mr. King, and again to Mr. Maxwell, you
        are telling the Court that it was all agreed that the
        Police would just keep an eye on these terraces and
        make sure the numbers were distributed. Does not the
        same point apply? If, as should have happened, the
        capacity of the new pens was worked out so that people
        knew what the capacity of each pen should be, when that
        had been done suppose someone said, "How are we going
        to control this?" and the answer had been, "Oh well, we
        are going to have the Police just keeping an eye on
        these pens to see when the number gets near the new
        worked out number and then the Police are going to
        close it off". What would you have said about that? -
        A. I do not think anybody would have said that the
                                                                   79

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


         Police were just going to keep an eye on it. They
         would have said that it was going to be monitored or a
B        word of that kind.

    Q. Monitored depends on —    - A. Visually.

    Q. Visual impression.  It depends on the visual impression
       of whoever happens to do the monitoring on that day? -
       A. An imperfect system.

    Q. An imperfect system because what might appear to one
       person to be crowded might appear to be the next to be
       over or less crowded? - A. No, no. That is not the way
       it will be done, Mr. Payne. You do have various pens
       in front of you and you can look at them to see whether
       one is becoming more crowded than the others and you
       control it. If it is then you reduce the flow into
       that pen or stop it.

    Q. Are you seriously saying then that it is quite all
       right and if someone had asked these hypothetical
       questions it would have been quite all right to leave
       the Police to gauge by looking at it how many were in
       each of these new pens? - A. No, that is not what I
       said.

    Q. It is certainly not what is contemplated by the Green
       Guide, is it? It is not?

              MR. KING: Sir, perhaps he could be allowed to
         answer because as I understood it he was going on to
         say what he had said?

    Q.        MR. PAYNE: My question is that it is absolutely
         contrary to everything in the Green Guide, is it not,
         this visual impression system? - A. No. Of course, the
         Green Guide has changed with time but the Green Guide
         was still saying that to have some method of closely
         controlling the number in each pen was the ideal
         situation. The Green Guide was clearly contemplating
         that many grounds would be not ideal and under those
         circumstances it does need visual monitoring.

    Q. The Jury have seen chapter 16, and I have no doubt that
       you have read chapter 16 and it — I have put the
       question.

              MR. KING: Sir, in view of the indulgence which
         you allowed my learned friend I would ask that I could
         ask just some very short questions arising out of that.
         I did not understand the system was that we could bob
         up and down having a second go but if that is the
         system I would like to ask some questions.




H
                                                               80
                                                      W. EASTWOOD


        THE CORONER:   Yes, go ahead, so long as it is
   short.

              Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Q. Dr. Eastwood, it has been put to you that what was
   being undertaken by the Police was a casual look with a
   view to finding precisely how many had got into an
   individual pen. Did you understand that was this
   system in respect of which you were receiving
   assurances? - A. There was to be careful watching as to
   what happened and taking appropriate action.

Q . Do you need to know individual numbers... - A . No, no .

Q. Wait for the question. Do you need to know individual
   numbers by which I mean the exact capacity of an
   individual pen in order to operate a system of
   observing the different way in which individual pens
   are filling up? - A. No.

Q. You gave an answer to my learned friend, Mr. Payne, in
   which you described how you would be observing whether
   various pens were getting more crowded than the other.
   If one was getting more crowded than the other you
   would reduce the numbers in one, is that right? - A.
   Yes. Reduce the numbers entering?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

Q. Do I understand that this is all designed as part of
   the arrangements which my learned friend, Mr. Maxwell,
   has referred to, to encourage even distribution of the
   crowd? - A. Yes, even to the fine tuning of having
   separate gates for pens 3 and 4 so that one could be
   closed off before the other.




                               /MR. TOULSON...
                                               W. EASTWOOD


     MR. TOULSONs   Sir, could I enquire, would it be
your intention to sit up to 4.30 if need be, to finish
this Witness?

     THE CORONERs I take it from that you are going
to take about three quarters of an hour?

     MR. TOULSONs   No, I am not. I don't expect to be
more than five to ten minutes, but I think if you were
prepared if need be to sit until 4.30, I think we would
finish comfortably and it might then be more sensible
for Mrs. McBrien to go first in the ordinary way. If
you were minded to rise at 4 then I can certainly
finish and would ask for leave to go next.

        THE CORONERs   I am in slight difficulty over
this.

     MR. TOULSONs    I am sorry if I am causing you
personal difficulty.

     THE CORONERs   No, it is not a personal
difficulty.  I think you should start, and then I can
make a judgment.

        MR. TOULSONs   Very well.

              Cross-Examined by MR. T0ULS0N

Dr. Eastwood, I have just got a handful of unrelated
questions to ask you, arising out of different things
which have been put at different times. First you were
asked a question, whether there was any documentary
evidence that you could point to, to suggest that at
the time when consideration was given to the
introducing of radial fences anybody ever did a
balancing exercise to consider, as it were, the pros
and the cons. Would you look, please, at document
C386? - A. Yes, sir.

Is that the note of the meeting of the Officer Working
Party when the question of the introduction of radials
was considered in 1981, first considered, and approval
given subject to conditions? - A. It appears to be so,
yes.

It appears that you were not yourself present, because
you were not a member of the Working Party, but we can
see from the top those who were present? - A. Yes.

Although it is not a meeting you were present at I just
want to invite your attention to the paragraph numbered
2, and the opening section of that paragraph? - A. Yes.
                                            W. EASTWOOD


What you may be able to help about is this, that from
the discussions you did have with members of the
Officer Working Party at that time, are you able to
help as to whether the advantages and disadvantages
were discussed? - A. Yes. This minute reflects the
kind of discussions that took place informally and at
the meeting at the ground.

Thank you. We note there that a    Mr.Sheriff was
present from the City Council. You mentioned earlier
in your evidence, you referred to Mr. Sheriff and
indicated his qualifications.  I draw this up now
because you, whether inadvertently or deliberately,
said that you understood he had been present on the
occasion of the discussion about  theremoval of 144,
whereas in fact the evidence from the City Council was
not that Mr. Sheriff was present, but a Mr. Swan? - A.
Yes.

It appears you were in error about that. Who was Mr.
Swan? - A. Mr. Swan is also a Charted Structural
Engineer.

I see. Next could you see, please, document C483 and
483B again? Looking at the second of those documents,
paragraph 3, "Dr. Eastwood says ....", the Jury might
be under the impression from some of the questioning
that this was a note by Mr. Strange of his meeting with
you. What is it actually a note of, if we look at the
top of it? - A. It is a note of a telephone
conversation which he had on 2nd March with Sharon, who
is a person on the staff of the Club who deals with the
ticketing arrangements for games.

So it is his note of what he said to Sharon of the
Club? - A. Yes, that is so.

Your conversation with him had ensued from the previous
memo some four days earlier? - A. That is so.

About which you have given evidence. You were asked
questions about the Club Safety Certificate.  I don't
think we need go back to that again. Can I just ask
you - and if anybody objects we will hear it - to
confirm, is there a requirement under the Club's Safety
Certificate that if any alterations are to be done
notice must be given to the licensing authority and
approval obtained first? - A. Yes. The Safety
Certificate says that advance notice must be given and
it says how long. I think it is three weeks but it
does give a time.

So at the time when you are issuing your annual
Certificate, is the situation this, that before ever
                                            W. EASTWOOD


the Licence was granted in the first place there had,
of course, been the full investigation which you have
described? - A. Yes.

If there had been then any alterations to the Ground,
notice would have had to be given? - A. Yes.

And it is your evidence that, indeed, that always
happened? - A. Yes.

So when we come to the requirement of an annual
Certificate, would that be by definition dealing with
matters, not with alterations, because they would
already have had to be notified and permission obtained
before they were made? - A. Yes, that is so.

So in the context that there had been the initial
detailed investigation before the Licence was granted,
and a requirement that no alterations could be made
without consent, what was the purpose of the annual
inspection? - A. Simply to inspect the structures,
looking for signs of deterioration.

Questions were asked about the particular reference you
made there to "safe to use the full capacity".
Supposing by way of example that you had discovered
some serious defect in, let us say, the South Stand,
would you have reported that in your Certificate? - A.
Yes. If I found something for the first time - of
course, the defect in the roof of the South Stand was
already there but because I made a special inspection I
mentioned it - but any new defect is reported.

Then self evidently the part of the Ground which
contained that structure might not be safe for use? -
A. It if it was not I would say so.

And you would identify what parts of the Ground were
and were not safe for use? - A. That is so.

Is it in that context that you make reference to the
Ground being safe for use to its full capacity? - A.
Exactly.

Would you look, please, at the Green Guide? You have
drawn attention to various differences between the
original and the later one but let's just work from the
later one. Would you go, please, to paragraph 21,
where you were asked a series of questions relating to
the passage in the middle of that paragraph:

    "Design and layout and signposting of exits ....
    require particular attention to ensure that they
    can safely cope with the number of spectators who
                                             W. EASTWOOD


     will use them at the end of an event or in an
     emergency ...."

and then follows particular reference to Chapter 6 ? -
A. Yes.

Chapter 6 we have been to, and it goes in more detail
into the matters which are touched on there by way of
general remark in paragraph 21. Did this Ground at all
relevant times meet the criteria required by Chapter 6?
- A. I would have to look at Chapter 6, sir, before
answering that question.

Chapter 6 is page 22 and deals with egress, times and
the like. - A. I never dealt with signposting in any
way, of course, and I cannot speak about that
particular aspect.

But so far as times of exit via the different exit
routes are concerned, what would be your answer? - A.
That they were very carefully looked at by the Working
Party.

May we go on just to look once again shortly at the two
paragraphs 101 and 206, that is pages 33 and 59, about
which you have been asked a number of questions. We
can see, I think, that in both paragraphs the Guide
distinguishes between sections and subdivisions of
sections. We get it, for instance, on page 33 and the
last line of paragraph 101, where it talks about:

     "... the need for subdivisions of sections in
     paragraph 103 below".

and then on page 59, the last sentence of paragraph 206
talks about:

     "... the need to ensure that sections and
     subdivisions are provided with sufficient exits
     for use ...."

How did you regard pens 3 and 4, and for that matter
the other pens? Were they, as you understood it,
separate sections or subdivisions of a section? - A. As
defined in clause 101, it is a whole side of the ground
which is a section. Then there is an ambiguity in that
in 206 it could be taken that a section, and they says

     "Each section should ideally be self contained


and so on, I think that clearly means a subdivision.
                                            W. EASTWOOD


Right.  In 101 we know that it is suggested, provided,
that each section must have its own limit of safe
capacity, and must be self contained. Do you find
anywhere in the Green Guide any requirement that there
must be a separate capacity figure for each
subdivision? - A. No, I cannot recall anywhere where it
says that.

You have drawn attention to the fact that in 206 there
is the recommendation that ideally there should be self
containment, and you have made your points about that
and I don't want to go further into that, but as long
as you have got subdivisions which actually open into
each other, so that there may be circumstances when
people can move from one subdivision to another, would
it be appropriate to have separate certified
capacities? - A. It is not appropriate if there is no
means of counting people.

Supposing you were to count them in but then people
move within from one subdivision to another? - A. In
that case, if you had a counting in system it would be
necessary to make sure that people could not then move
into a more desirable pen from the viewing point of
view.

Which would defeat one of the objectives of having the
flexibility provided by a subdivision, to facilitate
people being able to move from one to another? - A.
Yes.

In other words, if you are having the system that all
pens are being initially filled at the same time,
allowing the ability for fans to come in and if they
prefer to move along, to go through the gate along to
the next bit of terrace, if you were then to have a
counting of numbers does it follow you would have to
have people firstly on the outside counting those
coming in? - A. Yes.

Then people by the radial gate counting those going
out, and some communication between the two so that "x"
can be subtracted from "y" to know at any one stage
what the number is? - A. That is so. It is not a
practical thing.

You have been asked questions in the last few minutes
about the desirability of trying to keep some sort of
even distribution on the terracing. The 5.4 figure we
know is the recommended maximum density for a terrace
as a whole? - A. Yes.

Does the Guide also recognise that you may have areas
where you are going to get greater crowding in areas
                                                          86

                                               W. EASTWOOD


   where you will get less, namely the peak viewing and
   the other areas? - A. Yes.

Q. Provided for by separate barrier requirements? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Is there anywhere in the Guide a, so to speak, maximum
   local density figure? - A. No.

Q. So does it rely on saying 5.4 determines the number who
   can be allowed into the whole area, recognises
   implicitly that you may have more than that in some
   parts and less in others, and exhorts people toachieve
   some sort of even distribution? - A. Yes.




              /Q. Starting with a
                                                  87


                                    W. EASTWOOD




Q. Starting with a completely open plan terrace, is there
   any absolute way of being able to stop local excessive
   densities? - A. No, it would be impossible to try to
   do that by policing.

Q. Indeed however many pens you divided into, unless you
   actually divide them into pens where you are going to get
   penny numbers in each pen, is there any way of stopping
   local excessive density, absolute way? - A. No, the
   5.4 I am sure was meant to take account of the fact
   that there will always be either local or sometimes
   fairly widespread maldistributions although obviously
   they must not be gross maldistributions.

Q. So having started from the position back prior to 1981
   that you had the open terrace with a set number admitted
   through the turnstiles but no real ability to achieve
   or ensure precisely that you achieve the even distribution
   sought, after the 1981 incident and when the radial
   fences were introduced what was the relevance of that
   in terms of trying to achieve this objective of avoiding
   local excessive densities? - A. Obviously it made it
   easier to have a more uniform density on the pens
   provided of course that the numbers going into parti­
   cularly behind the goal area, Pens 3 and 4 which were
   one pen at that time, provided that that was controlled
   you would get a more even distribution.

Q. You have said yourself of course the system was not
   perfect. Do you regard it as a better system than the
   one which had gone before? - A. It was an improvement.

Q. After its introduction until the events of the tragedy
   with which we are concerned, was anything ever reported
   to you which caused you to believe that there were
   difficulties in now managing the system? - A. No.

Q. Finally on this topic you touched briefly on your know­
   ledge of the history of the ground before the Green
   Guide came in. I am not sure whether you have given
   in evidence or not, but what was the figure that was
   habitually admitted to the Leppings Lane end, the
   terraces, prior to your report of 1979 by agreement
   with the Police in the 1970s? - A. By instruction from
   the Police 11,600.

Q. Is it within your knowledge that during the 1970s semi­
   finals were held on repeated occasions at the ground?
   - A. Yes, on eight occasions in the 1970s the capacity
   which was transmitted to the Club by the Police in the
   letter of 30th September 1970, the capacity of 55,014,
   whatever it was, was admitted to eight successive semi­
   finals and within that figure was the 11,600 to occupy
   the terraces at the Leppings Lane end including the
   North West corner.
                                                             88


                                        W. EASTWOOD



Q. I ask you that question Dr. Eastwood for this reason,
   that inevitably now we are all looking back on these
   events, looking back at the history under the shadow
   of the terrible events which occurred in 1989, but
   before those events occurred how would you have regarded
   in a sentence the history of safety at that end of the
   ground as one of deterioration, improvement or what?
   - A. Oh of great improvement. First there used to
   be crudely 15% more people there at 11,600 instead of
   10,100. We had nearly doubled the number of crush
   barriers and we had put in radial fences which enabled
   much better control of the distribution of the spectators.

Q.   And with theexception of the events on this      semi-final
     of 1981 were you aware of any problems being     encountered
     in practice? - A. None whatever.

Q. And was it your understanding that matters had been taken
   in hand post that event in order to prevent a repetition?
   - A. Yes.

           MR. TOULSON: Sir, the only other matter which it
     may not be necessary for me to touch on at all was this:
     Dr. Nicholson of course introduced his leaning crowd model
     and I did cross-examine him putting various points in
     relation to that. Obviously Dr. Eastwood as an engineer
     has some views on it which I have effectively put in
     cross-examination. It is, we are all agreed, a conceptual
     scheme. I would not propose to take up further time
     eliciting from Dr. Eastwood his views on that model unless
     you ....

          THE CORONER: Perhaps you could just put to
     Dr. Eastwood whether he agrees with the propositions
     you put to Dr. Nicholson.

          MR. TOULSON:   Yes, indeed.

Q. Dr. Eastwood, were you in Court when I asked questions
   of Dr. Nicholson in relation to the leaning crowd model?
   - A. I was, yes.

Q. And when I put certain, well when I put questions to him.
   What is your opinion on the points which I put t.o him,
   in other words do you subscribe whole-heartedly to the
   working crowd model as an accurate predictor of barrier
   collapse or do you have reservations about it for that
   purpose? - A. Firstly let me say, because I would not
   want to be misunderstood, that I regard it as a very
   clever and innovative idea which is capable of perhaps
   being developed, but that it does have its flaws in its
   present form.
                                                          89


                                    W. EASTWOOD



Q.' Now just pause there. Don't go into further detail unless
    you are asked to do so, but is there area for serious
    question for example about angle theta? - A. Yes.

Q. Leaving aside the theory of it, as a matter of practicality
   have there been many occasions when on the Leppings Lane
   end at Hillsborough on that model you might have expected
   barrier failure which did not occur? - A. If the leaning
   crowd model were correct then it ought to have been
   failing every week years ago.

Q. Just one final matter in relation to that: I don't want
   to ask you about a lot of other grounds, but have you had
   some experience at the Nottingham Forest Football Ground?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Could you tell us in no more than three sentences what is
   relevant there? - A. I tested the crush barriers in the
   immediate aftermath of the Ibrox Disaster on the Kop at
   Nottingham Forest ground and not one of the barriers
   would withstand more than about 1501b. per foot.

Q. Is that about two kilonewtons? - A. That is just over
   two kilonewtons as distinct from the test load of six
   which we now apply. They were very sparsely distributed
   and that Kop, because the ground's capacity is quite a lot
   less than most other First Division grounds, it was often
   full.

Q. On the leaning crowd model as a predictor would you have
    expected those barriers to have stood in the way they
    had? - A. No, they would not have a hope if the model
  . were correct. That is again sir not to undermine the
    model. I regard it as elegant and clever.

       THE CORONER: Now, Mrs. McBrien, I don't think we
  will come to you today. You don't mind being treated
  like that do you?

        MRS. McBRIEN:   No.

        THE CORONER: Good because I have also got some
  questions from the jury and we won't come to those either
  and there may be one or two of my own, so Dr. Eastwood
  it does mean that we want you back tomorrow in the
  afternoon.

        We will do our visit in the morning at about
  quarter-past-10. We will go to the ground. We will spend
  as much time as we need and then we will have lunch,
  not there, sorry about that, shall we start at 2?
  Is everybody happy with that?
\X
                                                              90

     A                                    W. EASTWOOD



               We will finish tomorrow unless something happens
         extraordinarily.

                  (The Inquests were adjourned until the
                              following day)




     D




     F




     G




     H
