                                                                                           MIR.15


OTHER-DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                                    Number


T itle ____                                                                                                        ft]/b'Jo
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receiver's instructions —urgent action —Y*$7no            tr6 /foitU A c tJ -      tpC t                c ^ O c fe /c i^ f
                                                                                                                           Receiver
     t f t o j y    f^ O j Q t f" (X   sZ(M &            / f o d A U ' o i ^ ____________________________ ______


                                                                                                                           Indexer
Document registered/iadsited-as indicated C l ) \ M     ^ f
No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                 ~t9*f
Statement reader's instructions                                                                                     Statement Reader
                                        jZJ2_



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised                                                                                              4 ^ 0
Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                0/M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                       Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
        DOCKLANDS HISTORY PROJECT       HILLSBOROUGH TESTIMONY


      Your name?



      Your address?

                                         Liverpool

     Your date of birth?



     What is your occupation?

                                                City Council,

     Did you have a ticket for the match?

     Yes, I did.

     Where was this for?

     B Gate. Leppings Lane end. On the terraces

     What time did you leave Liverpool?

     About quarter-to-ten.

     How did you travel to Sheffield?

      My mate *          hired a car and we all went in thp car.
Tha t s       9          s work mate and his son, me,       's
brother            and         himself.

     What route did you take.

     The M5 route.

     Why did you take that route?

     I don't know. It was last minute arrangements.        rang
me at eight o'clock in the morning, I didn't know what route we
were  going to take, I was just driven there.

I     It was a last minute arrangement that you got the ticket?

     Yes.
s
    *




        I       Do you often go to football matches?

                Not very often, no.

        I   What sort of a journey did you have?

                Quite a good journey, we had a laugh and everything.

        I   Were there any hold ups?

                NO.

        I   Did you stop at all?

                No, just drove straight there.

        I   Where did you park when you       got   to Sheffield?

                Roughly, about a mile away from the main gate, Leppings
        Lane.

        I       Did you see any police officers where you parked?

             No. All the pubs were boarded up and all the shops were
        closed on the route to the stadium.

        I       What time did you get to Sheffield.

                About half-eleven,    something like that.

        I       Did you go directly to the ground?

                No. We went for a drink first.

        I       Where did you go for a drink?

             A pub called the Brown Bear. Don't ask me where that is
        because I haven't a clue.

        I       Were there any other football supporters there?

             Yes, some Forest supporters were there, they were having a
        drink in there, four or five of them, I think.

        I       Were you the only Liverpool supporters?

             No, some came later on. As we were about to leave,             some
        came then.

        I       What was the atmosphere like?

                Friendly. We were just having a drink,       laughing and
        jo k i n g .
    Did you have any contact with the Forest supporters?

    Not much. They never said anything.

    Were there locals there?

     Oh, there were locals there as well, yes.____        was h aving
a go on the video machine, answering questions and              won
six pound on it.

    How old is            the boy with you?

     About ten I think.

     How much did you have to drink?

     Three pints.

     When did you leave?

     It must have been about two o'clockish.

     Were there other supporters still there when you left?

            said we had to leave early anyway,       to get a place
by the stadium so we could get in handy.

I    You say there were other Liverpool supporters there when
you left. About how many?

     Three or four,   that's all, not many.

     Did you have any contact with them?

     No.

     What was their mood when you left?

      Happy. Everyone was happy all laughing and joking and
ever yth ing ,

I   Did the whole group of     you leave together?

     Yes.

I   What did you so next?

     Well, we drove towards the stadium. Everywhere was
barriered off so we had to park quit a distance away from the
stadium.

     How long did it take you to find a parking space,




                          3
_     Well, there was quite a bit of traffic by the time we got,
 it must have been about ten minutes or so upon reaching the
 place where the ground was.

I    Were there any police directing you at that time?

        No.
There were police there, but not saying particularly where you
should park. They weren t stopping every car or anything like
th a t .

I    What did you do when you got out of the car?

     Just walked straight to the stadium.

     How long did it take to get to the stadium?

     It was quite a good walk. Q u a r ter -of -an -ho ur, perhaps
more. As we were going to the stadium, we all made arrangements
on the way down there for all of us to meet outside the Bridge
Inn pub, which is not far from the car. As we were on our way
down there, the crowds started to come then and apparently,
just before they strated to go in,              made arrangements
w i t h t o   meet him by the shop. But I never heard that
because I was still further back with the crowd. They got a bit
ahead of me.

I   Did you see any police officers on your way to the ground?

     Only a few.

I   What were they doing?

     1 didn't take much notice. I saw the two policemen on
horseback. They were just riding round.

I   Were you able easily to find the entrance to that part    of
the ground you had a ticket for?

     No. Because when I got to the ground four policemen closed
the main gate by the turnstiles.

I    What time did you arrive there then?

     Aproximately half-two.

I    What was happening when you got there?

     Well, I got separated from the other three in the crowd.
So, by the time it was my turn to get in the gate, that's when
the police closed the main gate and wouldn't allow anyone
through the turnstiles.

I    How far from the turnstiles were you when that happened?
        I was near the front of the queue,   in fact, right by the
gate.

I       You say   'the queue', was it a proper queue?

        Oh aye. There was a big queue. Masses of people behind me.

I       An orderly queue for the turnstiles?

        Yes. Orderly.

I       Was there any crushing at that time.

     Yes, they were crushing up against the gate. Perhaps
because I was right on top of the gate, people were right
behind me. Because, they actually closed the gate as I got to
it. They were actually closing the gate.

I       Which gate was this?

     The main gate which cornered the turnstiles off. As we
were going in the gate with the crowd, the police closed the
gate on us, wouldn't allow us in. So that's how I got crushed
because I was right up by the gate.

I    Up until then there were orderly queues outside? How were
they ordered? Was someone directing people into queues?

     Well I didn't see anybody, ho. We were just walking in as
normal as you'd walk into any match.

I       Did you feel then that there was any sense of panic?

     Not then. no. Only when they actually closed the gate on
my face. O bv i o u s l y , I was crushed then because no-one was
expecting the gates to be closed, at that minute. And then
there were lads climbing up the fence and into the gated area
to get into the turnstiles and the police were letting them.
This bloke next to me, smacked some fella. He said.'Get down
from there.' and smacked him. He said, 'If you don't get down,
they won't let us in.'

I       Were there any police around you then?

        I only saw the four policemen by the gate.

I       Did they say anything before they closed the gate?

     No. They didn't say why they were closing the gate. There
was all shouting but they never said anything.

I       So what happened then?
V




          Some lads were shouting at the policeman who was on
    horsebac,k and he was shouting back at them.

    I       What were they shouting.

         I couldn't hear properly because there were people
    shouting behind m^ head as well. All shouting at the coppers
    not opening the gates, I couldn't hear what was said, I could
    just see they were shouting at each other, that's all.
    Then, this policeman on horseback said, 'The side gates open
    lads. Go round the side gate.'                               ’

    I       Did you hear him say that.

            Yse,   I heard him say that.

    I       Was there much confusion outside?

        .W e l } there was, because everyone was shouting, wanting to
    get in.     Why are the gates closed?' or words to that effect.

    I       Did you feel crushed then?

         Y e s > well as I was walking in the gates, they closed the
    gates on me. I was crushed right up against the gates then.

    I       And there were a lot of people behind you?

            There must have been a few hundred people behind me, maybe
    more.

    I       Were people panicking at that stage.

            No, not really, no.

    I       What were your feelings at that time?

         I'm not going to get in, they've locked us out. That's it,
    I 11 be going home.

    I       Did you feel angry or anything.

         1 was narked because I couldn't get in.  But what can you
    do if you're locked out? That's what I was thinking at that '
    time

    I    You heard the policeman say there was a gate open round
    the side. You could hear his voice above the rest of the crowd.

      _J Yes. It was jsut that I was in earshot, perhaps. I presume
    quite a few heard it because that's when the whole crowd surged
    forward to go to the gate.

    I       Which way did they surge?
     It must have been to the right a bit.

     What happened to you.

     I was taken along with the crowd. It was quite a distance
away from the main gate to the side entrance. That's the way we
all surged with the crowd.

I   Did you have time to think about going anywhere?

     Well no, he just said 'Side gate open' so, naturally
everyone makes for it. If there's a way you're going to get
in... you've got your ticket so you're going to go in.

I   How did you feel at the time?

     I felt O.K. You just think to yourself, 'Oh good, there's
a way we can get in. We're not all going to be locked out.|
I went with the crowd. I think it was to the right. The main
gate was here (he indicates in front of him) and you go around
to the right and then you go forward.

I    What was happening around     you? What was the mood of the
people at that time?

     There was a lot of shouting...
Everyone sort of rushed forward through the gate and in through
the tunnel. The tunnel was one of the worst parts, because
that's when the crush was starting, going through the tunnel.
You had to keep on your feet to keep going, because there were
thousands behind you. That was pretty n e r v e w r e c k i n g , going
through the tunnel, by i t s e l f .

I    Were you frightened then?

     A bit. Because obviously, if there's loads of people
behind you then you've got to keep up with the people in
front... I was a bit nervewracked because it was pitch black,          I
couldn't see as we were going through it.

I    What could you see.

     Nothing really. It was pitch black. You c o u l d n ’t even see
people... you were taken forward with the crowd. I didn't like
going through that tunnel at all.

I     What could you see from the tunne,     ahead?

     Well, when you got near to the end of it you could see the
light and you naturally think you're in the ground. But the
worst part was the impact when you left the tunnel to hit^the
people that were in there. The whole crush was then. That s
when, there was like the force into the other people. That
really shook me up. You hit the people and that's when you all
became squashed then, as soon as you hit the people that were
there. And we were all swung over... I was swung over to the
right and I was crushed up with my arms by my sides, my hands
up here, (he demonstrates his arms pinioned at his sides but
bent at the elbows so that his hands were to the sides of his
chest.) holding my glasses case. I was terrified of losing my
glasses... And the steps leading down to each barrier, with all
the crushing and pushing, we were going down three steps and
coming back three steps. And then we were getting pushed
forward each time because more  people must have kept coming in
then.

I    What did you think was happening?

     I was frightened because, it was that hot and jammed and
packed in there, the sweat poured off me and you could smell
the sweat of everybody else that was in there as well. The
place stunk of sweat.

I    What was happening to the people around you?

     I was aware that everyone was suffocating then because...
even I was suffocating at parts. Because,  obviously, the more
people that got in there, the less room there was for anyone to
move. I couldn't catch my breath half the time. As I say, we
were walking down three steps and back three steps and I
suppose that that give you the little bit of leeway to breathe.
There were certain points where you stood still and you were
jammed together then. It's very hard to describe, because a lot
of things happened so fast. And then, presumably, more people
kept coming in and I was pushed further forward. I presume
everybody else was pushed further forward then. And then, there
was an almighty push altogether and I hit the barrier then. I
was bent right over the barrier with the force of other people
on top of me.

I    The crash barrier was this?

     Yes. I hit the barrier that hard, it knocked the wind
right out of me and I was bent over double. I collected my
thoughts very quick and I got hold of the barrier and pushed
myself back... pushed some people away.

I    How long were you on the barrier?

     A few minutes. It felt like ages, a few minutes. But
that's when I was in a right state because I hit this barrier.
I didn't think I was going to get off it. Because people were
crushing on top of you then. So when I pushed myself off the
barrier, obviously, I pushed the people back to give me a bit
of room to breath for a second. I was so out of breath, it took
me seconds to recatch my breath. I decided... if I stay where I
am I'm going to get further crushed down again. So, the obvious
thought was, 'I better get back amongst the crushers.' not go
\




    further down and get crushed more. I could hear people
    screaming and crying and I could hear people saying, 'You're
    standing on some kid.' all that... I could just hear the
    screaming, lots of screaming.

    I       What were your thoughts at that time?

         I was panic-stricken. I'm not going to get out of this. I
    was really worried. I said, 'I'm better off getting b a c k u p the
    crowd, to see if I can get out.' I was in a state of panic, I'd
    better get out of this place or otherwise I'M going to get
    injured.' Because as I hit the barrier, naturally I thought I
    was going to get worse injuries. So I decided to crawl through
    everybody's  legs, which I did. I was facing the barrier then,
    turned round and went through people's legs. Because the
    terraces were on a slope, so all people's legs are on different
    tiers, naturally, you think there is a space in between people.
    That's why I thought very quick, that if I stayed where I was,
    even though I'd got off the barrier, I was going to go further
    down again and get crushed further. The best thing to do was to
    get back.

    I       How easy    was that? You went down   onto your knees..?

         No. Not onto my knees. I more or less knelt down and          then,
    that way... sort of pushed myself forward.

    I       Through    people's legs?

            Through    people's legs, yes. I was in a crouching position.

    I       What was happening around you then?

         I could hear all shouting and everything. THe match was
    going on - I couldn't see the match obviously - I know the
    match was on, people were shouting I heard the crowd was all
    shouting and everything. But as I was running through people's
    legs and pushing to get back up, lots of other lads followed me
    as well. So they must have been trying to get out as well.

    I       How did you know    that?

         Because they were right behind me. I think even   a few ran
    out in front of me as well. Once I started they must have
    followed suit sort of thing. See one do it and they all do it.
    I come to a barrier again, it must have been near the top of
    the place and I had to crawl right under the barrier and get to
    the top then. It actually had become... the situation wasn^t as
    crushed as you made your way further back, It was tough going
    at first, to get through the first... God knows h ow many rows
    of people before it became slightly easier.

        I   Where did you come out?
     1 came out at the top, which I thought was the tunnel
entrance, as I looked up I could see an archway, naturally, I
thought that was the tunnel entrance, the way I come in. I was
trying to get out. I was really panicking then, to get out. And
when I got there, this bloke said, 'That s as far as you go
mate. It s the wall h e r e . 1 And then, I went 'Oh shit.' This
bloke was laughing. And all the kids that were biKTHd me said,
 F in... gonna get out of here, let's get up.' I could hear
lads shouting.  Give us a hand up.' so all the people at the
back were saying,  E y re, bunk them up.' And so I bunked them
up then.

I    These were the lads coming out from between people's legs.
As they were coming out, you were, with other men, bunking them
up to people hanging down.

   J Yes, because at the very back there no crushing. It wasn't
as bad. We didn t know what was going on further down so those
lads had a bit more room at the back.

I    How many people were handed up?

     G °d knows... loads... too numerous to count. The lads were
hanging over the stands and held their hands down and as we
were bunking them up they were grabbing hold of the people's
hands and we were pushing them up.

I    What was happening in the crowd around you at that time?

   . Everyone was helping to hand them up. They were all
saying,  We want to get o u t . ' All the kids wanted to get out. I
didn t think anything was wrong then, I just thought, they want
to go up in the stands out the way.

I    So you didn't realise that anything was wrong at that
point?

      ® , only except that there was a load of crushing and you
couldn t breath. I was frightened because I was getting crushed
a lot. You see, as I went down, when I hit the barrier, there
was young lads next to me then who were falling, I helped this
young lad next to me, but I never seen that lad again because I
got pushed further on then, before I hit the barrier.

I    So there were people falling over then?

     Yes.

I    The kids that were asking to be lifted up, were they
panicking?

     oh y e s > you could see panic in their faces. I was
shattered but I was still lifting them up. I was obviously in a
*




    state of panic then, not realising what was going on anyway,
    myself. ,

    I    You weren't really aware of what was happening?

         No.

    I    How long were you there at the back?

         It must have been ages.

    I    Were you handing people up all the time?

         All the time, yes.

    I    Were you aware at all of what was happening at the front?

         No, but when we were handing people up, we saw the fans
    from the stands ripping the boards from the stands. I was
    shouting, 'What are you doing that for?' I didn't realise they
    were going to be used as stretchers for the dead. I was
    shouting at them for ripping the things off because they were
    dropping right.by our heads.

    I    What happened to those boards   then?

         They were just getting handed down through the crowd. I
    could hear screaming and everything. It was like bedlam really.
    It was too hard to comprehend what was going on. Because I was
    still shaking after I hit that barrier, that shook the life out
    of me.

    I    When did things start to calm    down, or did they?

         Not really,   things just calmed down when the area was
    cleared.

    I    How was it cleared?

         I don't know. I couldn't see. I was still helping people
    and the next minute  I knew, the place was a little more
    clearer. That's when I saw the bodies on the floor and I was
    sick then. I felt really sick then, when I saw the bodies on
    the floor. I said to this bloke next to us, 'Don't tell me
    there's people dead.' He said, 'Yes, I tried to help before,
    some young lad, tried to give this young lad the kiss of life,
    but the coppper said to me, "Leave him, he's dead.'" I don't
    know where that bloke came from, I must have been in a state
    of... God knows.... of shock of some sort... I just didn't
    realise what was going on, even then. When it cleared, I just
    saw fellas dropping to the floor and sitting on the floor just
    crying their eyes out. I was slumped over the barrier then,
    there was a barrier nearby, after I finished hand- balling all
    the lads up, I was just slumped over the barrier, I was
exhausted, I was really out of breath. When I spoke to that
bloke, I. said to him, 'There's all dead p e o p l e ' I just
couldn't believe that there'd be dead people there, I just
couldn't   believe it. When I seen all the lads with coats
over... I said, 'What are they doing with coats over their
heads?' I just couldn't believe it. And the bloke that was next
to me said to me, 'I was helping a young lad and the police
said "Leave him. He's dead."   It was just hard to comprehend.
And I was speaking to one Forest fan, an older bloke, I can't
remember what the hell he said, I just can't remember what he
said at all. I must have been in more a state of shock than I
thought. Even now, I feel sick talking about it... I just felt
breathless and exhausted.

I      How long were you over the barrier?

       When the crowd cleared? I don't know how long I was there
for.

I    Did anybody help you off or were you able to get off
yourself?

     I had to get off myself. I don't know h ow long I was
there. I must have been there over half an hour, it may have
been longer. I was just physically and totally exhausted.

I      What was happening around you then?

     People shouting and screaming and crying. People sitting
on the floor crying their eyes out, I seen loads of dead
bodies. And you could see them all walking round the pitch. I
could see then. I saw where the perimeter fence had been ripped
apart. One photographer got in, whether it was a cameraman or a
photographer, I d o n’ t know, but about twenty of the fans rushed
him and battered him. I saw that.

I      What happened then?

     Well, the police came up and they were trying to shift the
bodies and some of the fans were shouting at the police. I
couldn't make out what they were shouting, they were just
shouting and swearing, you know. I just couldn't make out. I
couldn't realise what was going on it was funny... It really
took it out of me. God knows how long I was there and then this
bloke came round with a mop bucket full of water and a load of
paper cups. I had a drink of water and  I felt a bit better
after a drink of water. I must have been really shattered, I
couldn't stand up, I must have leaned on that barrier.... God
knows how long.

I      Did you speak to anyone again?

     I don't think so. You see, when I saw all that, I just
wanted to get out of the place. When it fianlly registered,
what had happened, that there were dead bodies there. I just
wanted to get out. I felt really exhausted, I couldn t hardly
stand, it took me all my energy just to find my way out.

       Did you go back up the tunnel?

       Back up the tunnel yes.

I     Was there anybody helping people there or around you?

     I didn't see anyone. There was an announcement... that's
right, Kenny Dalglish came on before  the area cleared, he
appealed for people to be calm and co-operate with the,police.
That's when it cleared, when I was still over the barrier.

I    So you found the tunnel you came in by and is that the way
you went out?

          Yes and      I went to the toilet then. Fellers were talking
¥5out
d U U U U  it
           J- U in
                J-U the
                    UllC toilet.
                         U W i l t u • Some
                                        v/inv- were saying
                                                       — — 0 that here was five
                                                                            ••------- ------------

dead. I heard there was five dead and then I heard some lad
say, 'No, I heard there was seven dead.' And then others were
saying, as I was going out, because the crowd was walking out
then, some had radios and I heard them saying there was fifteen
dead. It just seemed to jump like that I even heard in the
ground, when I was there, there was five dead and some saying
there were seven. But when I got out of the ground completely,
altogether, the police were there ushering us on, 'Come on.
This way.' They were directing us out then.

I      What did you see outside the ground when you came out?

     I saw a lot of coppers sitting in vans eating food. And
there was still a policeman on horseback there and there was
plenty of coppers directing us which way to go. We had to go
round in a half circle before we got to the main road.

I       Did you speak to anyone?

     No, I hardly spoke to anyone at all. I had difficulty
walking, really. My body felt heavy. I just felt really
shattered. I managed to get to the main road and made my way
back up to the Bridge Inn pub. I must have waited there  for
ages. I stood outside. And there were peple crying, walking up
the road and everything. You could hear them all talking, but
it seemed like, miles away, it didn't register at all.

 I      How long were you outside that pub?

      God knows. It felt like ages. I saw people... the train
 stopped, there was this bridge there, the train stopped and
 there was some steps down. I could see people waiting at the
 station and they were meeting up with each other and putting
 their arms around each other and everything. People who had
probably lost each other in the crowd and meeting up there.
People crying and everything.. I could see all that.

I      When did your friends find you.

              found me. He was on his own then, and I said.
                  ")   TT   I   _       1      .   I   ___   f   .     "
'Where's
, , c            ? How's ----------
                                and    I? I said. I heard a young
lad °p ten was crushed or trampled, probably dead. He said that
      was panic-stricken as well, he couldn't find          at
all, b u t he found him in the end. He said, 'Everyone’s alright
         s alright, I'm alright.'

       So you were relieved to see each other?

       Yes•         said,   I thought we arranged to meet you by the
IThop.   I said,       What shop? You never told me about any shop. We
made arrangements
           „ 0 -------    to all
                             ,   meet>- here      on the
                                        n c j - c <ju u iic way down
                                                            way u o w n tto the
                                                                          o m e
ground.    He said,        We ve been looking for you for ages.'
was worried, he said, 'I thought you were in amongst the dead.'
When w e all eventually got together and we got in the car,
        was in a state because he was telling me he couldn't find
         He said he was squashed up against the fence, the
perimeter fence.

I     How were you feeling on the way home?

     I was just sick, terrible. And I must have looked an all
because the others were very quiet as well. Everyone seemed to
be very quiet.And we said, w e fd better find a phone, but all
the phones were crowded, there was no w a t j o u could get to a
phone. And we listened to the radio i n | s         car and the
next we heard there was 85 dead. We just couldn't believe that
many were^dead. We just couldn't believe it. But            was
saying,  I thought you were going to collapse, because when we
were in the Isle of White...    we went to see Bob Dylan one time
and I flaked out in the crowd. I think he was really worried.
He said,  I got you the ticket and you could have been d e a d . '
Because he could see everything from the stands but there was
nothing he could do. He just felt helpless.

I    Did you at any time after arriving in Sheffield, witness
any violence: within groups of Liverpool supporters?

     N o . Only to the point that when we were locked out at the
main gate, and these lads were climbing over and this big lad
got annoyed because, you'd think they'd lock us out, so he just
smacked that lad there. But that was the only trouble I saw.

I     Between rival supporters?

      None at all.

I    Against any individuals, apart from that incident that
you ve mentioned?
     No.

I    Against any police officers?

     9n ly that one on the police on horseback. He was just
shouting because he couldn t get in, that's all, shouting at
the copper.

I    And the incident that you mentioned against the press or
media?

     Yes.   I saw that.

I    Did you see anyone who appeared to be drunk?

     Not in my opinion. There was no way you could survie if
you were drunk. If you surged forward at that speed and that
many people, you'd never make it in the ground. You couldn't
keep your legs together.

I     Is there anything you want to add to what you've already
said?

     Only that... You see, my way of thinking was that the
place was like the Kop, I didn't think the area was that much
enclosed,you know, railed off and the perimeter fence joining
the railings. I thought it was like the Kop where there's a gap
between the end of the steps, the terrace itself, and then
there's a path right round which can lead to any sections of
the ground anywhere. It didn't occur... I could have made a
fatal decision to go forward, thinking that there was a way
out, that you could go to a different section. If I didn't make
the decision to go back instead of forward, I could have been
one of the dead. T h a t 's stuck in my mind the most. I just thank
God that I made the right decision to go through people's legs
and go back.

I    You'd never been to that ground before?

     No.

I    Your assumption would be that it was like the Liverpool
ground.

     Yes. You'd naturally think that there was a path, an area
around where you could walk to different sections of the ground
before you came to the perimeter fence. I just think that if I
decided to go forward, instead of backwards to get out, then I
would have been one of the dead. Because the barrier I crashed
into, was the barrier before the one that was demolished by the
crowd. That was a sickening thought as well, that could have
happened to me. The most sickening thought was, the force I hit
that barrier, I thought I was going to cut in two. I actually
screamed with pain. How I got off there, I can only presume...
that when I put my hands on the barrier and pushed the peopl
away, that's the only reason... But I was really pinned up
against that barrier. How I got off must have been a miracle




End of Interview
