OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised jL                                                  Number


Title    \
(Include source and any’ documt
                         document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action
                                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                                     Indexer


No(s) of actions raised               (^)
Statement reader's instructions   JjU*-- ffa JyJjjU & IL            jtp g /l   --                           e
                                                                                                                                Statement Reader



                             UU&AMAJ?*
                              ft* ..
                                                                                                                                srb%
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                >1 II II^i| .1'.-w-
                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                                O/M        SIO
                                                                                                                                f:
                                                                                                           -§-f— I—
                                                                                                           » imm Sum

Further action No(s)                                                                                                                 Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                                                                           1
        i


                                                               Telephone:
                                                                       Telex:
                                                                     Fax:




                                              Manchester
Our Ref:
Your Ref:
            26th April, 1989
Date:




            STRICTLY PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

            Lord Justice Taylor,
            C/O Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
            Hillsborough,
            Sheffield.                                     RECORDED DELIVERY




            Dear Sir,

            HTT.LSBOROUGH DISASTER

            Having Attended the F.A. Cap Semi-Final I feel moved to write to
            you in the hope that this letter in some way may be of
            constructive assistance in the course of your enquiry.

            I would preface my remarks by stating that I have watched
            football regularly for over 25 years during the earlier part of
            which I invariably stood on the terracing, although in recent
            years I have usually obtained a seat. The football I have
            watched is primarily on Merseyside, although I have visited over
            30 grounds in Britain and have attended numerous major events
            including Cup Semi-Finals, Finals, European Cup Finals etc.   I
            believe that I am qualified to make the following observations.

            1.   It is clear that too large a proportion of the crowd is
                 required to enter the ground via the Leppings Lane
                 turnstiles. The area approaching the turnstiles is designed
                 in such a way that there will inevitably be a bottle neck
                 when big crowds attend.  I entered the ground at
                 approximately 2.20 p.m., at which time it was distinctly
                 uncomfortable approaching the turnstiles.  I find it quite
                 impossible to accept any suggestion that there was a sudden
                 build up of pressure close to kick off time. Any prudent
                 policing arrangements would have provided for barriers say
                 100 yards from the turnstiles to exert some control over the
                 rate of arrival in the critical bottle neck area.

                                                              /cont'd.......2




                                                                                2
                                                                      2
                                             Continuation: page no.




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                             26th April, 1989


2.   I believe that there is nothing fundamentally wrong with
     sub-dividing a terrace into pens, although presumably the
     Sheffield Wednesday Club knew how many people the critical
     pen behind the goal could accommodate.  If the same tickets
     were available for the whole of the standing section, then a
     secondary turnstile to the pen would ensure that only the
     requiste number of spectatators would be permitted access.


3.   From my position in the centre of the North Stand, it was
     clear that the critical pen was already seriously
     overcrowded at approximately 2.45 p.m.  Indeed, others
     around me made the same comment at the time. The areas
     around the corner flags were almost deserted.  If it was
     clear to spectators it should have been more clear to police
     both on the ground and in control rooms that urgent action
     was required then.


I do not believe that periferal issues such as ticket allocation
- however illconsidered that may have been - nor late arrival at
the ground were relevant factors. All ticket crowds are capable
of control and indeed the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
effectively limited our stadia to crowds significantly smaller
than could be practically and safely accommodated.   Finally I
have difficulty in believing that the problem was alcohol
related.  It is not unknown for people to have a drink on the way
to a football match and there were no problems at the other semi
final where I have no doubt that Everton were equally well and
similarly supported.

In my mind the issue turns upon the critical lack of control of
numbers entering the critical pen area and some particularly
unintelligent police organisation. There appeared to be no
liaison between those inside and outside the stadium and even as
the tragedy began to unfold the police reacted as if there were
crowd violence.

I hope these observations may be of some assistance to your
enquiry, but in any event I would be grateful if you could let me
have the comfort of acknowledging receipt of this letter.


Yours faithfully,
