                                                                                                                     '

                                                                                                               '/
                                                                                          M I R .15            ,6r


                                                                             2.15.   IQ
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and time raised                J                    !
                                                                                                      Number
                                                                                                               ..                       ^OWc.'




T itle                     CW1       A-c                                >a> S o c           S c W iC S 2 /)
f Include source and a ny docum ent num ber i f relevant)   <£?__       /VcxT &JcSj\ T O ’’^V.SZftr   S o c l,       Hfe/yrV € X C 9

Receiver's instructions — urgent action
                                                                                                                             Receiver


                                                                                                                         3 7 ^ 5                 •

                                                                                                                             Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated                          2
                                                                    ......

                                                                                                                           ii-q.
No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions




Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken                                                                                            SIO




                                                                                                                             Indexer
F urth e r action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
J m I eRVYN JONES MSc                                                     FURNIVAL HOUSE                             2 122J
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                 Furnival Gate              |
  HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y TEAM                                           Sheffield S1 4QN             1 -      ——     ’
                                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                  SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                    Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                          Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                          Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                                             Our Ref:                JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                           Date:                   21 June 1



             D Mason Esq
             Director of Social Services
             C/0 26 Hatton Garden
             Liverpool         ,
             L3 2AW      /j j

                                                                                           \
                                                                                                c.


             Dear Mr Mason                          j           --- '2-_C| ^    /
                                                                                                                      >c
             ACCESS TO THE            WEST END TERRACES, STANDS, GATES AND TURNSTILES                                      '   I   1 -   ■

             Thank you for            your letter of 19 June.

            The reason why I am restricting physical access to the terraces, fences,
            gates etc, is that there still has to be certain research to be under
            taken by the Health and Safety Executive into various aspects. I have
            been advised that any contamination from outside sources could perhaps
            influence the results. It is appropriate, therefoe, that we preserve
            the scene until the Health and Safety Executive have completed their
            work. I hope that we will soon be able to return that end of the ground
            to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club after which you will have no
            difficulty in dealing direct with the Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell.

            I would like to stress that I do not wish to add any more to the
            distress already suffered, but it is imperative to Lord Justice Taylor's
            Inquiry, as well as HM Coroner, that the best evidence is achieved.

            I still have no objection to visits being made to the ground, subject to
            Mr Mackrell's approval, but touching any aspects of the terraces to
            which I have just referred cannot be permitted for the time being.
            Hopefully it will not be long before full access will be available to
            the Club.

            I have copied this letter to the Deputy Director of the Health and Safety
            Executive and to the Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                   Sheffield
                                      M M                                              Q
                                                                                                         MetroooliTan
                                                                                                         B o r o u g h o f W irra l
    Cheshire                                                                           SEFTON
    County Council                                                                     COUNCIL
                                                 I
                                       KNOWSI.EY j
                                                     Council s H w   1*11 In l n n m
                                                                     S t H e le n s



c/o 26 HATTON GARDEN
    LIVERPOOL
    L3 2AW                                                              Telephone: 051 225-3776

Your ref:       j m j /v s c .         Our ref:         p m /b p .                     Date:   19th June, 1989.


    Mr. J. Mervyn Jones, M.Sc.,
    Assistant Chief Constable,
    Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
    West Midlands Police Headquarters,
    P.O.Box 52, Lloyd House,
    Colmore Circus Queensway,
    Birmingham B4 6NQ.


     Dear Mr. Mervyn Jones,

                                 Access to theWest End Terraces, Stands,
                                 Gates and Turnstiles.

          Thank you for your letter of 7th June regarding the restricted access
     to parts of the Hillsborough football ground.

           In your letter you ask us to ensure that those who visit the ground
     do not touch any aspects of the terraces at the West End. In effect this
     means that there is no point whatsoever in us arranging visits to Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club, as the reasoning behind victims of the Hillsborough
     disaster paying such visits is for them to actually relive the experience
     encountered by those who were involved in the tragedy. I recall Lord Justice
     Taylor's comments to the press when he visited the scene of the tragedy which
     were, in essence, that he needed to be in the Leppings Lane part of the
     grounds to get the feel of the terraces so that he could better understand
     what happened on the day. In that sense Lord Justice Taylor's feelings are
     a mirror of the feelings of the victims and to deny them access to the very
     spot where they or their relatives or friends were subject to the horrors of
     the tragedy is to deny them any opportunity of overcoming their feelings of
     loss.

          I am sure you will understand that it is an essential part of the healing
     process that people are given the opportunity of visiting the scene of a
     tragedy, and in the Lockerbie disaster you will recall arrangements were made
     for relatives from the United States to be flown to the disaster area so that
     they could better understand what had happened and assist them in coping with
     their grief.

          Whilst I am sure there are good reasons why Lord Justice Taylor might
     have thought restricted access to the ground was necessary, I am equally sure
     that he would understand the necessity for selected groups with whom we are
     involved, being afforded every consideration to help them deal with the
     tragedy. Could I, therefore, ask you to share the contents of this letter
When calling or telephoning please ask for: Mr.
                            -   2-




with Lord Justice Taylor with a view to some arrangement being made
which will enable us to continue with the essential work of helping
the victims of Hillsborough.

     I have copied this letter to Mr. G. Mackrell, Secretary at the
Club, for his information.




                                     Yours sincerely,




                                Director of Social Services.
