                                   Kjnr\Q_\ LL-i                                 H 'O jC ( ^ Q j


                               SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:
                                                                            QA
    From: PC 647 T.Sherburn                                 Station/Dept:
    To:   Chief Superintendent Wain                         Date: 'jgth April 1989


                                                                  U
          SUBJECT:   F.A.Cup semi final Hillsborough Football round 15 th April 1989
           I was on duty at Hillsborough Football uround on the occasion of the F.A. Cup
           serai final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
           I v/as attached to serial 41 with responsibility for patrolling from V/adsley
           Bridge to partway along Halifax Hoad.
           In company with PC Stronach,I took up position about 10.45am ana paid particular
           attention to the shopping precinct on Halifax Hoad which included the Gateways
           store* From abput 11.30am Liverpool fans were entering the store and purchasing
           large amounts of beer and lager,some of which was being drunk nearby.
           At this stage all the fans were reasonably well behaved and sociable towards
           Police Officers.
           At approximately 2.45pm I v/as still on duty at this location and were warning
           the fans that if they did not leave the area there would be a possibility that
            they would be unable to reach the ground and enter it prior to the start of
           the matchoAs fans entered Halifax Hoad I would estimate that upwards of 1000
           were still   filtering along that road, towards the ground,and it was obvious that

           they would   not reach the ground prior to kick off.
           When th-3 call came for all Officers to attend the ground I went to that location
           and entered onto the pitch. Whilst there I spoke to a Liverpool fan who v/as in
           some state   of shock and he stated that an attack on the Notts Forest goal caused
           a surge in the crowd in the Leppings Lane stand and persons in        the stand were push
           forward,however,instead of the -expected return to their normal position,there
           appeared to be a second wave of pushing from the rear of the stand causing a
           concentrated push, -to the front of the stand. It could be that at this time the

           gate was opened.
           In view of any forthcoming inquiry into the incidents surrounding the tragedy
           at Hillsborough I forward these details for your information and perusal.

                                      A




Gen/2
