Other Document Form                           Date and time raised        2\ H        3->4         Number



Titla      Xa£ £ \Ci I L u o a         j, j   T.&6   ,___   ________________
(Include source and any document number if relevant)

Receivers instructions urgent action y $ / N o _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
                                                                                                               Receiver



Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                              Statement
Statem ent readers instructions
                                                                                                              Reader


Indexed as indicated                                                                                               Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

j a m m e d - further action to be taken                                                                    0 /M     I       SIO




                                                                                                            1 / Indexer
Further action no(s)

W hen satisfied all actions raised Office M anager to endorse other Document M aster Number Form
*




                     APPENDIX




    CURRICULUM VITAE IB RESPECT OF A.C.C. (OPS)

               AND SENIOR OFFICERS

              SERVING AT ’F* DIVISION


              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                        ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (OPERATIONS)
                           MR VALTER WILLIAM WILSON JACKSON



PERSONAL & DOMESTIC


Mr Jackson lsM ^ /years of age, a married man j
He was educated at Coatbridge Technical College and, in 1985, whilst a Police
officer, he attended a three year part time Diploma Course in Criminology at the
University of Manchester.



POSTINGS & PROMOTIONS


He joinedl the Manchester City Police in 1961, following 3 years in the Royal Air
Force Police. After a short period in the uniformed branch, Mr Jackson
transferred_to the Criminal Investigation Department where, apast from a brief
return to uMfoxjn duties as Inspector, he remained until 1978.

In 1978 Mr'Jackson was appointed Deputy Commander of North Manchester Division
which was a uniform posting. In 1980, on his promotion to Chief Superintendent,
he was seconded td the Police Staff College, Bramshill, as Assistant Director of
the Intermediate Command Course.

Mr Jackson returned to Greater Manchester in 1981 and took command of the South
East Manchester Division, which covers the busy Manchester International Airport.
In 1983 he transferred as Commander of South West Manchester Division - Moss Side
- which incorporates the Manchester City Football Club Ground. He was appointed
Assistant Chief Constable with the South Yorkshire Police on 1 May 1985.



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS


Mr Jackson has a wealth of operational experience and is a member of the
Association of Chief Police Officers General Purpose Committee - Sub Committee on
Hooliganism at Sporting Events.
                         CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD


PERSONAL & DOMESTIC

Mr Duckenfield is 44 years of age, a married man


POSTINGS & PROMOTIONS

Constable

Following service as a Cadet from 1960 to 1963 Mr Duckenfield was appointed as a
Constable on 2nd September 1963. He performed beat patrol duties in Sheffield
until 14th August 1965. On the 15th August 1965 Mr Duckenfield was appointed as
an Aide^to the Criminal Investigation Department and remained in CID in the
Sheffield City Centre and the Rotherham area until his promotion to Sergeant in
1969.
 *            '
Sergeant

On 6th October 1969 Mr Duckenfield was promoted to Sergeant in CID based on the
central Sheffield area. He remained there until 14 February 1972 when he was
seconded to the Regional Crime Squad for a period of two years.

Inspector

On 9th September 1974 Mr Duckenfield was promoted to the rank of Inspector and
posted to El Sub-Division based at Hackenthorpe, Sheffield. He was a patrol
Inspector responsible for a shift of men in a busy city Sub-Division. During
October 1975 Mr Duckenfield was transferred to the Community Liaison Department at
Force Headquarters, Sheffield.

Chief Inspector

On 15th March 1977 Mr Duckenfield was promoted to the rank of Chief Inspector as
the officer in charge of the Community Liaison Department based at Force
Headquarters. He remained there until 25th September 1978 when he was posted as
the Deputy to the Sub-Divisional Commander at F2 Sub-Division based at
Ecclesfield, Sheffield. During this period Mr Duckenfield would have been called
upon from time to time to perform duty at Hillsborough Football- Ground.' -On 3
September 1979 Mr Duckenfield was transferred from F2 Sub-Division to FI Sub-
Division as Deputy to the Sub-Divisional Commander and during the course of this
posting he would have had extensive experience in policing Sheffield Wednesday
Football Ground at Hillsborough. On the 5th June 1980 Mr Duckenfield transferred
from FI Sub-Division to D2 Sub-Division at Attercliffe. Here again Mr Duckenfield
was Deputy to the Sub-Divisional Commander and would gain a wealth of experience
in a very busy city Sub-Division. On the 28th June 1982 Mr Duckenfield again
transferred to the Community Liaison Department at Force Headquarters, Sheffield
and following a brief period in that department transferred once more to D2 Sub-
Division on 7th November 1982.
Superintendent

On 1st September 1983 whilst still serving at D2 Sub-Division Mr Duckenfield was
promoted to the rank of Superintendent to remain at D2 Sub-Division as the Sub-
Divisional Commander. On the 20th May 1985 Mr Duckenfield transferred to 'D*
Divisional Headquarters at West Bar as the Deputy to the Divisional Commander.
During this time Mr Duckenfield would have extensive experience in policing the
Bramall Lane Football Ground, home of Sheffield United Football Club in addition
to gaining a wealth of experience in a city centre Division.

Chief Superintendent

Mr Duckenfield was promoted to the rank of Chief Superintendent on the 27th March
1989 and assumed command of *F' Division at Hammerton Road Police Station.

COMMENDATIONS

During the course of his career to date Chief Superintendent Duckenfield has
received three commendations. On two occasions he has been commended by the Chief
Constable and separately by the Crown Court.

21.12.64. . Commended by Chief Constable for the arrest of four men for attempt
            shopbreaking an& possession of housebreaking implements by night.

23.02.65.   Commended by Chief Constable for the arrest of a man on description
            for an offence of larceny.

22.09.67.   Commended by City of Sheffield Recorder, Mr P Stanley Price Q.C., for
            assistance given on enquiries in case against man found guilty of a
            large number of offences of obtaining goods by false pretences.


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Mr Duckenfield has always been described as above average throughout his period in
the Police Service. He was promoted comparatively early in service, to the rank
of Sergeant and has progressed steadily since that time. He is dedicated,
hardworking, loyal and trustworthy.

On his most recent staff appraisal he was described as "....a most dependable
officer who sees problems from several angles and can cope with the complexities
of modern policing."       _ _                                  _             ____

He is an excellent Police officer, a good ambassador for the Force who has always
given exemplary service.
                                 SUPERINTENDENT MARSHALL


PERSONAL & DOMESTIC

Mr Marshall is A5 years of age, a married man


POSTINGS & PROMOTIONS

Constable

Following service as a cadet from 1960 to 1962 Mr Marshall was appointed a
Constable in the West Riding Constabulary on 28 August 1962 and performed beat
patrol duties in the Dewsbury Division of the West Riding Constabulary.

Sergeant

On 27 November 1968 Mr Marshall was promoted to the rank of Sergeant and
transferred -to the Rotherham Division of the then West Yorkshire Constabulary. On
1 April-1973 he''was> transferred to the Training Department at Force Headquarters
and remained in that posting until he was promoted to the rank of Inspector.
                          'V .

Inspector

On 10 June 1974 Mr Marshall was promoted to the rank of Inspector and remained in
the Training Department at Force Headquarters. On 1 August 1977 he was
transferred to FI Sub-Division at Hammerton Road as a patrol Inspector. During
this time he would be responsible for a shift of men in a busy city sub-division
and he would also be deeply involved in policing the Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground at Hillsborough.

Chief Inspector

On 6 October 1980 Mr Marshall was promoted to the rank of Chief Inspector and
transferred to B1 Sub-Division at Barnsley as Deputy to the Sub-Divisional
Commander. During this time he would gain experience in a busy town Sub-Division
in policing Barnsley Football Club. On 15 June 1981 he was transferred to Force
Headquarters at Sheffield for duties in the Research and Development Department.
After little more than a year he was transferred on the 1 July 1982 on secondment
to H.M. Inspector's personal staff. He performed duties as a Staff Officer to
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary.

Superintendent

On 1 October 1983 whilst still seconded to the HMI's office he was promoted to the
rank of Superintendent and during that period he was performing the duties of
Temporary Chief Superintendent.

On 3 December 1984 Mr Marshall returned to the Force and was posted as Sub-
Divisional Commander at D1 Sub-Division at West Bar. This is a very busy city
centre Sub-Division and during the period that Mr Marshall was in this posting he
would have gained experience in policing the Sheffield United Football Ground at
Bramall Lane. On 19 October 1987 Superintendent Marshall transferred from Dl Sub-
Division to F Division at Hamraerton Road as Deputy to the Sub-Divisional
Commander. During this time Mr Marshall would have extensive experience of
policing the Hillsborough Football Ground. He is currently still in that posting
as Deputy to the Divisional Commander at F Division.

COMMENDATIONS

During the course of his career to date Mr Marshall has received one commendation:

09.04.64.       Commended by Halifax Magistrates Court for prompt and praiseworthy
                action.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Mr Marshall has always been held in the highest regard throughout his period in
the Police serivce. He was promoted relatively early in service to the rank of
Sergeant and has progressed steadily since that time. He is a committed,
hardworking, dedicated Police officer.

On his most recent staff appraisal he was described as ”....totally loyal and
dependable.......who sets a first class example to all those with whom he comes
into contact and has excellent qualities of leadership."
 9'
He is a first class Police officer whose commitment to the South Yorkshire Police
could never be in question -with considerable potential to progress further in the
ranks.
                                    SUPERINTENDENT MURRAY


     PERSONAL & DOMESTIC

    Mr Murray is A7 years of age, a married man


     POSTINGS & PROMOTIONS

     Constable

     Mr Murray joined the former West Riding Constabulary on 15 November 1965 and
     performed uniform patrol duties in the form of West Riding Divisions including
     Pontefract and Huddersfield. As a Constable he was also required to perform
     Divisional administrative duties again at Divisional Headquarters Huddersfield,
     later performing beat duties in Barnsley Division.

^^Sergeant

     On 34 November 1972 Mr Murray was promoted to the rank of Sergeant to perform
     duties as the Divisional Administration Sergeant at Barnsley and on 30 June 1975 he
     was transferred to uniform patrol duties at B1 Sub-Division Barnsley. During that
     time Mr Murray would be involved in policing Barnsley Football Club. On 1 August
     1977 Mr Murray was transferred to the Communications Branch at Force Headquarters,
     Sheffield.

     Inspector

    ' On 19 June 1978 Mr Murray was promoted to the rank of Inspector and transferred to
,    Traffic Division at Sheffield as a patrol supervisor. He remained there until 23
      August 1982 when he was again transferred to Force Headquarters to Force Training.

     Chief Inspector

     On 11 June 198A Mr Murray was promoted to the rank of Chief Inspector and
     transferred to the Discipline & Complaints Department at Force Headquarters in an
     administration capacity. He was a Chief Inspector responsible for all matters

•    concerning the administration of the complaint files. On 1 September 1986 he
     transferred from Force Headquarters to B1 Sub-Division at Barnsley as Deputy to the
     Sub-Divisional Commander. Once again Mr Murray would have experience of policing
     Barnsley Football Club at Oakwell.

     Superintendent

     On 1A March 1988 Mr Murray was promoted to the rank of Superintendent and
     .transferred to Hammerton Road Police Station at FI Sub-Division as Sub-Divisional
     Commander. During this period Mr Murray would have extensive involvement in
     policing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club at Hillsborough.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Mr Murray has always been described as a thoroughly reliable, hardworking Police
officer who is dedicated to the South Yorkshire Police.

On his most recent staff appraisal he was described as ” ....an eminentlysensible
man who has made an excellent start in his first year as aSuperintendent.    An
officer who continues to develop on the right lines."

He is a first class Police officer who always gives his best and can be thoroughly
relied upon at all times.
                               CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL


 PERSONAL & DOMESTIC

 Mr Beal is 41 years of age, a married man


 POSTINGS & PROMOTIONS

Constable

 Following service as a cadet from 1963 to 1966 Mr Beal was appointed as a
 Constable in the City of Sheffield Police on 8 August 1966. On 1 March 1971 Mr
 Beal was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department and performed duty
 as a Detective Constable in the Sheffield city centre.

 Sergeant

 On 13 August 1973 Mr Beal was promoted to the rank of Sergeant and performed
 uniform patrol duties and served in D1 Sub-Division at West Bar. On 24 June 1974
 he was transferred once again into the Criminal Investigation Department as a
 Detective Sergeant working at D1 Sub-Division. On 15 November 1976 he transferred
 to Hammerton Road Police station at FI Sub-Division as an Acting Detective
 Inspector.

On 3 January 1977 Mr Beal returned to West Bar Sub-Division D1   as aDetective
Sergeant where he remained until 28 February 1977 when he took   up a posting as
Acting Detective Inspector at F2 Sub-Division.

 Inspector

On 21 March 1977 Mr Beal was promoted to the rank of Inspector and transferred to
Force Headquarters into the Licensing Department. On 2 January 1979 Mr Beal
returned once more to the Criminal Investigation Department being posted to D2
Sub-Division at Actercliffe. On 6 October 1980 Mr Beal attended at University
under the Force Scholarship Scheme and remained there until 4 July 1983. On
completion Mr Beal obtained an LLB.

-Chief Inspector-

On 4 July 1983 following his time at University Mr Beal was promoted to the rank
of Chief Inspector and posted to C3 Sub-division at Maltby as deputy to the Sub-
Divisional Commander. He remained there until 1 January 1984 when he was
transferred on secondment as Staff Officer to H.M. Inspector of Constabulary. On
1 July 1985 Mr Beal returned to C3 Sub-Division at Maltby and transferred to his
current posting at Hammerton Road on 19 May 1986. During this time at Hammerton
Road Mr Beal would be extensively engaged in policing Hillsborough Football
Ground.
COMMENDATIONS

During the course of his career to date Chief Inspector Beal has received two
commendations:

30.06.71.       At Sheffield City quarter sessions Mr Beal was commended for
                tenacity shown by him in the presentation of evidence and the
                excellent manner in which it was prepared.

25.11.76.        Mr Beal was commended by the Chief Constable in that "....he did a
                great deal to prevent what could have been a miscarriage of
                justice."


GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Mr Beal has always been described as a very good Police officer with potential.
This is borne out by the fact that the Force sponsored his secondment to
University *for three years to allow him to read Law and eventually to obtain an
LL*B.

On his most recent staff appraisal he was described as "....consistently shown
himself to be an able administrater/manager and leader of men who has carried out
to the full the role of Acting Superintendent on numerous occasions."

He is a very good Police officer with potential to progress in the service.
