                       S h e ffie ld A rc h i^ s R ^ ^ |                                                                           MIR.15
                                   J1rt IMtmf*l(lf innMi mmmm,I........... I IIIIPI|1IBIMIHIMU!1|I_|II||I|MJU.             I




                                                                                                                       _
  01*HER DOCUMENT FORM                                                         Date and tim e raised                           U
                                                                                                                                            Number
                                                                                                                                                     T >w .
 Title          ^Qficn/-                   jXc                                                                   /}„
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)

 Receiver's instructions - urgent action            -^etfko                                                      Sd
                                                                                                                                                            Receiver



 Document registered/indexed-as-indicated                                                                                                                   Indexer
 No(s) of actions raised                                                                                                                                Co'S?
Statem ent reader's instructions
                                                                                                                                                     Statement Reader



Indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                                                            Indexer
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                                                     O /M            SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                                                    In H av a*




When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number I
Dr. Edward A. Birkby
                                                                    Sheffield,

                                                             Tel:

5th May 1989

Lord Justice Taylor
c/o Sgt.       1
The Hillsborough Enquiry
Furnival House
Fumival Gate
Sheffield 1

Dear Sir

RE; THE HTLLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

I have been asked by 9gt.       to write a report of events from my point of
view which occurred on the Saturday in question

I drove through Hillsborough at 12.30 p.m. that day. I observed between 10 and
15 groups of Liverpool supporters walking towards the ground or sitting near the
ground. Most of these people were drinking alcohol from cans.

At approximately 3.20 p.m. I was helping at a local Scout Jumble Sale and was
informed that, over the radio, local Doctors were asked to attend the Hillsborough
Stadium. I rang 999 to get further details and was informed by the operator that
I should make my way to the Hillsborough Gymnasium, she was not aware of any
further details.

I called in at heme to obtain my bag and other instruments. Driving down to the
ground down Foxhill Road and the A61 I passed through many Liverpool supporters
who appeared extremely upset and distraught. The road had been closed to normal
traffic from Wadsley Bridge downwards. I turned onto Leppings Lane ami drove
slowly through crowds of supporters. Unfortunately one of them hit outat my car
and removed my wing mirror.

Halfway down Leppings Lane the road was blocked by various emergency vehicles and
the Police. Inspector Kevin Robinson, whom I know personally, parked my car for
me. I went into the Stadium with another Inspector and a second Doctor whom we
had met on the way. During our walk into the Stadium the Police Officer was abused
and sworn at by many supporters. In retrospect this part of the afternoon was
extremely frightening.

We made our way through the Leppings Lane courtyard down through the tunnel and
across the terracing. This was mainly cleared at this stage, however the other
three sides of the ground were full. We climbed through the perimeter fencing
which had been bent upwards and made our way across the football pitch. A line
of Police was strung along the halfway line. There was one remaining ambulance
in the far corner of the pitch at that time. I looked into this and saw four or
five people attempting to revive a young man. This situation seemed to be adequately
dealt with and the ambulance left straightaway for hospital. I made my way to the
Hillsborough gymnasium.

 continued/.....
                                 -   2-


On arrival there were approximately 35 bodies in the first section of the
gymnasium. It had teen divided into three by netting. There was no immediate
action necessary in this part of the gymnasium. In the central zone there
were approximately 20 to 30 casualties being dealt with by various personnel.
In the far section there were people counting money.

Initially I looked for a person in charge but there was none. I asked fee a
Senior Police Officer to accompany me around the various casualties and we
enquired at each point to see whether or not additional medical assistance was
necessary. I personally attended to three casualties over the next twenty to
thirty minutes putting up an intravenous line and giving oxygen.

After this tine all the casualties had teen taken away by ambulance. The remaining
Doctors, about 10 in number, then decided to go to the various Casualty Departments.
I stayed behind with another Doctor to certify people who had died and to help in
any other way which was necessary.

Over the next couple of hours I was asked to certify death on several occasions.
I spoke to various Police Officers , in particularly one who had been greatly
affected when a child he was attempting to resuscitate had actually died. I left
the gymnasium at around ten past six in the evening. I gave my name to the Police
Officer in charge in case he wished to contact me later on.

Approximately 9.00 p.m. I received a telephone call asking me to attend the gymnasium
again. On arrival, several bodies had been brought from the Northern General
Hospital with incomplete certification details. I was asked to re-certify nine
people. We began this task but soon realised that Professor Usher had just
completed recertification. I spoke to one or two distressed Police Officers again
over the next half hour then returned heme.

I have been asked for an opinion as to how the situation could have been improved
from my point of view. The only recommendation I would make is that an Officer
or nominated person should assume immediate command of a disaster situation.   He
(or she) should wear a distinctive uniform and set up an initial Command      Centre
to delegate and to direct the initial stagesof the operation. In the firsthalf
hour in the gymnasium no-one that I spoke to, either Doctor, Police Officer,
Fire Brigade Officer or Ambulance men knew who had assumed a co-ordinating role.
Other than that I think various helping agencies worked very well indeed. The
Police Officers who I saw and spoke to behaved in an outstanding fashion      inone
of the most difficult and harrowing situations imaginable.

Yours faithfully,




DR. E. A. BIRKBY



EAB/SJ




                                                                                       3
