                                                         Stuart Fraser Gough

                                                         Police Constable 503

                                                         Maltby Police Station

                                                         T/N 0709 812282




On Saturday 15 April 1 9 8 9 , I was on duty at the Hillsborough Football Ground for

the semi-final between Nottingham Forrest and Liverpool.          My duties before

the start of the game   were to patrol along Herries Road, where the bus depot

for the Notts, supporters was      situated.   Most of the fans   werein good spirits

until approximately 2 pm   whenI saw approximately 12 Liverpool        Supporters

walking up Herries Road towards the bus depot when they were set upon by a number

of Notts, supporters, but the fighting was stopped by 2 Officers from the mounted

section, no arrests were   made.

After this incident fans   that were arriving werebecoming        more boisterous, sing­

ing and shouting and numerous fans were seen to be urinating in a small group

of trees.   As they alighted from the coaches it was evident most of them had been

drinking.

At 2.50 pm in company with Inspector Charles and other serials, we made our way

towards Claywheels Lane.   We were then instructed by Inspector Charles to

proceed towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground.        We were 6 serials in

total, our serial Sergeant being PS Carter.       We formed into our serials outside




At approximately 3-07 pm we were given the command to enter the ground, upon

entering I saw a large number of people behind the stand wandering about, I also

saw people carrying others through the central tunnel to the stand, they were

shouting at us to help them.    We cleared a path from the tunnel to enable a free

passage for the bodies to be carried out, I then took charge of 2 groups carry­

ing bodies they placed them on the ground.       I checked their vital signs both were

breathing and their hearts were beating.       I placed them both into the recovery

position, I asked a fan to keep a check on both of the men.
                                                                           2?o

                                         2

I then entered the stand through the central tunnel, where I saw a mass of

bodies at the bottom of the terraces approximately 4 people in height, people

were wandering about hailing abuse at Police Officers calling us "Murdering

bastards." blaming us.   I then went to the pile of bodies and helped Officers

pull bodies from the pile and pass them through a gate that was open, eventually

some of the fencing was pulled back making another exit for the bodies.    Once

all the bodies had been passed onto the pitch I went onto the pitch to administer

first aid, I helped other fans carry some of the bodies on the advertising

boards towards awaiting ambulances and to the gymnasium.   Shortly after this,

approximatley 4-500 fans on the pitch ran towards the Nottingham Forrest

supporters, these fans were ushered back to the Leppings Lane end of the pitch

and a cordon was placed across the centre of the pitch.

Once all the injured and dead fans had been removed from the ground our serial

was placed on traffic duty outside keeping the road clear and making sure the

fans didn't meet.
