TREVOR HARVEY                                                        R245



Police Inspector



Discipline & Complaints Department



I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police presently seconded to

the Discipline and Complaints Department, Force Headquarters.       Prior to

this appointment (30.1.8 9 .) I was an operational Inspector at 1F 1

Division stationed at Hammerton Road.     I have at least 4 years

experience of uniformed supervisory duties at Hillsborough Football

Ground and several years experience of working in criminal investigation

duties at this venue.

I have assisted in the last three cup semi-final football matches to be

played at Hillsborough.   My main uniform supervisory duties at this

venue have been the supervision of serials 1 to 3 (perimeter track and

car park areas) and more lately Crime and Vandal Commander duties, being

deployed where and when required.    (The majority of these requirements

have been at the Leppings Lane area of the ground on coach reception,

e t c .)

I have also supervised serials having responsibility for all sections of

the ground, including the West Stand area but this has been on a lesser

footing than the other areas mentioned.

At 9.45 a.m., 15 April 1989, I reported for duty at the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground Semi-Final - Liverpool v. Nottingham Forest.

My call sign was India 2, in charge of serials 4 - 6 .    My overall sector

commander was Superintendent Greenwood, his deputy was Chief Inspector
Briefing was held in the South Stand, given by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield - incident commander.

Serials 4 - 6   overall coverage of roadway from Penistone Road - rear

South Stand to Leppings Lane turnstiles (barriers).

Serial Sergeants:    4 PS   266 Jacques (E) + 10

                     5 PS 1084 Hodgett (E) + 10

                     6 PS   729 Norburn (E) + 10

All experienced officers in football duties.       No problems foreseen.

Serial   4- Penistone Road area, safety ofpersons,

            vehicles, etc. Run South Stand

            Supervision of turnstiles etc.

Serial   5- Supervision turnstiles and security of

            TV vehicles etc.

Serial 6 -Erection of barriers near     to 'C' gate

            Leppings Laneend.   Security of   South

            Stand car parks etc.

11.20

All serials, 4, 5 and 6 at their respective details.       No problems,

spectators light good humoured.     Mainly Nottingham Forest supporters

except near players' entrance of both.

Both teams arrived - no problems.     Fans well behaved.

Approx. 2.30 p.m.

Apparent radio fault - buzzing when control pass message - similar to

radio battery fault.    Enter ground by players' entrance and tunnel speak

to officers there - fault on radio system - saw Chief Inspector Beal who

apparently had civilian radio engineer with him on way to control box.

South Stand and Spion Kop - filling well.

North Stand and West Stand and terracing - large gaps.
                                   -   3   -




Liverpool players on field, pre match kick around.

Whilst speaking to other officers near to players' tunnel, approached by

Doug Lock (Ex Police Superintendent FI) now head of security at ground.

Looked very worried, made mention of large crowds at Leppings Lane end

of ground.

It looked as if they were trying to push their way in.     Some had already

got in through a gateway.   Mr. Lock stated that ground control was

aware.   Players had left pitch by this time.

Exit ground via players' tunnel and called at Doug Lock's office.      Saw

large group outside Leppings Lane end on camera.

Left South Stand via players' entrance and commenced to go to Leppings

Lane turnstiles.

Once outside, rear of South Stand, heard Superintendent Marshall on

radio requesting permission to open gates.

Two horses pass by towards Leppings Lane.

Whilst passing television vehicles mention on radio of possible

postponement of kick off.   Radio reception poor.    Unknown source.

2.55?

Arrive at barrier near to 'C' gate - large crowd possibly 4,000 outside

turnstiles all pushing and shoving.    Horseman in middle of crowd -

didn't look happy with situation, didn't look as if he could get out.

There were a number of 10 - 20 youths climbing on wall above turnstiles

towards 'B' gate.   I could see Inspector Bennett on top of turnstile

wall trying to stop them.

Crowd chanting and pushing very frightening scene - never seen anything

like this at a football match.   In fear that someone would get badly

injured or worse.

Noise from inside ground - possible teams onto field.     This made crowd
push even more.   Real danger of peoplebeingcrushed.      Several being

pulled or pushed out at side.

Saw Inspector Purdy - worried.

Noise too loud to hear radio etc- could smell    alcohol drifting from

crowd.   People shouting for help.

Gate 'C' opened from the inside - unable to see by whom.     Crowd surged

forward and allowed into ground, unable to stop.     The smell of alcohol

got worse the nearer they got.     Approximately 1500 or more passed

through the gateway.

Horses move and close crowd down somewhat.     Gate pulled together

slightly and crowd let in a little more orderly.     Those holding tickets

in the air were allowed to pass.     Another 5 or 600 allowed in pressure

easing by this time.

I then went around the barrier and saw 200/300 supporters at the

turnstiles still trying to get in that way, it didn't appear as though

they had seen Gate 'C' open.     Then someone, I couldn't see who, opened

Gate 'B'.   The people at the turnstile then ran through this gate and

the pressure on the turnstile was relieved.

There were several people who were limping, etc., and had obviously been

injured in the crush.    None appeared serious and there were definitely

no bodies at this location.

I do not know who opened gates 'C' or 'B' or if control had requested

them to be opened.     I can only say that if they had not been opened when

they were serious and probable fatal injuries would have been caused.

There were roars from the crowd inside, possibly kick-off or football

action of some description, I was unable to tell.

I spoke to Sergeant Norburn and we discussed the behaviour of the crowd

and the pressure build up.
Started to walk back towards the television vehicles as the problem had

cleared and we intended to activate phase 2.

I heard Sergeant Goddard's voice come over the radio, although reception

was none too clear there was an anxious tone in his voice.     'All

officers on to perimeter track', (repeated).

I shouted to the serial (6) and we all ran towards the entrance near to

turnstiles 19 to 22 at the rear of control point.    We entered the

perimeter track via the front area of the South Stand.     People in the

South Stand were stood up and shouting abuse towards the West Stand

area.   It looked like a pitch invasion from the West Stand terraces.

There were no players on the field.     Numerous police officers near and

around the perimeter fencing and goal mouth area.     Fans were spilling

onto the field, climbing fencing etc.    My immediate thought was that it

was a pitch invasion and nothing more.

With the officers I made my way to the perimeter fencing.     I made my way

to the fencing towards the left hand side of Gateway No. 3.     This gate

was open and police officers were trying to clear the gateway of fallen

people.

To my horror I then saw the reality of what was taking place.     The first

4 or 5 rows of supporters who had been stood behind this section of

fencing had all be crushed together up to the fencing.     Several were

obviously dead and others appeared to be dying.

There was one elderly man, greying hair,



                                He was obviously dead.    Others around him

were turning blue/purple as they were suffocating.     A young girl

probably 15 or 16 years was struggling to keep alive.     She was unable to

speak and I suspect fading fast.   The gateway was open and officers were
trying to remove what I realise now were bodies from the gateway.     The

bodies were entangled with other bodies which were alive.    Supporters

from the back were climbing over bodies to get out, thereby hindering

the rescue attempts by the officers concerned.

The crowds were still pushing forward and chanting at the police.     I

joined the officers stood on the wall and shouted at the crowd to stop

pushing.   Shouts of abuse were the only reply.

Officers were trying to make their way through the section of crowds to

the left, compound 2, and climb over the adjoining fence.   They were

being pushed and jostled by the crowd as they did so.

Other supporters were climbing over the dead and injured at the front to

escape over the fencing.   The crowd at the rear of this section and the

West Stand area did not seem to realise what was happening at the front.

They continued to shout abuse at the police.

I was unaware if control had realised the seriousness of the situation.

It was impossible to hear radio transmissions if in fact they were being

made.

I jumped down from the fencing and ran towards the goal mouth area in

the hope that I could contact control and ensure that other services

were attending.   We urgently required cutting equipment, bullhorns or

the public address system to let the crowd know what was happening etc.,

and for officers to be deputed to attend from the rear tunnel, that

being the main entrance to areas 3 and 4.

It was mayhem and there was no way that a message could be passed from

my position.   I ran towards the South Stand where I saw Superintendent

Greenwood near to the touchline facing the South Stand and the control

box.    I shouted to him that there were fatalities and we needed

assistance quickly.    I did not wait for an answer and ran back to the
fencing area near to gateway no. 3-

By this time several officers had climbed the fencing and were hanging

over the top trying to pull people up from the other side of the fence.

To some extent this was being successful.      Some were being extracted

from the gateway.     By now a number of severely injured were laid on the

playing area to the left of the goal mouth.     Police Officers and

supporters alike were giving what assistance they could.

I ran towards the gateway and as I did so a youth was pulled from the

gateway.   Assisted by some supporters, I carried the youth aged about 17

years to the playing area, his breathing was shallow but he was alive.

I, therefore, placed him in the coma position and as I started to get up

I saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit go passed me and go towards the

gateway n o . 3.

I followed him and saw that the gateway was still blocked.     Chief

Superintendent Nesbit had told the officers to clear the gateway of

bodies as best they could but they were being hampered by two bodies in

particular, one of which was laid face down, his head and upper body

being entangled with the other bodies in the doorway, his legs and lower

body being on the perimeter track.

I intended to attempt to remove this body when the body of a male 40 to

45 years, well built, salt and pepper hair, was passed through the

gateway.   Sergeant 840 Wright and myself carried this man on to the

grassed area.      I cleared the man's throat and Sergeant Wright commenced

heart massage, whilst I commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation.        After a

couple of minutes we realised that this was a pointless exercise, the

man was dead and I covered his upper body with my coat.

I returned to gateway no. 3 and saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit lifting

a small boy up the perimeter fence.      The child's shoe or shoelace had
become entangled in the perimeter fence and it had to be released by

Sergeant Gutcher, Serious Crime Squad, who was inside the compound.        By

this time a number of officers had made their way into the enclosure and

were either moving bodies, assisting others over the fences, or giving

mouth to mouth resuscitation.    Two officers in particular came to mind,

although there were many others whose names I do not know.     Sergeant

Gutcher and Constable Humphries of 'C' Division.    Their actions were

praiseworthy to say the least.

I then assisted several other officers with the removalof casualties

from the area of around gateway no. 3-    With Chief Superintendent

Nesbit, Sergeant Morton, HQ Serious Crime Squad, and other officers, we

made a chain and continued to pass injured and dead people from the

compound.   It is proper to say at this time that the majority of these

people were in fact dead by now.

As the number of bodies inside the compound dwindled, I assisted police

officers and supporters to carry the dead away on make-shift stretchers.

These were advertising hoardings used on the perimeter track of the

ground.

The bodies were carried to the gymnasium where they had to be taken from

the stretcher in order to get them through the door.     The bodies were

then either left with one of the officers who had assisted in carrying

them or handed over to officers inside the gymnasium for continuity

purposes.

I assisted with the removal of 3 or 4 such bodies but I am unable to

recall anything about them other than they were all male and in either

their late teens or early twenties.

As I was about to leave the gymnasium on the last such    venture, somebody

I am unable to say who, asked if a check could be made     outside to see if
                                    -   9   -




there were any more dead in the immediate area of the prison van and

police room.

I went outside and assisted in carrying the body of a male 20 to 22

years, fair hair, no other details, into the gymnasium.        I returned and

saw one more body outside.     It was laid on the floor between the prison

van and the gymnasium wall.     It had been partially covered with a green

blanket.     Together with P.C. 2051 Jackson, I carried this body into the

gymnasium.     I assisted P.C. Jackson with the completion of a sudden

death report and left him with the body.        This body was later identified

as Stuart William Paul Thompson, 17 years,

Liverpool.

Sometime after 4.30 p.m.

I then returned to the playing area and made by way towards enclosure

no. 3.     I saw that the wire fencing had been bent away from the frame at

one corner.     This I understood had been done by police officers in an

attempt to remove the casualties.       I then noticed the broken barrier

which must have had an effect on the outcome of this tragedy.        The cross

member had snapped near to the neck of the securing stand and then the

whole stand had been pushed forward, no doubt by the pressure exerted by

the supporters at some stage.     Chief Superintendent Nesbit had already

positioned officers to preserve the immediate scene for evidential

purposes.

I looked around the scene at some of the officers and saw that some were

overcome with emotion and others were physically exhausted.        All, I feel

sure, were numb with the scenes they had witnessed.        It was at this time

that I noticed that my shirt had vomit and blood on it, my trousers and

shoes were covered in mud, my hat, coat and tie were missing.

I went around speaking to police officers giving what support and
encouragement I could under the circumstances.   I stayed on the playing

area until nearly all the supporters had left the ground and then

remained in the ground until I was stood down at 7-00 p.m. that evening

by Chief Superintendent Mole.




                   /
