                                                     r9L/i



                                                                           /£5 *
ANTHONY GORDON LANG




Police Constable 1278        -    B1




9-00      On duty Barnsley

10.00     Parade Hillsborough Serial 14 i/c PS 13^1 Crawford

11.00     To Phase 1 Duty Leppings Lane Turnstiles A - G

          in company with other officers instructed to search

          incoming fans re offences.

During this time there was a steady influx of fans, slowly at first and

as 2.30 approached, looking through the turnstiles I could see a build

up of people on the outside.      These persons all appeared to have arrived

at the same time.

As the crowd outside built up and the turnstiles were getting busy I had

occasion to eject four people for climbing over the revolving barrier,

having no tickets.    These were ejected via Gate C as to take them to the

Police Room would have resulted in a shortage of manpower at the

turnstiles.    I could only see one serial in the area covering A - G and

Gate C.    As the crowd outside got bigger a number of fans were coming

through the turnstiles and making complaints about the crowd outside.

All the fans who entered appeared very agitated and some very frightened

by what was happening outside.         Women and children appeared to be

suffering the most and were in various states of shock.         I received a

substantial amount of abuse from some fans at this time, demanding we

sort out the crush outside.      Some fans were in possession of tickets
purchased from Notts and when they were unable to gain entry into the

turnstiles they were having to turn around thereby blocking the

turnstiles even more.      During this time I could see outside and could

see people being pushed towards the turnstiles and some getting stuck on

the revolving barrier which because of the amount of people couldn't be

generated properly.     At this point Gate C was opened, I did not see by

who but in company with PS Crawford I shut the left side of the gate and

locked it but not before quite a number of fans had run in.     The gate

was shut before the majority realised it was a way in.

I then returned to the turnstiles and could see people climbing the

walls and fences from the outside, youths were also climbing on to the

turnstile roof from the inside and were throwing tickets down to those

waiting outside.    I suggest these were the youths who had entered Gate C

when it was briefly opened.

I could also see fans entering the turnstiles without tickets and

passing back £ notes of various denominations to the stewards.     These I

saw were ejected.     I have no knowledge of any successfully paying to get

in.

By this time I was again near to Gate C and looking outside through the

turnstiles, it was obvious that there was no control over the mass of

people I could see.

A man and young woman entered through Turnstile A and this woman was in

a state of shock and received first aid, allegedly as a result of being

crushed against the wall outside.

I was assisting them near to the wall between Gate C and Turnstile A
                               -   3   -
                                                                                <m



when the gate was opened fully again.          I could see a mass of people

outside who all surged forward towards this gate.          The majority I would

describe as young men and youths between 17 - 25 years.          I braced myself

against the wall to prevent the young woman getting carried along by the

crowd who by this time were rushing, heading through the gate in what

seemed like a never ending torrent of people.          This mass of people had

one aim and that was to enter the ground.          They were unstoppable and

certainly undirectable.      In my opinion should a PC or PC's have

attempted to direct these fans they would have been swept along with

them.   It was obvious the situation was out of control both outside and

inside the ground.

After a time the gates were closed and the area between the turnstiles

and the terraces emptied quickly.          I did not see where those fans went.

I then resumed my duties at the turnstiles.          I did not hear the match

kick-off because of the sheer volume of noise around my location.

A short time later I heard a shout that there was a pitch invasion and

as a result of this, in company with other officers ran around to the

rear of the South Stand, through the stand and over the wall on to the

circular track.    I could see people climbing over the fences between the

track and the terrace and also people being lifted from the terrace up

to the seating area above.     As I got nearer to the fence I could see the

reason for this and that was the excessively large number of people in

the central pen.     I do not recall how many other officers were present

at this time but I could see a number on the fence attempting to pull

people over on to the track.       This was hampered by the forward facing
                                   -    n   -




spikes at the top of the fence.             I could see people massed against the

fence vith their bodies and some faces with a crush of people at the

rear of them, this was approximately 20 or 30 deep in the centre and

they were obviously unable to move or break but just appeared to be

watching us with terrified looks on their faces.

I could see individuals were obviously dead and dying with their

colouration and looks.

There did not appear to be too many casualties at first glance but I

could then     see a lot of   those people were laying at the bottom of the

wall under     the fence,   Ican only describe      it as a large mound of people,

most were obviously dead.

I approached a gate to the rear of the goal and saw two officers on the

fence to the left of the gate trying to reach a young boy who was at the

front, he was alive but obviously shocked.             I entered the gate by

climbing around it using the fence and standing on the fence swung

through to the interior of the terrace.             I was then able to get an arm

around this boy and lift him enough for the officers reaching over to

pull him up.

By this time the crush seemed to be easing slightly from the rear.                The

only way to assist the injured due to the entanglement of limbs was to

get to the rear of them and start from the back towards the fence, in

order to do this I was obliged to crawl over some bodies.

I could then see that       a crash barrier had given way just above      the area

containing     the peoplewho had       fallen over and down towards the   wall.

A path was then cleared from the gate towards the tunnel at the rear.
This enabled bodies to be passed along this path and out of the gate to

waiting officers.   There was no room inside the terrace to attempt first

aid.

I could see that some of the trapped people were obviously alive and as

a result these were given priority when released.

The noise was very loud during all this with some fans still shouting

and chanting.   A number of fans assisted us removing people from the

terrace and on to the pitch.   Without these I have no doubt that more

would have died as in the most they assisted speedily.

Some fans, mainly young men, were obviously drunk, they had all the

signs, and smelled of intoxicants.    These fans were not assisting but

were abusing and pushing myself and others.     I was threatened on a

number of occasions by these men, and although not directly assaulted

was poked or pushed repeatedly, with comments like "you bastards, it's

all your fault".

I have no recollection of the number of people I removed but they were

pulled from the pile and carried to the gate.    I only recollect one

young girl about 17/20 years with black hair wearing what appeared to be

a brown leather jacket, she was immediately to the right of the gate

when looking up towards the stands.   When the last body was cleared I

returned to the pitch area and joined other officers giving first aid to

those still on the pitch.

As a result of climbing through the gate I trapped the sole of my left

boot and suffered a minor ankle strain which has now cleared up.

From what I could see throughout the incident the problem seemed to stem

from the large number of people attending outside the ground at the same

time.
