                                                                                                M I R . 15


                                                                             '-
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised
                                                               rai                -         -          „      Number


      -.Jl
Title / w-_ w - . . . . s
Title                        .    mix         c?k£.                                                                               cfCl/C
(include source and any document number i f relevant)                                 H2.                    Qc-:fCAl:     ••

                                                    /?
Receiver's instructions - urgent action -- J M ^ o    ifehC Q ( i
                                                                                                                                R eceiver




Document registered/indexed as indicated

Nolsl of actions raised
                                                                                                                         S ta te m e n t R eader
Statement reader's instructions     A                     st   U 'j U U .V


                                                                                                                                Indexer
Incfexed/S' indicatt
——     -• —
          — —-——            ..                         " ——
                                                          —
Note) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                                indtxar
further action No{$}

When satisfied ail actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
J MERVYN JO N ES M Sc                                  HILLSBOROUGH       INQUIRY   TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
CORONER'S OFFICER                                     NECHELLS QREEN POLICE STATION
Fumival House                                         Fowler Street
Fumival Gate                                          Birmingham B7 5DA
Eyre Street
Sheffield S1 4QN
Telephone: 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 5 4 6
Fax        : 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 4 8 3
                                                      Your Ref:
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY
Police Headquarters
Chester CH1 2PP                                       Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2091
                                                                  JMJ/AES
Fax       : 0244                                      Date:
                                                                  11th December 1990



Dr C E Nicholson
Research Laboratory
Health & Safety Executive
Broad Lane
Sheffield




ELROND ENGINEERING LIMITED REPORT

You will recall after our meeting of last Thursday with the Coroner it was agreed
that he would consider what you had had to say together with the contents of your
brief reports on the contents of the Elrond Report.

Having now considered the reports and reflected on what you said, the Coroner has
asked me to write to Hammond Suddards and (a) raise your concerns about their
report in general, and (b) if the concerns are not accepted for me to arrange a
meeting between yourselves and the Elrond representatives. I believe this action
is what we broadly agreed with the Coroner.

As a consequence I enclose a draft letter to Hammond Suddards for your
consideration.   I considered inserting a precis from your reports in the body of
the letter but naturally I am concerned that I do not fully understand what I am
saying or I may place undue or unfair emphasis on a particular point.   I wonder
therefore if you could insert an appropriate number of paragraphs which highlight
the "disagreements” which, with luck, may be resolved long before you get to the
Coroner’s Court.   Please also feel free to make any other comments on the draft
letter's contents.

Hopefully, with your help, I can get the letter to HammondSuddards well before
Christmas so that reaction can commence.

Best wishes,




     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                               JMJ/AES

                                                               11th December 1990


Hammond Suddards
Solicitors
Empire House                            DRAFT
10 Piccadilly
Bradford
BD1 3LR

For the attention of Mr Peter Metcalf




Dear Sirs,

ELROND ENGINEERING LIMITED
HKPOBT OH ASPECTS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Recently you very kindly forwarded to me a copy   of the Elrond report as youalso
did to the Coroner, Dr S L Popper. We both appreciate receiving those copies.     I
am now writing on behalf of the Coroner who, as you well know, is fully engaged
conducting the Inquests.

The Coroner asked the Health & Safety Executive who undertook the original work
for Lord Justice Taylor to examine the report and give their views on its
contents.  I have since met with members of the   Health & Safety Executiveand the
following is their reactions to the reports:-




                                        V
                                       -   2   -




Before we go any further it would be helpful to me, and in turn the Coroner, if
you would consider the above comments and with or without consultation with
Elrond, as you see fit, to give your reactions in order that we can reconcile the
issues.

It may be that the issues can be best resolved by my arranging a meeting between
Elrond, through your goodselves, and the Health & Safety Executive officials.
Hopefully that meeting, if there is to be one, could take place early.  I do not
anticipate technical evidence will be heard before late January 1991 at the
earliest.

I have two other observations to make.  Firstly, the question of whether the
Coroner decides to call a witness from Elrond has not yet been made and by no
means is it guaranteed that one will be called although obviously the Coroner, as
he has already amply demonstrated in his Court, will consider representations.
Secondly, on reading the report it appears to have been written for a civil case
rather than a series of Inquests. As I know you are fully aware the objectives
of the two procedures are distinctly different with the Coroner now being
primarily concerned with how the ninety five deceased came to meet with their
death rather any apportionment exercise. Forgive me, but I do make the above
comments with the greatest of respect but you may care to reflect upon the Elrond
report and how you see, if at all, it can help the Coroner achieve his objective.

I look forward to hearing from you in the near future.


Yours faithfully,




J M JONES
Deputy Chief Constable
