Robert Gascoyne
Police Constable 218

Crown Court Security.




On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was working the special duty in relation to to the

Notts. Forest        w Liverpool football match at Hillsborough Stadium/ I started

my duty along with other officers at the Midland Station sheparding Liverpool

supporters from the station approach into awaiting Sheffield Corporation buses that

were transporting the fans striaght to the football ground. Ve were also making random

searches of the fans clothing and bags. Numerous cams of lager and beer and bottles

(partly drunk) of spirits were taken from fans and placed       in a   pile onthe station approa

It   was noticably obvious that numerous of these Liverpool fans       had been drinking

on the journey and could be described as 'merry*.

At   approximately   12 noon I then commenced with others on a van public      orjtder

patrol   of the City centre.

At about % O p m that day along with the serial that I was part of we took our meal at

West Bar Police Station. At about 3.0pm a Police Inspector came into the canteen and

said 'There s trouble at Hillsborough.        All the serials that were mealing went to their
           ft
respective vans and headed      for Hillsborough FootballGround.

At about £^20pm we entered      the Penistone Road end of the ground and on alighting from

the van I saw a group of youths carrying a man from the ground on an advertising

hoarding, the man was obviously dead. At this time myself and the rest of the serial

thought that the trouble at the ground was an out break of violence.

With the others I ran down      the slip way onto the field and saw what I can only dxscribe

as mayhem.    The Leppings Lane end half of the pitchwas covered with people milling

around and bodies laid on the filed with Police men and civvy's administering

mouth to mouth reecusitaion and other first aid. Police men and fans were putting bodies

alive and obviouslt dead onto advertising hoardings and taking them to the gymnsaium

I assisted on two of these actions.

It was obvious to all present that tempers were running high amongst the humdreds of fans

who were not injured but were on the pitchand i t appeared to me that they would invade

the Kop end where Notting Forest supporters were. This became more obvious when the

Notts.Forest fans start®*      applauding   ^ en bodied were carried past them. The Liverpool
                                         2                                             &bZ-      y
i *   fans thought they were clapping becuase the   Liverpool people were dead or injured.

      I heard numerous remarks about this from Liverpool supporters and some ran towards the

      Kop intent on fighting.

      I also noticed that many of the Liverpool fans on the field were under the influence of

      alcohol and the stench of beer was very strong.

      Chief Superintendent   Nesbitt then caused a line of Police to be be formed across the

      foeld to prevent Liverpool supporters from attacking the Nottingham Forest supporters.

      It was patently obvious that this would have happened if this line had not been formed.

      Numerous people tried to break through the line and on one occasion a drunken Liverpool

      supporter r a n straight into me and broke through. I grabbed at him and he hit me in the ch

      chest and ran into the crowd.

 0    The line across the fiild was held until the ground and pitch was cleared and my serial

      was odered off to other duties which were public order patrols of Shalesmoor.




         fObert Uascoyne mLice Constable 218
