                                                   Date and tim e raised                               N um ber
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM


T itle U 5 iA ,U   Li!-----------------
fInclude source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es /N o   __i_                                                           Receiver


                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                      Indexer
Do cu m ent registered/indexed as indicated

No|s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader

Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                      Indexer

 indexed as indicated

 Nols) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                SIO
 Examined - fu rth e r action             taken




                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Further action No(s)

 When satisfied ail actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D o cu m ent Master N um ber Form
Tel                                            lore;
                                     19th April 1989-
Dear Sir,
                Hillsborough Disaster - 1Sth April 1989
     Like millions o others in this Country, I have read and
seen the horrors o** the tragedy at Hillsborough last Saturday
                                                            *


afternoon, and feel compelled to submit the undermentioned
observations :
     In the various media accounts of the tragedy, reference has
been made to the crowds of Liverpool supporters gathered in the
street outside the grounds - causing initial d: fficulties for the
police. The media have suggested that a great many of these
supporters were late in arriving at the ground, and could not,
therefore , be admitted before the kick-off. I venture to suggest
that there may have been a reason for such late arrival by at
least some of these fans - although on the other hand, they quite
probably jpent the time between their actual arrival in Sheffield
itself and the ground in many other ways,
     To explain - I was in Birmingham on Saturday afternoon, and
whilst waiting for my return train to Malvern at 5-^5 p.m., an
announcement was made that the 15-30 departure from Liverpool
Lime Street ( the 17.24- service to 1 oole ) would be delayed by
at least 2 hours due to damage to the overhead electric lines
at Runcorn, and a special train was waiting at llatform 5 to
take Birmingham passengers to Reading, Basingstoke and Ioole
without waiting for the arrival of the "through" train from
Liverpool. This announcement was repeated several times - and
I could not help feeling sorry for those who were awaiting the
arrival of passengers from the Liverpool train, in view of the
extended delay.
     I realise, of Course, that any train from Liverpool to
Sheffield would presumably run via Manchester, and certainly not
via Birmingham, but I think the line to Manchester (and Sheffield)
would have to pass through Runcorn, end I therefore assume that
not only the 15-30 departure from Liverpool would have been
affected by the damage to the overhead cables. Could it be that
the late arrival of some of the Liverpool fans have been caused
by delays on British Rail during Saturday? (earlier in the day).
     Of course, until I saw on T.V. later on Saturday evening
and heard the media comments as outlined in the second paragraph
of this letter, the announcements at Birmingham Eew Street station
had no significance as far as I was concerned (in fact, not being
a football fan myself, I did not realise even that semi-final
matches were being played - much less the venues I ) - but in view
of the public enquiry now being undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor
and the police authorities under the VJest Midlands Chief Constable
I wondered if the foregoing might be worth following up with
British Rail at Liverpool?
     You may consider my comments of little merit and not worth
following up - but my conscience would not let me rest until 1 had
endeavoured to put on paper what I felt it my duty to report.

                        Yours faithfully,




The Supt. of rolice,
SHEFFIELD.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                                           FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                                    Furnival Gate
  H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M                                               Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                                             Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                                      SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
 PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                      Liverpool L7 3PR
 Colmore Circus Queensway                                                                    Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
 Birmingham B4 6NQ
 Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                                             Your Ref:

 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                                                             Our Ref:     JM J/D M D
 Fowler Street
 Birmingham B7 5DA
 Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                                             Date:        6 July 1 9 8 9




Dear

I have received your letter dated 19 April 1989 from South Yorkshire Police
concerning the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.

The contents of your letter have been of great interest to my investigation
team.

If you have any further information please do not hesitate to contact my
investigation team at Nechells Green Police Station.  Alternatively you may
write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below: -

    Mr R M Whalley
    Secretary to the Inquiry
    50 Queens A n n e ’s Gate
    London  SW1H 9AT

Yours sincerely




J M Jones
Assistant Chief Constable




                                        Nechells Green Police Station
       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T .....................................................................
                                           Wore
                                17 th July 1989-
Dear Sir,       ->
               Hillsborough Tragedy - 15th April 1989
     Thank you for your letter of 6th July - which only
reached me on July 15th. (Your Ref JMJ/DMD).

     I was interested to learn that my original letter
addressed to Sheffield had been of some value - but I very
much regret that I can add nothing to the information set
out therein. As I remarked in the penultimate paragraph,
I am not a football fan, and did not even realise that
semi-final matches for the F.A. cup were even being played -
much less their venues, and it was not until I returned home
and turned on the T.V. for the news, that the significance
of the announcement by British Rail at Lew Street Station
struck me - especially in view of one commentators remarks
that "the police were unable to deal with the large crowd
of Liverpool supporters arriving late for the kick-off at
the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground".
     As I have already remarked, I have no doubt that many
of such so-called "supporters" spent the time between their
arrival in Sheffield and the kick-off in various ways un­
connected with football, but the probable late arrival of
various trains from the North might have had some bearing
on the situation - and it was for that reason I felt compelled
to make my original comments, so that the matter might be
confirmed with British Rail if the police thought fit.
     I do not think I can assist further, but if you think
otherwise, please do not hesitate to get in touch.
                       Yours faithfully,



The Hillsborough Enquiry Team Office,
L'echells Green Police Station,
Fowler Street,
BIRMINGHAM. B7 5DA.
