Statement re Hillsborough
Vincent Thomas Ley
DOB
Police Constable 2763
South Yorkshire Police
Main Street
Rotherham


At 8.30am on Saturday 15 April 1989. I paraded at Main Street Police Station in full Police
uniform.     I was assigned to Serial No 41, in the charge of Sergeant Dixon from Maltby
Police Station.     I was assigned to partner Police Constable 2153 Ekwubiri throughout the
days duty.     We were then transported to Hillsborough football ground in Police vehicles and
arrived there at 9 •55am.    We then sat in the seated stand for the briefing by supervisory
officers.     Following this briefing we were issued with packed lunches which we then
consumed.     Myself and Constable Ekwubiri, together   with the rest of ourserial, then made
our way on foot, to our phase one positions, along      the length of Halifax Road.
^^^the morning progressed, coaches, buses and cars      started to arrive inthe area and myself
and Constable Ekwubiri positioned ourselves in the      area of Halifax Roadjunction with
Southey Green Road.     As the morning progressed further, the young men arriving in the area
focused their attention around the Thresher off licence and the White Horse public house
situated at either side of that junction.     The staff at Threshers off licence were allowing
the men into the store a couple at a time.     The men were purchasing cans of beer and lager,
and then walking away consuming them.     The amount of men visiting the off licence increased
through the morning until a small queue could be seen outside the shop.        Most of these men
walked across the road into the White Horse public house's yard to consume the cans.
Access to the White Horse was restricted by the staff there and the more respectable
looking men were allowed into the premises via the rear door.
The crowd seemed good natured on the whole and the biggest problem for the fans seemed to
be where' to urinate.    Myself and Constable Ekwubiri stood    in the White Horse grounds,
sS^^pping people urinating in the rear yard        and monitoringtheir behaviour.
As the beginning of the match neared, approximately 2.40pm, the pub yard cleared, together
with the surrounding streets.     My Serial gathered together at the junction and we started
to walk down Halifax Road towards the ground.     I walked directly behind Inspector Broomhead
and Sergeant Dixon, listening to their pocket radios and asking the Inspector to relay to
me what was happening when I missed something.     I could clearly hear an officer shouting
for permission to open the gates at Leppings Lane end of the ground because of the crowd
problem.     I commented on the fact that I had worked that duty on the previous years semi­
final and experienced the crush at the turnstiles then.        I also made mention of the fact
that our problems had only been alleviated by the fact that my Serial Sergeant at that time
was Sergeant Keenan who beckoned the mounted section into that corner who organised the
crowd into something similar to a queue, thus lightening the pressure on us.
At the time of hearing the radio    messages, we were around    the Wadsley Bridge railway
  station at this time.
  We continued on towards the ground along Feniston Road and as we got to within 200 yards
  of the ground we were made aware of some urgency and quickly made our way into the
  ground* We entered the ground at 3»09pm and went straight onto the grounds perimeter
  track between the Spion Cop and the North stand entrance. At the entrance to the pitch
  we were met by an officer of inspector or afcove( definitely of senior rank, wearing a
  white shirt and flat cap)• There he directed us in front of the Spion cop in order to
  control that area of the ground. Our serial spread along the perimeter track, behind the
  goals towards the far comer, assisting the one or two Police Constables remaining there.
  On looking down the length of the pitch, I could see that there was a problem in the
  Lepping Lane end of the stand. I could see fans being pulled and lifted up to the
  UDi:er balcony of the stand by other fans. I could see other officers at that end of
  the pitch, but was at this stage totally unaware of exactly what was happening there and
  how bad the situation had become.
  Several Nottingham Forest fans started to climb onto the fencinf directly in front of
^^is but were quickly discouraged from doing so. The Nottingham fans were agitated and
^^:his was not assisted by a Liverpool fan approaching the Spion Cop -and beckoning the
  crowd aggresively. The Nottingham Forest fans shouted and showed aggression towards the
  fan, who ran back to the Liverpool end of the ground. There I saw him arrested by
  Police officers.
  I could see Liverpool fans starting to spill onto the pitch and people making, makeshift
  stretchers form the wooden hoarding around the pitch perimeter. I could see the fans
  carrying bodies of people towards the gap between the Spion Cop and North stand. Many
  bodies were being place in that corner of the ground and I could see fans and Folice
  officers giving mouth to mouth resusitation and heart massage to people layed all over
  the playing pitch.
  I sa w a   large number of Liverpool fans start to charge towards the Spion Cop in an
  arressive and very intimidating way. These, eventually turned before they got to us
^ ^ n d Police officers were   then deployed across the pitch.
  Some Liverpool fans came     down to where we were stood and demolished the advertising hoardin,
   to use as stretchers."
  At this time the Nottingham fans seemed to realise what was going on and apart from the
  odd person, they were well behaved. Two people who said that they were doctors and
  another two who said that they were St. Johns ambulance men came to the front and were
  allowed on the pitch, to assist. During this time a boy of about 13 years of age, two
  youths of about 19years and 22 years of age, all fainted towards the front of the crowd.
  They were quickly brought to the front, out of the crowd and placed in the recovery positic
  until after a short time     they all came round. They 22 year old was stretcherea away.
  An old man of about 60 years fell at the front of the-Spion Cop complaining of a
  twisted knee. It appeared to be twisted very badly and was apparently an epileptic.
  He was assisted out of the cop and layed on the grass. Two St. Job. is ambulance men
  attended him and stretchered hi away for treatment. The Nottingham fans were if anything
  at this time, he1            extremely concerned. The anouncment was made that the game was
cancelled and the Nottingham fans made their way out of the ground in a very orderly manne
Our serial was deployed back to our original positions on Halifax Road. As we were there
many Liverpool fans approached us trying to find out about their relatives. V/e were
unable to give much information except the emergency telephone number we had been given.
The only facts regarding the death toll, were what was being overheard on the car radios
of the fans.
The fans were quiet and subdued on the whole, but                 many were obviously distressed and
upset at what had happened. Some were angry and we received comments from some of them
such as, " You're fucking shit," "Satisfied now ?" and " I hope you can sleep tonight."
The comments were ignored due to the situation being potentially very volatile. Feople
who asked us for advice were told to telephone their families as a matter of priority.
Eventuall the crowds cleared, apart from the odd person awaiting and looking for
family and friends. V/e resumed to Claywheels Lane. After something to eat v/e resumed
to Main Street Police Station and went off duty at 7.15pm.




FolicConstable 2765 L e y
■» ■ ■   ■■ ■ '   I' '.'.i ■ '   i > ■   i   i ■   11   ■" ■■ ■
