ov(
STATEMENT OF:-      Maureen Ann Wilkes
                     Police Constable 3052
                     South Yorkshire Police
                     Police Headquarters
                     Juvenile Prosecutions Department



I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police stationed in the
Prosecutions Office at Police Headquarters, Castle Green Annexe.


At 9.45 am Saturday 15 April 1989 I canmenced duty at the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Ground for the semi final football match between
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.     After being in the North Stand at the
ground I took up patrol duty in a transit van together with other Police
Officers.     Police Sergeant No.1075 Holbrook was in conmand and our serial
was No.50 that day.     We were assigned to patrol the North side of the
ground in the area of Halifax Road/Parson Cross, giving attention to
public order and licensed premises. We patrolled the area as directed and
prior to the arrival of the train carrying Liverpool fans to Wadsley
Bridge railway station, took up an observation position directly above the
Travellers Inn, Halifax Road.


Whilst the transit was parked in the observation position on Halifax Road
I saw that football fans were walking towards the direction of the
football ground in an orderly manner.        I saw several carrying cans of beer
or lager and in sane cases drinking from them, but I did not see any
obvious signs of drunkeness.     The football fans that passed me, I believe
were from Liverpool and their numbers gradually increased towards the hour
of 3.00 pn.     I noticed that the numbers of coaches carrying fans also
increased in a-similar manner; several coach drivers of whom I saw stop to
speak to foot patrol officers in Halifax Road.       In the main these coaches
were moved along towards the allotted parking area still carrying their
passengers.    However, some passengers were seen to alight in Halifax Road
between our position and Claywheels Lane before Officers moved the driver
of the coach along.


At about 3.00 pm this same date radio carcnunications received from ground
control indicated that a serious public order situation was arising at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Together with other Officers in serial
50 we moved in our transit from Halifax Road to Leppings Lane in
anticipation of being required at that location.     However, on arrival
there I saw numerous other officers present and ambulances arriving.       To
avoid congestion our serial in the Police Transit resumed from Leppings
Lane back to Halifax Road travelling there via Hillsborough and Penistone
Road.     Our Police transit became stationary in heavy traffic in Halifax
Road on the into City lane below the railway bridge.     Ambulance, Fire and
Police vehicles travelling towards the ground were having difficulty
getting through because of the traffic congestion.     By this time I
realised from radio traffic that the situation at the ground was very
serious and steps should be taken to make a clear passage for emergency
vehicles.     With the approval of the serial sergeant I left the transit and
commenced to direct traffic on the Halifax Road away from the ground.
Police Constables Lund, Buckley and another Officer from our serial
assisted me with this operation.     Shortly after the traffic situation had
eased I resumed from Halifax Road together with other Officers in my
serial back to the ground following a radio coirmunicat ion "ALL OFFICERS TO
THE GROUND".     On arrival at the ground in Penistone Road outside the main
enterance I alighted fron the transit with the other members of the
serial.     I saw that ambulances were entering and leaving this enterance
and assistance was required.     I was directed by an Inspector to assist
with the walking injured.     Police transit vans were being used to
transport the injured to hospital.     I and other officers assisted and
accompanied the walking injured to the Hallamshire Hospital.     A number of
these injured were shocked and one youth kept attempting to alight from
the transit van.


On returning to the football ground r was then released from this duty by
an Inspector.     I then bacame attached to another serial with Sergeant
Creasey in charge patrolling Penistone Road area.


Two Liverpool fans from WALES approached our vehicle asking for assistance
as one of their party, a 19 year old youth was missing.     They were
distressed and unable to get any response on the emergency telephone
number.     They asked for directions to the Hallamshire Hospital, we took
these two people to the Hallamshire Hospital and resumed patrol.


We were then required to return to Claywheels Lane; going off duty at 6.30 pn.




MAUREEN ANN WILKES
