                          ijQ



                                <s»
                     *




^o„           CkJWA
o jo ~ cX .   o ^v       r\
                N   tfttt
 '   FREDERICK BURNS,
     INSPECTOR
     CPU. HQ PROSECUTIONS.


      ON Saturday 15 April '89, I was allocated a special duty at the Hillsborough football
     .ground in connection with the semi-final match, Liverpool -v- Nottingham. I commenced
      duty at 10am at the ground.
     .My function «as that similar to the duty I normally carry out within the CPU, ie -to
      read and check prosecution files for evidence content in respect of those persons
      arrested in,or in the immediate vicinity of the ground and brought to the police room
      for processing. I was based in that room but had no resposibility or input into the
      actual charging procedure. It was my task to ensure that files were prepared as
      quickly as possible so that all paper work could be transported together with the
      prisoner to either of the holding stations at Hammerton Road and Ecclesfield.

      I remained in the Police room     pending the arrival of the first prisoners (time of
      which I cannot be sure about - but some considerable time after commencement of duty)
      and from then on spent varying periods in police room and the gym ( where arresting
      officers wrote reports).
   At some time around Jpm or shortly thereafter, I was in the gym when I became avare via
|A*adio traffic that some sort of incident was taking in the ground. This information was
^^followed by instruction -again over radio 'all officers onto the pitch'. I then left the
   gym and entered the playing area via the access point between the North stand and the Spion
   Kop.
   My first impession was that a pitch invasion had taken place and believed that officers
   at the far end were dealing with a large scale public order situation. Play had
   already been stopped with players leaving the field. The position at the Kop end was
   that the Nottingham supporters had appeared to have had a similar impression and there
   were signs^.cif unrest. As a control measure, Supt Chapman, F2 Sub Div, instructed that
   a line of. Be1§rawn up - facing the Nottingham fans, to prevent the possibility of a
   second pitch intrusion. Initially I was one of those officers but became involved in
   some first aid work when it became apparant what the situation was and fans began
   bringing surviving spectators from the far end. I aided two persons and then assisted in th
   carriage of one other - obviously dead, into the gym. From that time onwards I was
   involved in events in and around the gym without having any specific job. At some stage
   I went with other officers in a Iponsit van to the Leppings Lane side of the ground
   and returned with a number of bodies to the gym. I then remained inthe gym, providing
   assistance with body documentation. I remairxlin and around that area until 12 midnight
 ^p»hen I was relieved from duty.
