                                                                    Pol /




               IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                     Case No T991569



                                                                         Combined Court Centre
                                                                                    Oxford Row
                                                                                         Leeds

                                                                              3rd September 1999

   B


                                                       Before

                                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE HOOPER




                                                       REGINA
                                                         -v-

                                                BERNARD MURRAY
   D                                           DAVID DUCKENFIELD




    E
                                                        ORDER




                                                     APPEARANCES


                        For the Prosecution:                       MR.   A.   JONES’
                        On behalf of the Chief Constable           MR.   N.   GODS'
                        For Bernard Murray:                        MR.   M.   HART
                                                                   MR.   S.   MY7
                        For D a v i d Duckenfield:                 MR.   W.   Cl
                                                                   MR.   P.   I

    G


                                  Transcribed from the Palantype

                                             J .L . Har p ha m L t d .
                              Official Court Reporters and Ta
                                               55 Queen Street
     H                                             SHEFFIELD
                                                     SI 2DX


I I H a rn h a m Ltd.
                          R E G IN A -v- BERNARD MURRAY AND DAVID DUCKENFIELD

                                                                           3rd September 1999

                                              PRE-TRIAL HEARING

                    THE CLERK: Are you David Godfrey Duckenfield?

                    DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD:               I am.

    B               THE CLERK: A n d are you Bernard Dean Murray?

                    BERNARD DEA N MURRAY:           Yes,    I am.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones, Mr. Clegg and Mr. Harrison,
              as I think you know, many years ago I gave some advice to the
              Director of Public Prosecutions. That advice, although it
              concerned Hillsborough, had absolutely nothing to do with any of
              the matters with which this Court is concerned. Does any one
              wish me not to conduct either this hearing or the trial itself,
              as a result of that?

                   MR. JONES: My Lord, we were all of us given notice of this
              matter by the Treasury Solicitor, who I think was consulted by
              the Director of Public Prosecutions about this matter. We have
    D         all given full information about it last week. My Lord, it is
              obvious that your Lordship's involvement in that was of such a
              minor kind that cannot affect any issues in this case or from
              the Prosecution's part, we are grateful for being notified about
              that. We have no objections at all to your Lordship sitting.

                    M R . C L E G G : We have n o n e .

    E               MR. HARRISON: None,         my Lord.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Thank you, Mr. Harrison. The indictment
              has not been signed. It has been received by the court, as I
              understand it, as being received within the time as extended,
              namely 56 days. Is there any objection to the Associate signing
              the indictment in the normal way?

                    MR.     JONES: Not from us, my Lord,             no.

                    MR.     CLEGG: Not from us, no, my Lord.

                    MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes,          the indictment may be signed.

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, I appear for the Prosecution    in this
               case. My learned friends, Mr. Clegg and Mr. Isaacs for the
    G          defendant, David Duckenfield, and my learned friends, Mr.
               Harrisson and Mr. Myerson for the defendant, Mr. Murray. My
               Lord, by w ay of preliminary, I do not have a junior with me
               today. Wo u ld your Lordship allow m y instructing solicitor to sit
               behind me, m y Lord, in case I need papers?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.
    H
                    MR. JONES:      I am obliged. My Lord this of course is a

                                                           ■1-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
fS




                  preliminary hearing, and because there is a trial pending, my
                  Lord, I think we are all agreed, I have spoken to my learned
                  friend, Mr. Clegg, briefly about this, that it would therefore
                  obviously be appropriate to make an order under Section 4.2 of
                  Contempt of Court Act 1981, prohibiting publication of any
                  matters arising in this hearing, other than the normal, formal
                  matters permitted.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: What I normally do is to ao this at the
                  end of the hearing so that we know and the Press can then make
         B        any representations about what should or should not the be
                  published. Is every in the Press concerned with, a blanket order
                  until the end of this afternoon's hearing and we will look at it
                  again? Yes.

                        MR. JONES: My Lord, I should have said, I am sorry, that my
                   learned, Mr. Godsmark appears for the Chief Constable of the
                   South Yorkshire Police.

                        My Lord, this is I think a pleas and directions hearing,
                   and I think we are very much in your Lordship's hands as to how
                   to proceed. My Lord, we have raised in a note dated Tuesday of
                   this week, some matters, additionally, which we wish to raise,
                   in addition to the papers which I think your Lordship had
                   requested and was supplied by the court last week. M y Lord....
         D              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Can I say, the first thing I want to do
                   is to set the date of the trial, assuming that there is going to
                   be a trial, as I understand there will be an application that
                   the indictment should be stayed.

                         MR. JONES: Yes.

         E              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: But assuming that were not to be
                   successful, I want now to set the date of the trial so that
                   everyone knows what date to work through. I am perhaps
                   suggested, I think, the date of June the 6th. Does anyone wish
                   to make any observations about that? Mr. Clegg?

                        MR. CLEGG: M y Lord, we have been told that is the first
                   available date in the court, and in those circumstances, we are
                   grateful to be able to take advantage of it.

                   MR . JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. The first available date, in the sense
                   that it is taking into account the huge amount of work that is
                   going to be needed in this case and the other commitments of the
                   court.

                         MR. CLEGG:   So be it.
         G
                         MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: One would have  liked to have   had it
                    earlier, but also one has to have quite a long period    for this
                    trial, and advantage of June is that if there were to    be an
                    overrun, it would be over running in August, which is    much
                    easier for everyone to cope with.

                         MR. CLEGG: Well, I can see the advantage of the date,    and
         H
                    we do not object to it.



     J. L Harpham Ltd.
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Right, June the 6th will be the trial
             date. The length of the trial, you seem to have reached a least
             some agreement, about six to seven weeks, something like that?
             It is early days.

                  MR. JONES: It has to be very tentative because, my Lord,
             the question of the universe of documents that have to be
             examined, but, tentatively, we have suggested for the
             Prosecution case, three to four weeks.
    B
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, well, will assume a trial of about
              that length, at the moment, anyway. Now, can the indictment be
              put, at this stage? A ny objection, Mr. Clegg?

                   MR. CLEGG: No. So far as we are concerned, two Counts have
              been added to the indictment since commitment, Counts four and
              five. They were not charges upon which the defendant,
              Duckenfield, was committed on. One of them mirrors almost
              exactly a charge that was the subject matter of a hearing before
              the Divisional Court, which resulted in the Director of Public
              Prosecutions reconsidering an earlier decision not to exercise
              his powers to discontinue. Following the hearing in the
              Divisional Court, he did reconsider and did discontinue those
              proceedings.
    D               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                   MR. CLEGG: Notwithstanding that, the charge has reappeared
              on the indictment and is reflected in Count five, the same
              allegation is dressed up, I do not use that wor d in any
              derogatory sense, but it is dressed up under a different
              heading, but it actually exactly the same allegation differently
    E         described. We intend to apply to Her Majesty's A t torney General
              for a nolle in relation to those two Counts.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                   MR. CLEGG: In relation to the first three Counts on the
              indictment, we will be making an application to stay those,
              which will clearly involve a little time. Were the application
              for nolle to fail, in relation to Counts four and five, we will
              be making an application that the court quash those Counts
              because they are not based upon any evidence that was disclosed
              on the Committal papers. It is our submission that the added
              Counts must be reflected upon evidence that was before the
              magistrate. It cannot be supported by, for example, as yet
              unserved notice of further evidence.

    G               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, but that can be done by way of
               application for a voluntary bill.

                    MR. CLEGG:   It could be,   if one were made.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I do not want spend time examining one
               route if another route can cure any pro bl e m there ma y be.
    H
                    MR. CLEGG: Well,   I propose to close each route as it opens,



J. L Harpham Ltd.
             if I am able. So I am dealing with the routes currently open and
             I shall seek to close them, and if more open, I shall seek to
             close those.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: As a matter of law though, is there
              anything to prevent the indictment from being put? It does not
              in any way prevent you from making these arguments later?

                   MR. CLEGG: In my experience, an indictment is not put until
              an application to stay has bee n heard.
    B
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,      that is not universal practice.

                   MR. CLEGG:      It is certainly the practice some little way
              south of here.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Harrison,       what do you think?

                   MR. CLEGG: I can seen no advantage in putting it because
              everybody knows the defendant will plead not guilty to all
              charges, and I can give that ve r y firm undertaking.

                    MR.   CLEGG:   I adopt Mr.   Clegg's argument, my Lord.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr.       Jones?
    D
                    MR. JONES: M y Lord, it seems to me to be a technical
              matter, my Lord. I can see absolutely no reason why the
              defendants could not be arraigned today and I do not know which
              part of the south my learned friend is referring to, but my
              Lord, in my submission, it is prett y general practice that an
              abuse of process application now is fairly flexible and can be
              made at any time convenient to the court, and it will be my
    E         submission, m y Lord, in due course, that the right time to hear
              that, since the question of whether the trial should be stayed
              concerns matters to be determined in the round, in a variety of
              a large number of factors, I do suppose this application should
              be determined as close to the date of the trial as possible, in
              the light of all available material, and that there is no reason
              w hy the formal arraignment should await that occasion, but it is
              a master for the C o u r t .

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I shall order the defendants to be
              arraigned on Counts 1,2 and 3 which there can be, subject to an
              abuse, there can be no other wider attack on the Counts. Would
              you arraign the defendants on Counts 1,2 and 3.

              THE CLERK: David Godfrey Duckenf i el d and Bernard Dean Murray,
              you charged on this indictment, containing five counts.
    G         On Count 1 you are both charge with manslaughter, and the
              particulars of the offence are M^at on the 15th of April 1989
              you unl a wf u ll y killed John A l f r e d A n derson by gross negligence,
              namely, by failing to prevent and relieve a crush in ‘'.0.4 of t h 2
              west terraces at Hillsborough fooLDall ground, Sheffield,
              between 2:30pm and 3:06pm.        David Duckenfield, are you guilty or
              not guilty?
    H
                    DAVID DUCKENFIELD: Not guilty.

                                                    -4-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
     THE CLERK: Not guilty.            Bernard Murray,   are you guilty or
not guilty?

     DAVID DUCKENFIELD:         Not guilty.

     THE CLERK: Not guilty. On count 2 you are both charge with
manslaughter, and the particulars of the offence are that on the
15th of April 1989 you unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall by
gross negligence, namely, by failing to prevent and relieve a
crush in 10.3 of the west terraces at H i l l s b o r o u g h _football
ground, Sheffield, between 2:30pm and 3:06pm.          David
Duckenfield, are you guilty or not guilty?

     DAVID DUCKENFIELD:           Not guilty.

THE CLERK: Not guilty. Bernard Murray,            are you guilty or not
guilty?

     BERNARD MURRAY:          Not guilty.

     THE CLERK: Not guilty. On Count 3 you are both charged with
misconduct in public office, and the particulars of the offence,
that on the 15th of April 1989 you wilfully neglected as senior
officers of the South Yorkshire Police Force to ensure the
safety of spectators entering the Hillsborough football ground,
Sheffield, by failing to take steps to prevent and relieve a
crush in pens three and four of the west terraces of the ground.
David Duckenfield, are you guilty or not guilty?

      DAVID DUCKENFIELD: Not guilty.

THE CLERK: Not guilty. Bernard Murray,             are you guilty or not
guilty?

      BERNARD MURRAY:         Not guilty.

      THE CLERK: Not guilty.

           MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones, doesn't the statement
of offence usually identify contrary to common law or something
like that?

     MR. JONES: M y Lord, I always thought was unnecessary,
myself, but if your Lordship thinks it ought to be added, it can
be, certainly. I think the precedence, as I recall, my Lord, the
rules do not require t h a t .

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, is any technical point going to
be taken absence of the w o r d s , contrary to common Law?

      M R . C L E G G : Not by m e .

      MR. HARRISON: Nor me.

      MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:       In which case you do not have to.

      MR.   JONES:   Thank you.
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Can I deal with the Counts 4 and 5? How
             long do you anticipate, Mr. Clegg, before you will be in
             position to know whether there will be a live argument on Counts
             4 and 5 ?

                   MR. CLEGG: That depends on the Attorney. For reasons that
              everyone is aware of, on this -siic at any rate, the Attorney
              himself cannot consider the question of a nolle because he did
              advise the Director in relation to the prosecution of
    B         Duckenfield, a matter of public record. It will depend upon the
              availability therefore of the solicitor. We would hope to write
              to the solicitor, certainly within three weeks of today. It then
              depends his workload, and of course he m a y wish to consult those
              who made the original decision to discontinue the proceedings,
              who was not in fact the Director because he too is unable to
              advise in this case.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,   I have four days free on December
              the twentieth.

                    MR. CLEGG: All will be resolved long before then.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So, should you not succeed in your
              submissions to him, this matter of Count 4 and 5 will then be
              looked at on December the 20th.
    D
                    MR. CLEGG. That would be a convenient date for me.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   Suit you, Mr. Jones?

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

    E              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So that is that decision made. Insofar
              as abuse of process is concerned, you said that you wanted it
              very close to the trial.

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I have some reservation about that,
              simply because defendants are entitled to know whether they are
              going to be tried or not.

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The matter has been examined, I read
              Mr. Cadby's decision on the matter, and for my part I would wish
              to hear this, any abuse of process application on December the
              20th.
    G
                    MR. JONES: My Lord, if I may so, I have no objection, in
               principle, to that course. My Lord, the reason why I suggested
               later was particularly in the light of arguments there had been
               about publicity, and your Lordship will, I know, will be very
               familiar with all those cases, talking about fate factors and so
               on, but my Lord, for my part, if it is convenient to your
    jj         Lordship then, so be it.


                                                -6-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: In any event, at that time, one can
anticipate that there will be no publicity between then and the
date of the trial, should any application fail, because to do so
would be a contempt of c o u r t .

     MR. JONES: Can     I just be build in this reservation, my
Lord, I understand that although a note was sent to the court on
Tuesday? A n d I know that ..as later than it should be, for
reasons I will explain. My Lord, I do not know whether your
Lordship has appreciated the extent of the paperwork to which we
seek access.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:    Yes,   I appreciate that.

     MR. JONES: Now, my Lord, when and in what form those
documents are disclosed and made available is a matter of
controversy, and I only mention this reservation to your
Lordship, that if there is an enormous amount of documentation
and if we are still looking at it at Christmas, it is possible
that the outstanding examination still to be done might justify
an application by any party for tLe abuse of process application
to be postponed. I hope not. We earnestly hope that this
question of disclosure of documents is going to be resolved very
quickly, but I just   sound that note of warning.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Clegg, Mr. Harrison, December the
2 0th for those arguments, does it cause you professional
difficulties?

     MR. HARRISON:   It does for me, my Lord,    I am afraid, yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: When do they cease?

     MR. HARRISON: They do not, my Lord, that is the difficulty,
and I think that we are all in a certain problem. We had a view
at the Bar that if your Lordship were able to accommodate us,
that we could actually deal with this m at t er during the very,
very first week of January. In the week before term strictly
begins.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: During the vacation,      you mean?

     MR. HARRISON:   Yes.

     MR. CLEGG: It did not sound quite so b a d the w a y Mr.
Harrison first put it.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: He put it v er y smoothly.     So what date
would that be?

     MR. HARRISON:   The 4th of January.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:    Is that because the week following you
are a l r e a d y . ..?

     MR. HARRISON: I think we are all in difficulties, my Lord,
and that was w h y at the Bar we came up w i t h that suggestion.
                    MR. CLEGG: Could I bring up something that literally-
              occurred to me as Mr. Harrison has been addressing you? The
              application in relation to the two counts, if it needs to be
              made, could be made before Christmas, on the 20th and Mr. Jones
              has alerted me, in his skeleton, to a possible argument on
              a dmissibility that would only affect Duckenfield, and that also
              could be dealt with - I know he is anxious for that to be dealt
              with.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: This is what Mr. Duckenfield is said to
    B         have said to what? To...?

                    MR. CLEGG: Taylor.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Taylor.

                   MR. CLEGG: So it is a possibility that we could use both
              periods. I think it would be quite tight to deal with everything
              on the 2 0th.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Sounds like it.

                       MR. CLEGG:     Even knowing my Lord's sitting hours.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We will wait for the listing officer to
              make sure - now, this ought to be heard here, I think. Although
    D
              two of you come from London, I think it is important that those
              involved in this case hear this argument. It should be heard
              here, I think.

                   MR. CLEGG: Certainly. I am not opposing an application to
              hear the p reliminary argument here. For different reasons....

    E              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I mean, so often one can move it to
              London, but I think it would be inappropriate in this case.

                       MR.   CLEGG:   So be i t . I am not going to complain.

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, if it is just a question of Mr. Clegg's
               argument on the 20th, then, my Lord, if there was any question
               of a vote, I would be arguing that it could be, if it was
               convenient to your Lordship.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,      that will be here because I am
               here.    4th of January then.

                       MR.   CLEGG: Yes, my Lord, thank you.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, well, that will be the date of the
    G          substantive hearing on the abuse, on that day, lasting that
               week.

                       MR.   CLEGG: Does my Lord want to hold the 20th fcr...?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, I hold the 2 0th for two days, for
               odds and ends, two of which we have already mentioned. I would
    H          like to do a timetable now for 4th of January hearing because I
               think that is an important timetable. The burden of proof is on

                                                       8-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
             you, Mr. Clegg, Mr. Harrison. You to go first. I want any
             evidence upon which you propose to rely and skeleton arguments
             in by about the 1st of December? Mr. Jones?

                    MR.   JONES: Yes,   we are happy with that.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, perhaps a bit earlier,            if you are
             going to call evidence.

                  MR.     CLEGG: Well, if we are going to call evidence, which I
    B        think is     unlikely, we will give notice of that by an earlier
             date.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:      I want the statements too.

                    MR.   CLEGG: Of course, yes.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, why don't we just set a date of
             the 19th of November for statements of any witnesses who vou
             propose to either call or seek their admission bv some other
             route and your skeleton arguments by the 19th of November? With
             liberty to apply, if....

                   MR. CLEGG: I would ask for a little longer than the 19th
              because I a m . ..
    D               MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:      26th?

                    MR. CLEGG: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I mean, if you said to me now, you are
              not calling in any evidence, then I would put it to the
              beginning of December, but....
    E
                   MR. CLEGG:      I think it highly unlikely that I will be
              calling any.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:        I will give you two dates. It will be
              b y the 26th of November,        if you are calling evidence., and by the


                    MR.   CLEGG:   Seven days after that I would be able t o . ...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The third?

                    MR.   CLEGG: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         3rd of December,_if you are not calling,
              any evidence. Mr. Jones,         are you content with those dates?
    G
                    MR. JONES: My Lord,        might I have an extra period, please,
               after the D e f e n c e . ...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I have not given you it yet.           I have not
               said that yet. You are content with date?

                     MR. JONES:    I am, yes,    I an content with that, yes.
    H

                                                       _9_

J, L Harpham Ltd.
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Now, how long do you want for your
             reply to that skeleton argument and the service of any evidence
             from which you propose to rely.

                  MR. JONES: M y Lord, if it was Friday the 3rd, if I could
             have until then Monday the 13th, I would be grateful.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,       I wxil give you a little longer
             than that. 17th of December.

    B               MR. JONES: Thank you.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So it is just, initially, in effect,
             ready for our hearing on the 2 0th, but it will not affect that
             hearing. Yes. Now, who is going to make - can one of the juniors
             make a record of all these and type it out?

                   MR.    ISAACS: That is being dealt with,    my Lord,   as you
              speak.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And you will dra w the order up, get
              everyone to agree it and then it can be distributed to everyone?

                    MR.   ISAACS: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Do we need any timetabling for the 2 0th
    D         of December? All I will simply say on that, that if any of the
              issues to be raised on the 2 0th of December skeleton arguments,
              to be in - you will be going first would be going first, would
              you not? If you were not succeed on a n o l l e . So two weeks
              before.

                    MR.   CLEGG: Yes.
    E
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A n d Mr. Jones,     five days before that
              hearing.

                    MR.   JONES: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:      Perhaps that could be converted into
              dates by Mr. Isaacs.

                    MR.   ISAACS: Was that five days,    my Lord?

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:      Five days. Well,   five days before the
              hearing.

                    MR.   ISAACS: Yes.

    G               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am fairly flexible. Issues of
               admissibility, I want a skeleton argument, but I leave it to you
               both to resolve that at, a suitable timetable.

                    MR.   CLEGG: Yes,    we will keep to the same dates.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, right. H av i ng set the timetable of
               the 6th of June for the trial, I want to deal with one or two
    H          matters relating to that. I appreciate things are in a state of

                                                  -10-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
          flux and we will be dealing with some of those matters later,
          but is anyone going to be calling any expert evidence, as
          presently advised?

               MR. CLEGG: We want to know if the Crown were going to call
          any before we answer that question.

                 MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: K j.'. Jones?

               MR. JONES: At present the        intention is no, but   we have   not
 B        ruled it out, no.

               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I should put you on a tight timetable
          for any expert evidence, with liberty to apply to come back and
          say something new has arisen, but essentially, that decision
          must be made quickly.

                MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, I appreciate that. Again, the
          Chief Constable has indicated the he is prepa r ed to disclose any
          expert reports in his possession, and that would be a critical
          matter in our making decisions upon this point. M y Lord, he
           indicated that, I think two weeks ago, that he was prepared to
           disclose any such expert reports in addition to the one they
           have already disclosed to us in 1997 and the obtaining of that
           is critical to a decision as to how we proceed in the matter of
  p       getting expert evidence,   if we do at all.

                MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:  Well, I am minded to put a date down
           with liberty to come back to me, rather than the more fluid way
           of letting it all float away, and I think the Prosecution are to
           serve any expert evidence upon which they propose to r e l y . I
           would have thought somewhere mid-November.

  £              MR.   JONES: Ver y well.

                MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: November the 19th because that gives
           you quite a lot of time still, doesn't it?

                 MR.   JONES: Yes.

                MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And then when we, on December the 2 0th
           we can see whether any order is necessary for the Defence, but
           we do not need to do that at this stage. So Prosecution to
           disclose any expert report upon which they propose to rely by
           Friday November the 19th, liberty to apply. That applies to all
           of these orders. Where do you want to go next, Mr. Jones?

                 MR. JONES: My Lord, the substantial matter we raise
            concerns disclosure of documents.
  G
                 MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: What about the admissions point?
            Because I think we could deal with t h a t .

                 MR. JONES: Certainly, we can deal with that, yes. Can I
            indicate what our concerns are upon the submissions matter? My
            learned friends before the committal proceedings made a number
            of admissions which I believe have been transmitted to the court
  H
            by the Magistrate's Court.

                                                -11-

L Harpham Ltd.
                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   If that is the case,   I have not seen
             them.

                     MR. JONES: Well,   my Lord,   there are several pages of them.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     I do not need to read them for these
              purposes ?

                     MR. JONES: No.
    B
                   MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: No. That is what happened,      and   I do not
              have a copy of Archbold,   I am afraid.

                   MR.    JONES: Well, my Lord, the admissions that were    made
              were all    of a background of technical character, they totalled
              96.

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                   MR. JONES: A n d our concern, my Lord, is this. A lot of
              those admissions deal w ith the authenticity of documents, which
              is important because we have obtained by witness summons and
              voluntarily from the Director of Public Prosecution, large
              numbers of plans, photographs, video tape equipment and so on.
    D         All of which we want to use in the course of the trial. Now, my
              Lord, most of that material has been used without objection, at
              the previous Inquest in the case, in Lord Justice Taylor's
              inquiry, without objection from any party, and what we are most
              anxious about is that we do not have to spend time getting
              formal witness statements, producing those matters. We do not
              want to spend time getting formal admissions on of the causes of
              death when the pathological evidence has been served and never
    E         been disputed before, and we do not....

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: First of all, you raise a point under
              the 67 Act, are you persisting in that point?

                   MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, as a technical matter, it appears
              to us, your Lordship has to do it but, my Lord, there is no
              substance in the matter. My Lord, if my learned friends say, in
              our submission, for good reason, that they are not prepared to
              make those admissions for the future, then we have got to set
              about incurring time in proving it.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Let us divide the statements, at this
              stage. The first stage is, a matter of law, are they permitted
              to withdraw their admissions....
    G                MR. JONES: They are, yes,     they are.

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:    ...with my leave?

                     MR. JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Do you oppose me granting that leave,
    H          given the history of the matter which I have seen in the
               correspondence, even allowing for the fact that there may be

                                                   -12-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
             disagreements between you all?

                  MR. JONES: My Lord, we do not oDject, as a matter of law,
             no, but we do invite the Court to ask the defendants whether
             they seriously do maintain the position that appears at the
             present to be implicit in my learned friend Mr. Harrison's
             argument, if not Mr. Clegg's, in saying that they do not propose
             to make any admissions for the time being.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, first of all, then, to the extent
    B        to which I have to grant leave, I grant leave....

                    MR.    JONES: Yes.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: ....for them to withdraw the
             admissions. Now we turn to stage I stage two. What do we now do
             about the situation we are in?

                      MR. JONES: My Lord, we wrote on the 22nd of July to
             solicitors for both parties, asking whether they would be
             prepared to make the same admissions again and if not, to be in
             a position to indicate today, why. M y Lord, I hope I have
             sufficiently put forward the reasons to the Court to indicate
             why we are concerned about the matter. My Lord, surely, in our
             submission, we are not to be expected to have to get witness
    D        statements from forensic pathologists, producing documents which
             they produced nine or ten years before, which have never been
             disputed to be a u t h e n t i c . We are ver y concerned that we do not
             have to get statements from shorthand writers, producing
             evidence of the defendants given to Lord Taylor and to the
             I n q u e s t , and we are also concerned that we do not have
             unnecessarily to have to get evidence formally producing video
             tapes plans and the other documentary evidence which was before
    E        the Magistrates' Court, and I would invite my learned friends to
             indicate whether they have any substantial objections to making
             those admissions, which they made before a committal. If they
             have to indicate what they are so that at least we know where we
             are for preparation of a trial. My Lord, certainly, my learned
             friend, Mr. Clegg, has indicated he is not takin any technical
             points, but I have assumed from my learned friend, Mr.
             Harrison's argument, that he does not propose to offer any
             assistance in this matter at all, for the time being.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, let me just look at the
              admissions. Which volume would they be in, in here?

                      MR. JONES: My Lord, they were sent separately. I have them
              separately. M y Lord, it is a document of about ten pages and I
              know that they were put into the box, I think by Mr. Cadbury,
    G         personally, on the last day of the committal in July. M y Lord,
              we have got a spare copy. Can I hand those in? M y Lord, your
              Lordship will see that two and three are simply background about
              t h e ....

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,     can I just try and read them to
              myself?
    H
                     MR.   JONES:   Certainly.

                                                 •13-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You now invite me to invite Mr. Clegg
             and Mr. Harrison to tell me the p o sition they take on this?

                  MR. JONES: M y Lord, yes, and they have - it is permitted to
             say this - my Lord, most of the documents where there are
             figures and capacities, are all drawn from the Taylor enquiry,
             and the compilation video is prepared by the West Midlands
             Police under the auspices of the Treasury Solicitor, and all
             those matters have always been accepted as uncontroversial at
    B        all previous Inquiries.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. Mr. Jones, when I asked the
              questions of Mr. Clegg and Mr. Harrison, it is right to say that
              if they were prepared to make an admission, it would not follow,
              of course, it is from their own knowledge, that is what t h i s . ...

                    MR. JONES:   Exactly.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And secondly, it would not prevent them
              subsequently saying that these matters are inadmissible as being
              irrelevant or some other reason, should not be introduced into
              evidence.

                    MR. JONES:   I absolutely agree,      my Lord,   yes.
    D
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Against that background, those two
              things, Mr. Clegg, are you in a position or will you be in a
              position, shortly, to be able to answer the question, whether
              you are pr e pared to make these admissions?

                   MR. CLEGG: Yes, I can do so now, in general form, not
              making any formal admission, but it would be put into writing in
    E         due course. So far as, for example, the pathological evidence is
              concerned, admissions will be made. So far as shorthand writers
              are concerned, admissions will be made. So far as photographers,
              those that produce the photographs, put them into the albums and
              produce the indexes, admissions will be made. So far as plans
              are concerned, likewise. So far as video footage is concerned,
              well, we have no desire to see cameramen or the person who
              produces the film give evidence, admissions will be made. All
              that is in a spirit, I hope, co-operation and to assist, and it
              has never be e n our intention to require any of that sort of
              evidence to be called.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: How long do you want got this process?

                       MR. CLEGG: A week, I would have thought. If anybody could
              provide with a copy of what I signed in the lower court, which I
    G         never took the precaution of taking at the time, I never have
              been able to get hold of since, maybe less, but can I make it
              quite clear what we are not agreeing to because it may at first
              glance to be surprising. Evidence, which you can see in front of
              you, setting out, for example, paragraphs four on to eighteen,
              a n d . ...

    H                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   Let us take four. W h y can you not admit
               four?

                                                   -14-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
■




                      MR. CLEGG: They are to be looked at cumulatively. Of
             course, that is a fact that is not in dispute, but the effect of
             making these to admissions in total is that there will be no
             witness called whom we can cross-examine about other matters
             that we wish to place before the Jury. So, if you read, for
             example, the whole of these admissions from four down to and
             includinq, well, really down to 48. None of that will be
             actually be challenged and we do not require, necessarily, each
             and every part of it to be proved, but we want to have a witness
    B        whom we are able cross-examine about w h y changes were made to
             the ground, what happened as a consequence to it, the way in
             which it was done and likewise, the effect of these is that, of
             course it assists the Prosecution, one might say it assists the
             Court, but it denies the defendants the opportunity to
             cross-examining relevant witnesses about matters that, in our
             submission, we should have the opportunity to do and
             t h e r e f o r e ...

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, in number four, for example,         could
              presumably be proved by - it is not a v ery good example.

                     MR.   CLEGG:   That is not a very good example.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: But who would you want the Prosecution
              to call as a quid pro quo for making the admissions.
    D
                   MR. CLEGG: But my instincts are not to make the admissions,
              but I am prepared to suggest who they could call to tender for
              cross-examination. For example, the people that spring to mind
              who might fit the bill would be the person in charge of the
              ground, who is responsible for maintaining it, may be the....

    E              MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER:   The appropriate official from the
              ground.

                   MR. CLEGG: The appropriate official from the ground,          to
              talk about the changes, why they were made and in what
              circumstances.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       So they would just be tendered for
              cross-examination?

                     MR. CLEGG: Well, if that was to          be guaranteed and we       cou
               see   a statement from such a person.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, what would the statement be? All
              you want to do is cross-examine.
    G               MR. CLEGG: Yes, I want to know that he is able speak as to
               these events. I do not want somebody being put up who when I
               come to ask the first question had only started work in the last
               five years and know nothing about any of this at all.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, well,         that means that the person
               has to be p r operly identified.
    H
                     MR. CLEGG: Yes.

                                                   •15-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
kJT




                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Someone who was at Hillsborough
                   Stadium, working then as senior management capacity in 1985.

                        MR. CLEGG: Yes, but I would anticipate Mr. Jones being able
                   to lead the witness over these relatively short matters, and to
                   what extent it is necessary for him to do so, but at the moment,
                   I am nou minded to make admissions in relation to the ground
                   itself. I want to have the opportunity to cross-examining
                   whoever he chooses to call, and this is not only an adversarial
          B        system the we are in, but very much an adversarial trial, I
                   suspect, and I wish to cross-examine whoever it is he chooses to
                   call to prove what he wants to prove in these paragraphs, and I
                   have done something that I am not required to do by law, is to
                   indicate why, and I could have said, I hope with respect, my
                   Lord, I am not going to tell you why I want someone called, but
                   I am just not going to make the admissions, but I hope in the


•
                   spirit of co-operation, I have given you the thrust of why it is
                   not a desire just to be difficult for the sake of it, it is
          C        because we have relevant questions that we want to put to
                   witnesses, and I know that if we make these admissions, we will
                   not have that opportunity.
                         Likewise, the policing arrangements. If we make those
                   admissions, there will not be people called whom we can
                   cross-examine about the policing arrangements. So that is why I
                   will not be m aking admissions, with respect, however muc h I am
          D
                   encouraged to, in relation to those aspects of the case. Of
                   course, if Mr. Jones is in genuine difficulty about one aspect
                   of it and says, look I am calling somebody from the ground and
                   he cannot say what the number of people were that were allocated
                   tickets then, them I will make that admission. So I go....

                          MR. JUSTICE  HOOPER: But you could sit down with Mr. Jones
          E         and identify the   kind of person who might not be able to answer
                    some of the points that are made here, but could deal with it
                    v ery generally.

                          MR. CLEGG:    That is right.

                          MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You want a higher management person,
                     someone who is making the decision, the decisions that are
          F          referred to here.

                          MR.   CLEGG: Yes,   and   likewise,   with the policing.

                          MR. JUSTICE     HOOPER: W i t h the policing?

                          MR. CLEGG: Yes.
          G               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You would want a senior police officer?

                          MR. CLEGG: Yes.

                          MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: But I cannot see why that senior police
                     officer cannot just simply be tendered, if Mr. Jones agrees to
                     call X.

                          MR. CLEGG:    I can understand why my Lord says that,      but I am

                                                         -16-

      J. L Harpham Ltd.
             afraid to say if it appears I am being difficult, then that
             appearance would have to s u b s i s t . I am not making the
             admissions. If when the witness is caxied, there is one part of
             these admissions he can not speak to, then my current
             inclination would be to make the admission then, that the
             witness can be called and if necessary, can put in a written
             document containing these facts, but I want the - I am not going
             admission until the witness is sworn - because sometimes in
             cases like this, we are told witnesses are going to be called
             and then, quite properly, views can change and one d e c i d e s . . ..
    B
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: If we are going to go down this route,
             and I have not heard from Mr. Jones yet, it would be obviously
             conditional on this happening. I mean, that would be - there
             would not be any question of it not then happening.

                       MR. CLEGG: Well, I would want to know who the witness is,
              but my current instincts I think are fairly firm, that insofar
              as those aspects are concerned, the ground and the policing, I
              want a senior person called that I can cross-examine and then
              the evidence can be placed before the Jury, after he is sworn,
              in a w ay that is most convenient for the Jury, and that may well
              be then, it can be put into written form. A statement is
              t a k e n . ...

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, take 27, there was no access for
    D
              spectators from the north side of the ground. What do you want
              Mr. Jones to do about that?

                   MR. CLEGG: Well, of course, when looks at them
              individually, it is easy to, if you like, to pluck out examples
              that can not sensibly be the subject of any possible objection,
              and that is a classic....
    E
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, why therefore can you not say,
              provid e d you call Mr. X, Chief Superintendent Y, then I can see
              no reason why we will   not make these admissions?

                   MR. CLEGG: Well, I do not think there is much between us,
              and I do not want to be difficult. What I am saying is, if that
              person is called, I will make that admission, when he is called.

              M R JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes,   but he does not need to take a huge
              statement from him.

                    MR. CLEGG: I do not want a huge statement to be taken.    I
               want a statement that m e rely identifies him, but after all this
               is all on disc. They have only got to say, that "I am the Chief
               Executive, I have read these admissions, 1 to 4 8 and confirm
    G          they are all true". That is a perfectly simple, short statement,
               and t h e n . ...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A n d he can do that from hearsay
               knowledge?

                    MR. CLEGG: Yes. I mean, I do not think I am going to taking
    H          any technical hearsay points on this. Obviously, I do not want
               somebody being tendered who was not there in 19 89.

                                                -17-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
             MR JUSTICE HOOPER: But that is the agreement that would have to
             be reached, that Mr. Jones has to call X, but X ' s statement may
             simply be, I have looked at these and they are all true,
             although as far as number 42 is concerned, I do that from my
             knowledge of the history of the stadium.

                   MR. CLEGG: If that is done, Lnen at that time, I would
             p robably indicate that when the witness is called, these
             admissions will be made and he can be called and say, you are
    B        whoever you are, and we can give the Jury a list of the points
             but at the moment, that is where I am sticking.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: That is y ou r position. How many
             witnesses would fit - meet your requirements - approximately?

                   MR. CLEGG: I would have thought, perhaps three. Somebody
              senior who was in a senior position at the club itself.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: At the?

                    MR. CLEGG: At the club.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                   MR. CLEGG: A n d a senior police officer, involved in the
    D
              planning of the policing operation and probably a senior police
              officer involved in the policing of the outside of the ground.
              Maybe a senior police officer involved in the policing of the
              inside on the concourse or on the match, but that is the sort
              of ....
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So, with y o u r extensive knowledge of
    E         the case or your clients extensive knowledge over many years,
              You could p re s umably identify some people.

                   MR. CLEGG: Oh, yes, but Mr. Jones does not need me to
              identify those witnesses, he knows them.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Now, Mr. Harrison,      do you adopt the
              same p os ition or...?

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes, I do, my Lord. I have tried to summarise
              m y position on this issue of admission, shortly, at paragraphs
              11 to 13 of my note to your Lordship.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, but twelve is         essentially, you
               are agreeing with what Mr. Clegg is saying?
    G               MR. HARRISON: Yes.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:   Subject to, perhaps,   some fine tuning.

                      MR. HARRISON: There is this about it, that at the moment, I
               am obviously troubled by the fact that Mr. Jones makes no bones
               about i t . He his not yet in a p o sition to indicate to the Court
    H          or to the Defence, who he intends to call. That we regard as a
               v er y important issue, and we have taken the v iew that it is not,

                                                 -18-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
             on the face of it, responsible to be m a king admissions,
             piecemeal, not knowing how the Crown intends to put its case
             against the defendants. Therefore, we have taken the view that
             the usual approach should be adopted, the Crown indicates what
             issues and evidence it intends to adduce, that we will consider
             that. We will makes all our admissions, at that stage. I do not
             know how long Mr. Jones is asking the Court to give him, gross,
             in terms of time, before lie indicates, definitively, who he
             proposes to call, but I would respectfully submit that one way
             to unlock this problem is for the Court to put a time limit on
    B        that so that, shall we say, by November, we know categorically,
             who the Crown intends to call, and just as importantly, from our
             point of view, whom they intend not to call because there is
             clearly an issue which I averted to in p aragraph six. Some
             witnesses who are clearly relevant and material to the issues of
             the trial and which we would submit on the Defence side, the
             Prosecutor would normally regard it as his duty to call, are not
             being called.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So you need the list of who is not
              being called.

                    MR. HARRISON: As well.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, I can see that, but going to, for
              example, something like the - Mr. Clegg has taken the attitude
    D
              on the pathological evidence, for example - that he does not
              require the Prosecution to find the pathologists who conducted
              the postmortems.

                    MR.   CLEGG:   I am sure I shall be following him on that.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So could you, if I said, start with at
    £         least seven days to indicate which of these you are prepared to
              admit so as to save considerable funds, for example, and going
              to look for evidence as from pathologists.

                    MR. HARRISON:     Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: There is no problem with that?

                    MR. HARRISON:     No.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Seven days for that?

                    MR. HARRISON: This trial is ten months away, my Lord, and I
               know that Mr. Jones and those behind him are not going to go
               immediately from this court this afternoon to start obtaining
               pathologists statements, I hope to try a n d . ...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Seven days then, for that. So the first
               thing, Mr. Jones, as I have ordered, is that within seven days,
               they are to indicate which they do admit.

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

    H               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Stage one. Stage two; what do you say
               about Mr. Clegg's principal submission, that they ought not to -

                                                  -19-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
             they need someone to cross-examine about these matters.

                  MR. JONES: My Lord, the first thing I would say is, I would
             like to have notice of this, my Lord, I have not, but I can give
             my Lordship my initial reaction. My Lord, I can say, positively,
             that there are no circumstances at all in which the Prosecution
             will be proposing call any of the senior officers from South
             Yorkshire Police who were on duty at the Hillsborough ground
             that day and who were concerned into the enquiry of these
             events, the next six weeks. We do not believe any of them are
    B        witnesses of truth. My Lord, as far as the Sheffield Wednesday
             Football Club is concerned, it is certainly a matter which I am
             certainly prepared to consider with those instructing me, and if
             there is some way we can do it and call some witness who can
             give some useful information or even further information, about
             the changes in the ground, then we would certainly be prepared
             to look at t h a t .

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, now, let us deal with the police
             side of it. You are not prepared to call any police officers.
             That means Mr. Clegg is not prepared to make any admissions
             about the policing arrangements that day. As I understand it,
             apart from the threat of a wasted costs order, I have no other
             sanction, do I?

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, no. The other option of course is to
    D         invite your Lordship to admit documents under Section 24 of the
              Criminal Justice Act 1988 which are admissible, unless to be
              e xcluded under Section 25, or to invoke the public record
              doctrine, by which a report such as Lord Taylor are public
              records for the purposes of proving the    facts contained in them.
              Those are matters which we would want to look at, but my Lord,
              it m a y well be that things such the capacity of the terraces are
    E         not going to    be critical to the case, I do not know. We would
              have look at     itor consider i t .

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Do you agree with my proposition,
              subject to a wasted costs order, I have no other sanction under
              the law, as it now stands, to force Mr. Clegg to make
              admissions?

                   MR. JONES: I respectfully agree, m y Lord, yes. Under this
              legislation, that is correct, but my Lord, it does not matter,
              however, because of the existence of Section 24 or the public
              record doctrine, we would say.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, in which case,    first of all,   they
              have got seven days to come back to y o u .

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Then you are going to have to decide
               which you wish to prove b y some other route and indicate what
               the argument i s .

                    MR. JONES: Yes.
    H
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A nd that would be,   I should have

                                               -20-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
            thought,     a fruitful area for debate,     on the 20th of December.

                   MR. JONES:   23rd or 4th,   I shoum    crunk.

                 MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, 23rd or 4th of January, anyway,
            somewhere at that period. I think therefore you ought to be
            under a timetable of, shall we say - and I am suggesting dates
            now - rour weeks, to come back to them as to whether or not you
            propose to, well, we can make it a bit longer than that because
            you have got a lot of work to do. Somewhere sort of mid-October?
    B
             MR JONES:    Certainly,   yes.

                  MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: 22nd of October. You are to come back
             and   tell the defence how you propose to prove these matters,
             those that insist upon trying to prove.

                   MR. JONES:   Certainly.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A nd identifying the section or
             identifying a witness who is going to give the evidence.

                   MR. JONES:   Certainly,    my Lord, yes.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Bearing in mind that Mr. Clegg has
             accepted that he may not object if someone is giving - senior
    D
             management is giving evidence, generally, saying, well the
             records show that this w ork was done then.

                  MR. JONES:     My Lord, I know that the South Yorkshire Police
             have very good     relations wit h Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
             have had since     1989. My Lord, there is absolutely no reason of
             course why the     Defence can not all any of these witnesses
    E        themselves.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You can make the point, but it does not
              help me to decide the issues. So that is the 22nd of - let us
              get this right - seven days for the Defence to indicate which
              admissions they are now prepared to make and by the 22nd of
              October, Prosecution tgu-indicate which of the other masters they
              wish to prove and how they propose to go abput it.

                   MR. CLEGG: In the spirit of co-operation, could I invite my
              friend to consider calling Superintendent Mold, who was not one
              of the officers who was at the ground on the fateful day, but
              was in charge of writing the plan, the police plan, that he
              seeks to produce, pr e sumably under one of his various umbrellas
              that he has just aired, and had previous experience of the
              ground, when there is no complaint being made, as I understand
              it, as to the police conduct.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, Mr. Jones,        you can obviously
              consider that.

                   MR. JONES: Well, I can tell you the answer is, no,        my Lord,
              we do not propose to call Superintendent Mold, in any
    H         circumstances.


                                                  -21-
J. L Harpham Ltd
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am not going to get involved at this
             stage because at some later stage there may an application made
             to me to call the witness.

                    MR.   JONES: Certainly.

                    MR. JUSTICE H O O P E R : Perhaps later, much later.

                  MR. HARRISON: My Lord, does the date of the 22nd of October
             extend also to the Crown's deadline for indicating precisely
    B        which witnesses they will and will not call?

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I want to move on to that next,
             yes. Now, can we move on to the next stage, which is really - so
             I want to get admissions slightly out of the way. When are going
             to complete the service of the statements upon which you propose
             to rely? Now, I appreciate it is always going to be subject to a
             proviso that your examination of any documents you are going to
             see, prese n tl y with the South Yorkshire Police, may obviously
             affect it, but nonetheless, I have to put down a timetable.

                   MR. JONES: Yes, my Lord, it does depend and that very much.
             Could I just indicate to your Lordship some of the areas of
             problems are? My Lord, we do have at the moment, witness
              statements from a large number of supporters, my guess is
    j)       something like 60 or 70 spectator witnesses who were at the
              ground. Almost all of those were disclosed by the Home Office in
              1997 and 1998. The greater proportion of those have never been
              seen before by the Hillsborough Family Support Group. My Lord,
              we know that the service of those statements was accidental in
              this sense, that they came from what were known as body files
              and they are the statements of spectators who could give
              evidence about individual victims of the disaster.
    E
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am sorry to cut you short. I know
              there are extreme difficulties, but I want you to give me a date
              b y which, always w ith liberty to apply, b y which you are able to
              serve on the Defence, the statements upon which, at this stage,
              you are pr oposing to rely. It may be there will be further
              evidence later on, and we will have to deal with that as it
              comes along, but, at this stage, by what date?

                      MR. JONES: My Lord, I could do that within three weeks, but
              it is going depend, thereafter, upon what we see in the
              remaining statements disclosed, and it could be, in the light of
              that, that we would seek to replace some of the witnesses upon
              w h o m we had indicated we were going rely, by others, but I
              could, my Lord, the material we have got at present, I mean, I
              could do it easily within three weeks, but it is subject to that
              v e r y considerable reservation that things are going to change.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, give me a date by which you say
               you will be in a position to tell the Defence what evidence you
               propose to rely on, subject to any fine tuning afterwards?

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, the end of September, we could do that,
    jj         but the fine tuning is likely to be a v e r y complex exercise.


                                                  -22-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, well, the end of September seems to
             be too early. I want to give you a more realistic timetable. We
             have now set the trial date, what about the end of November?

                    MR. JONES: Certainly,     yes.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: By the end of November, you must             have
             served on the Defence the evidence upo n which you propose            to
             rely. Subject always of course to an application that you             are
             entitled to call this or that because y ou have discovered            it.

                  MR. JONES: Yes,      certainly,     my Lord.    I am certainly prepared
             to do t h a t .

                  MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: A n d we will b ear in mind when we turn
             and look     at your arguments with the Chief C o n s t a b l e .

                    MR. JONES: Certainly.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:   End   of November?

                    MR.   HARRISON:   Thank you my Lord?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Clegg?

    D               MR. CLEGG: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I will have to word this carefully. By
              the 3 0th of N o v e m b e r ,. the Prosecution is to serve on the Defence
              all of the witness statements^and exhibits, which they then
             '&r°P°se to rely upon for the t r i a l . Is that wording, Mr.
              Harrison, sufficiently tight?

    E                 MR. HARRISON: M y Lord, yes,      I think so.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: By then you have got to say this what
              we now propose to do at the trial. It m a y be of course, after
              you come b ack and say, "Well, we want to fine tune this", but
              that is where the bulk of the work must be in by.

                   MR. JONES: A nd of course the advantage of that, my Lord,               is
              it fits in quite well with the abuse of process timetable.

                      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes,       it does,    yes. Where are we going
              next?

                   MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, I think those are the matters
              which I wish to raise, subject to the question of access to
              papers in South Yorkshire Police.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Have you got a P.D.H. form I can slip
               through? I am not asking you to fill one in, it is more just a
               blank, just to remind you if there is anything - it is just a
               bank one, to see if there is anything else I ought to be
               considering. Now, Mr. Jones, I normally, in cases of any
               complexity, require the Prosecution to do even more substantial
    H          admissions than you have already done, but it may be, you know,
               continuity of the exhibits and - is there going to be need for

                                                     -23-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
             anything more than you have already done?

                    MR.   JONES:   I do not believe so, my Lord,   no.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: W hen you serve this by the end of
             November, will that be the bundle that we will all be using at
             the trial and we will have pagination, starting at 1 and ending
             at the last page? .

                    MR.   JONES:   It sound as if it will be, my   Lord, yes.
    B
                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: Also legible?

                   MR. JONES: Yes. My Lord, I think we have had problems with
              that in the past, but I think we have got by committal,
              sufficiently legible documents, yes.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Is the pagination now in use going to
              be used on or are you going to, in effect, start with a
              f r e s h ...?

                   MR. JONES: No, I would hope that the documents we produced
              for committal are the basic core documents, plans, matters of
              that kind. There are a few in the category where my learned
              friend wants to start bargaining wi t h us, but for the most part,
              I am sure that they are the core documents for the t r i a l .
    D
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You will maintain that pagination,       to
              help every one who has already worked on it?

                    MR. JONES: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Therefore, it means if a witnesses
    E         makes a second statement, please put that witness as 1.11 ABC,
              do not tuck it right at the end.

                    MR. JONES: V er y well.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Insofar as you are able to do so.
              Anythi n g more on pagination, so that we all work - Can we deal
              with the interviews? So far as you concerned, are there issues
              on interviews and all the similar, you know?

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes,     I think Mr.   Clegg and I are...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Then as far as you are concerned then,
               Mr. Harrison, as far you are concerned, your client, is there
               any issue as to what the admissibility of anything that he may
               have said to Taylor or...?

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes, m y Lord, there are issues which Mr.
               Clegg and I would argue about, the admissibility of what was
               said at the Inquiry, Inquest.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: What kind of ground would you be
               raising?
    H
                     MR. HARRISON: Well,     so far as the Taylor Inquiry is

                                                  -24-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
             concerned, certainly we would invite the Court to consider that
             no appropriate warning was given to the witnesses, who were
             there speaking, which might affecu'admissibility.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,      what is the best way to take this
             forward from here?

                  MR. HARRISON:    My Lord,   I chink Mr. Clegg is leading on this
             issue.

    B             MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Clegg, what is the next step on
             this now?

                    MR.   CLEGG: A mouth full of skeleton. At the....

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Not this one?

                   MR.   CLEGG: No, not that one. You can throw that away,     I
              suspect. Mr. Jones wants to keep it.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I think we can hand back those
              admissions so that you at least, Mr. Clegg, have a copy if no
              one else d o e s .

                   MR. CLEGG: Yes. They will need to comply with the seven day
    D         order. At the same time as some time in the November date, I
              think there is one in mid-November, that you have set before.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Do you know what the Prosecution now
              propose now to rely on, insofar as what you have said or said to
              have said, through Lord Taylor and others.

                   MR.CLEGG: In part. I mean,    I know they say they want to
    E         rely on   it. They have not as yet indicated what part, but I
              cannot believe that they are saying that every solitary answer
              is relevant and probative to every solitary question so there
              would be no filleting exercise, but....

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, but have you been given - is that
              right, Mr Jones? They have got everything?

                    MR.   JONES: Yes.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:   From which,    at the moment...?

                    MR. JONES: Yes,     I have a....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Once you have got everything, I
               normally put it upon the Defence to start then the task of
               saying, well, only this should be called or this should not be
               called.

                    MR. CLEGG: Well, there is really a two stage approach to
               it, the first is, whether any of it is admissible.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,     stage one is for them to tell you
    jj         what they wish to rely upon.


                                                  -25-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
                     MR.   CLEGG: Yes, well,      they have done that.

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       They have done that?

                     M R . C L E G G : They have done t h a t .

                     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:      So, stage two is yours.

                      MR. CLEGG: Unless there is anything I do not know about, it
             is what Duckenfield said to Taylor, what Duckenfield said to the
    B        C o r o n e r . ...

                     MR.   JONES: And the statement to the....

                     MR. CLEGG:     I am grateful. A n d the statement he made.

                     MR. JONES:     To the Lord Taylor's Inquiry.

                   MR. CLEGG: Right, well, there are three areas. Well, I               will
              indicate and prepare a skeleton, if I wis h to object to any              of
              those three classes of document.

                     MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Or to any parts of them.

                     MR.    CLEGG: Or to any part of them.
    D
                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: What about a deadline for that?

                     MR.   CLEGG: Well,     certainly the November deadline.

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:        End of November?

                     MR. CLEGG: Yes.
    E
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones? Yes,             he is content with
              that.

                   MR. CLEGG: My only hesitation is, Iwould have no
              difficulty in dealing with, if you like, the fundamental
              questions of the civilian, but I would have thought, when we get
              to relevance, it really would be too time consuming to go
              through huge - I am sure we can agree relevance, and if that
              could be left one side.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I am more interested             in the    broad
              position, which you want me to rule on.

                      MR. CLEGG: And I will have skeletons   available for that,
               the     appropriate authorities by the end of November.

                      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:        By the end of November?

                      MR. CLEGG: Yes.

                      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

    H               MR. CLEGG: And, likewise, any evidence we are going to call
               will be disclosed then, with statements.

                                                         -26-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: On?

                    MR.   CLEGG: Admissibility.

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, there is one complication, that Mr.
             Duckenfield was interviewed by the West Midlands Police in the
             summer of 1990 and under caution, and said nothing. However, Mr.
             M u rray was interviewed at the same time, under caution, and did
             reply, and we are seeking to rely upon those interviews and I do
    B        not kno w whether my learned friend, Mr. Harrison, is objecting
             to t h o s e .

                    M R . J O N E S : N o , not y o u r s , n o .

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: This is the West Midlands interview
             where apparently your client replied - you haven't got those
             though - the Prosecution haven't got those yet?

                    MR. JONES: Yes, we have got them and they have been served.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Oh,               I see,      and are you going to object
              to those?

                    MR. HARRISON:         I think not.
    D               MR. JONES: Well, I wonder if I can be clear, are my learned
              friends objecting to the statements made early in May and signed
              b y Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray?

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, what they are going to tell you is
              b y N ov e mb e r the 3 0th they will tell you, which, if anything,
              they argue is inadmissible?
                                              *
    E
                    MR.    JONES: V e r y well.

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Now,            has anything else...?

                    MR.    CLEGG:    There is one other.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Can I just finish my form? We will need
              equipment, video equipment?

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Could that be noted in the court file.
              Will you need tape playback equipment.

                     MR. CLEGG:       I do not think so. Possibly,              Mr. Jones says.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, for the moment, video equipment.
               What we have not got, so we have got your date for the end of
               Novemb e r to serve the witnesses, what we have not given them, is
               us a date upon which they must indicate whether they wish those
               witnesses to be called in person or not. We ought to have that
               date.
    H
                     MR. CLEGG:       2 0th of December?            I mean,   I do not know whether

                                                            -27-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
             we are going to be given five lever arch files or that much.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     2 0th of December?

                  MR. HARRISON:      Perhaps that could be done at the end of the
             January session?

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, che only thing about that, that
             is the kind of thing that I am definitely going to need know,
             for the abuse hearing, which witnesses are and are not being
    B        called.

                  MR. HARRISON: Yes, but that we shall know,         that is to say,
             being called by the Crown.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No,        the Crown are going to serve you a
             list of witnesses?

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You have got indicate which witnesses
             you require to be called in person and w h i c h can be read.

                    MR. HARRISON: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And what date do you want that for?
    D
                   MR. HARRISON: Well, I would submit that could be done at
              the end of the January hearing, but I submit it is not relevant
              to the abuse to know which witnesses we are going to require, to
              give oral.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No,       I do not think that is right, Mr.
    E         Harrison.

                   MR. HARRISON: V e r y well,    then we will try and do it by the
              December date.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I think I would like it done by
             December the 20th or the Friday before.^Perhaps we can make all^
             the deadlines, except for December the 20th, we can make them
              the Friday before, wfiich is the 17th. Has Mr. Isaacs got that
             'change?

                   MR. ISAACS: The interesting part, m y Lord, was in the first
              instance, you prepared to give the parties the opportunity to
              agree between themselves as to when the skeletons were going to
              be exchanged, but I understand the date, but I think it has
              changed now.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I thinV It has changed,        looks like it
               has changed now, taken over.

                     MR.   ISAACS:   17th of December,    my Lord.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. We will need a - assuming that the
               applications to stay do not succeed, we will need a further
    H          directions hearing, but we will do that at the conclusion of the

                                                   -28-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
             hearing in January. Is there anything else wanted,       at this
             stage? What are the bail terms?

             MR: CLEGG: Unconditional.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No objection to that? No. Do you want
             to stay here for this next argument? If you do not want to, if
             your clients do not want to?

                  MR. CLEGG: My instincts ara not to. Can I just raise one
   B         matter that I do not think have....

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We have got to do contempt. Two at the
             moment.

                  MR. CLEGG: Yes. There is the compilation video. My concern
             is, I do not know how representative that is, of the video
             material that was available to those, whoever they were, who
             compiled it. Now, I fully recognise that Mr. Jones and his
             solicitors did not compile that video, but we are anxious to
             ensure that we have access to the original footage, in order to
             confirm to ourselves that the compilation video is truly
             representative of what it shows because it is perfectly possible
             for it to have been created and demonstrate one particular
             matter that was of interest to the people who commissioned^its
             compilation, and that may not be the same that we are enquiring
    D
             into in this trial.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Who has the original footage,        Mr.
              Jones?

                   MR. JONES: My Lord, the South Yorkshire Police have their
              original footage. However, copies I think are available at the
    E         Magistrates' Court and have been sent here. So there should be
              complete copies of the police videos.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Of the unedited ones?

                    MR. JONES: Of the unedited videos. Similarly, Sheffield
              W ednesday tapes were, complete copies, I am told, were at the
              Magistrates Court and available for inspection, and have been
              transmitted to this court. Outstanding are BBC tapes, which we
              have got a collection of, and I think, I know the defendants
              solicitor had the opportunity of seeing them in Liverpool, but I
              think those the only ones that are not as freely available to
              them as they are to u s .

                    MR. CLEGG: Well, I am perfectly content wit h copies.         I
               mean, I do not want the a c t u a l . ...

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,     it looks like they are available.

                    MR. CLEGG: Well, in that case, really we can arrange with
               the court here, for them to be copied on to some sort of....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     I think your asking too much.
    H
                    MR.   CLEGG: Well,   m a y I ask if there wou ld be any objection

                                                  -29-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
            to the copy tapes in the custody of the court being released
            into the custody of a partner of those instructing me or those
            instructing Mr. Harrison, for them to remain in tbe custody of
            that firm of solicitors, for the purpose of copying, and to be
            returned, thereafter, to the custody of the court?

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones?

                    M R . J O N E S : Of course n o t .

   B                MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: On that undertaking,           that can be done.

                  MR. CLEGG: Likewise, could we invite Mr. Jones to agree to
             us taking custody of the copy of BBC tapes that he has, in the
             same way.

                  MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, we know that the copy of the BBC
             tapes, there is also a copy, South Yorkshire Police. So they
             have a copy, South Yorkshire Police, and we have got a copy. My
             Lord, South Yorkshire Police's charging and time rates are....

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, we are going to come to that. I
             am just going to say this is an order, is that any video
             evidence wh i c h is now in the possession of the court m a y be
             released by the court upon an undertaking from a partner, that
             he/she will keep it properly and return it to the court, when
   D         asked to do so. Are you content with that?

                  MR. JONES: My Lord, similarly, Miss Addington is not a
             partner, but she is a solicitor, on the same terms.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes,               certainly. Mr.   Isaacs,   have you
              got that one?

                   MR. HARRISON: Yes, my Lord, I have the point at paragraph
              one to four of my submission, concerning further particulars of
              the allegations in the indictment. M y Lord, I would invite my
              learned friend to indicate, as soon as possible, either that he
              declines to give particulars, in which case we shall return the
              matter to your Lordship or to leave them.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, let us look at the indictment.
              Well, now, Mr. Jones, at the moment you have got the words
              "failing to prevent and relieve".

                     MR.     JONES: Yes.

                     MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: Your setting out to prove both of them?

                     MR.     JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:          Plus, you have deliberately used the
               word "and"?

                      MR.    JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So you would have to prove both sides,
    H          unless there was any amendment made in the indictment?

                                                           -30-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
                  MR. JONES: My Lord, may I give that some thought? M y Lord,
             I have I have not got any difficulty with my learned friend's
             request.

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: You haven't?

                  MR. JONES: No, I have cercainly got no difficulty about
             giving him further particulars, and I can do that by the end of
             the month.
    B
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: There we are.

                    MR. HARRISON: Thank you.

                  MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You will have that under the heading,
             in the indictment, it will be an amendment to the indictment,
             assuming, after it has been the subject of an argument, which
             says further particulars or something like that?

                  MR. JONES: Certainly, and then it would be a matter for
             discussion, whether that needed to go on the form of the
             indictment or n o t .

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. Anything else, Mr. Harrison?
    D               MR. HARRISON: No,    thank you.

                   MR.  JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Clegg? Can we deal with the
              contempt matters? Who isgoing to speak for the Press? Who is
              here today? Some familiar faces. What has been said today, that
              anyone would be anxious was not reported? Putting the burden the
              other way. What has been said today, that you would be anxious
              is not reported?

                     MR.  CLEGG: What Mr. Jones has said about the witnesses   he
              is    going to call and not going to call.

                    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr.    Jones,   on...?

                    MR.    CLEGG: On witnesses.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: What witnesses - Mr. Jones on his
              attacks on the South Yorkshire Police.

                   MR. CLEGG: The trouble is I have not - I mean, I am clear
              in my m ind as we went through, and now I am trying to put it
              into reverse.

    G                MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: You may have to go in reverse.

                     MR.    CLEGG: The existence of Counts 4 and 5.

                     MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER:   Should not be revealed.

                    MR. CLEGG: I would prefer to do it the other way round.
               There would be no o b j e c t i o n . ...
    H

                                                    -31-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
                 MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Let us start listing. If I start to
            list, then you can make representations and discuss them amongst
            yourselves. First of all, Counts 1, 2 and 3.

                    MR.      CLEGG: Yes.

                 MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You say no publ i ci t y about the proposed
            Counts 4 and 5?

                 MR. CLEGG: Yes, with the pleas tendered, the date of the
   B        trial, identity of Judge and Counsel. For my part, I do not
            think anything else ought to be reported.

                    MR.      JUSTICE HOOPER:    Place and date of trial?

                    MR.      CLEGG:    Place and date of trial,     yes.

                    MR.      JUSTICE HOOPER: W h i c h will be at Leeds.

                  MR. HARRISON: Maybe bail conditions.               I think they are the
             subject - reported to Magistrates Court.

                    MR.      JUSTICE HOOPER: All ready.

                    MR.      CLEGG: Yes,    so that would be....
   D              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And there are some matters which have
             not been mentioned in court about w h i c h the Press are always
             concerned, namely, addresses, but they have not been mentioned,
             and if the Press wish to do it   from some earlier proceedings,
             that is a matter for them.

                     MR.     CLEGG: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We are only conc e rn e d with what has
              b een said in this Court, today.

                   MR. CLEGG: Yes, and could I invite the order to remain in
              force until verdict or further order, and to include all
              proceedings in the absence of the J u r y , unless otherwise
              indicated.

                       MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones,        do you want to add to that
              list??

                       MR. JONES: No,       I do not think so, m y Lord.

                   MR.CLEGG: We would also ask for the order to embrace what
              is  going to happen when we are not here, in relation to the
    G         application, in relation to the archive, because there may well
              be things said about the police   ..

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                       MR.    CLEGG:    ....generally.

                     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am minded, first of all, if I outline
    H          it   for you, minded to make a general order, which one always

                                                         -32-

J. L Haroham Ltd.
.s'*'-




                   makes in this kind of case, that nothing is to be reported until
                   verdict or further order, of anything said in the absence of a
                   Jury. A normal order, and that i n ■^ubjecL these exceptions;
                   first of all, the contents of Counts 1, 2 and 3, which you have
                   not probably seen   yet, have you? But the court will give you a
                   copy to help you,   but there is     to be no publicity, in
                   particular, about Counts 4 and 5 because obviously I have got to
                   rule    may have to rule as to       whether those Counts      are good
                   Counts. Secondly,   the pleas of     not guilty to Counts 1, 2and 3
                   that can be reported. The place and date of trial, the identity
          B        of Judge and Counsel, and the fact that the defendants have been
                   released on bail.

                        Now, do you want to have a w ord amongst yourselves,
                   anything else you would like to do, perhaps?

                        M E MBER OF THE PRESS:                  on behalf of the


•
                   media. Thank you for hearing us. I think there is just one item
                   of concern to us that we would seek your view upon. That is the
         C         need to report upon the fact of the abuse of process hearing,
                   simply as a date and a time and a place, in general.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The problem with that is that if it is
                   unsuccessful, then the avid reader of your newspaper or the
                   listener to your television programme will know that it has been
                   unsuccessful, if we say that there is going to be such a hearing
         D
                   and then it does not succeed, and I think is a problem with
                   abuse hearings, unless anyone, do you share that view. That is
                   the normal view we take on t h a t .

                   MEMBER OF THE P R E S S : I wo u l d only say    tnat it is the discussion
                   about the issue, the abuse of process            has been so well rehearsed
                   publicly now, over the last few years            and more recently, a court
          E        in July, when there was a Stipendiary            Court decision.

                         MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         Did you report the decision in the
                    Magistrates Court?

                         M E MBER OF THE PRESS:       I did not,    and some of us here did, my
                    Lord, yes.

          F              MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:       There was no ban on that?

                         M E M B E R OF THE PRESS:    Indeed not.

                         MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         Does it really matter? Was it reported
                    in the Press?

                         MR. CLEGG: We thought that the order did cover it, but by
         G          the time we had realised that it had been reported, it was too
                    late to clarify, but it was certainly my belief and intention
                    that it should not have been reported so we would say that some
                    damage was done, but we do not want to add to it. It is bad
                    enough knowing the potential Jury, that the Stipendiary
                    Magistrate made the ruling that he did. We do not want them to
                    know that you take the same view, if you do.

                         M E M B E R OF THE PRESS: My Lord will know that that hearing

                                                          -33-

     J. L Harpham Ltd.
             divided, effectively, into two part, and the first part dealt
             w ith the issue of abuse of process, and we in the spirit of that
             hearing, simply noted that result and awaited clarification upon
             the ending of the hearing a week or two l a t e r . I would also
             remind you, my Lord, that of course this matter was well
             rehearsed before, I think in the Hig h Court,, some time, I think
             last year.

                      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The problem is we are getting closer to
              a trial now, aren't we? You will be reporting this January
    B         t h e ....

                    MEMB ER OF THE PRESS: Six months before a trial.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Six months before a trial,      You do not
              want it?

                   MR. CLEGG: No, I will come up front, if it is reported in
              any detail, we will renew our application in relation to abuse
              of process and rely upon the reporting. So I can not make our
              position much clearer than that.

                   MEMB ER OF THE PRESS: I think the distinction that I would
              want to make, my Lord, is that you would anticipate in any
              event, the Court w o u l d probably make a ruling that we would not
              go into any detail about the arguments, which is what we did do
    D
              during the committal hearing. It is simply to report the
              outcome, the result of the abuse of process argument, and in
              this e v e n t ....

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I think at this stage, all I am
              concerned is whether you are allowed to report that there is
              going to be a hearing. We would have to consider that second bit
              later?

                    MEMBER OF THE PRESS: Yes, yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The fact that there is going to be a
              hearing in January, reported now, would that really - what is
              the test I have to apply?

                    MR. JONES: Substantial risk of prejudice to the
               administration of justice in same or any subsequent proceedings.

                    MR. CLEGG: The difficulty is I really do not want to occupy
               too much time on it. It is the accumulative build up of
               publicity, and it is a constant bringing to the public's
               attention, this disaster, which has now been going on for ten
               years solidly, and every anniversary, every event then, it is
               all brought up again and revives all of the painful memories
               that everyone has of that fateful day, and, of course, looked in
               isolation, no harm will come of just that one fact being
               reported, but it is the accumulation of this constant reference
               to the disaster which remains, I think, the worst football
               disaster, outside Peru, in the world.

    H               MR. HARRISON: My Lord, can I add to that because if the
               Press report today that there is going to be an abuse hearing in

                                               -34-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
              January, it is inevitable that they will say now, our readers
              have been told that there is going to be an abuse application in
              January, surely we can tell them what the outcome was. So it is
              not possible to divide off publicity and the outcome from
              publicity of the future e v e n t .

                   MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, if I m a y make this observation.
              My Lord, it has bee n publicised in the Press, in the last year,
              that theie was an application to the Director of Public
              Prosecutions to take over and discontinue this. Then there was
    B         the matter in Divisional Court which was reported in the Press,
              television and continuing law reports. The outcome of the
              application was reported in July. M y Lord, for the life of me,
              applying the statutory test, it is m y submission....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     Paragraph?

                   MR. JONES: I do not think - a contempt is listed in
              paragraph 28.30 and it is Section 4.2. I will have to look it up
              in the index, I am sorry.

                    MR.   CLEGG:   Page 2276,   22.77.

                    MR.   JONES:   2276.

    D              MR. JONES: Well, it appears to be necessary for avoiding a
              substantial risk of prejudice to the administration of justice
              in those proceedings. Now, my Lord, I would argue that there are
              three similar types of application have been reported in the
              press, and nobody could possibly argue that the brief report of
              similar pending proceedings could amount to a substantial risk
              of prejudice in those proceedings.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     Do you want to add anything further?

                    MEMBER OF THE PRESS: My Lord, I do not think so, on that
               particular point. I am grateful to....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A n y other point you want before I make
               a ruling?

                    MEMBER OF THE PRESS: My Lord, one or two of my colleagues
               are just a little concerned, it is of course a matter of record
               in any event that the two defendants were both match commander
               and deputy on the day of this tragic incident in Hillsborough,
               and they are a little concerned that although that has not been
               made clear here, that we are free to go on reporting that fact,
               (Inaudible) the Defence did hold those responsibilities, at the
               time of this offence.

                    MR. CLEGG: Well, for my part, I would have no objection to
               that being reported because that has been so widely reported
               already.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So the position of the defendants on
               the day or - how would you like to word it?
    H
                    MR. CLEGG: M a y I reflect on it? Because,   I mean,   it is

                                                    -35-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
              difficult to read on the

                   MR. HARRISON: It is something the Jury would know, in any
              event, and therefore I think the statutory test would not cover
              it.

                    MR.   CLEGG:    I agree w i t h . ...

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: How would I word that?

     B             MR. CLEGG: The rank and role, on the day of the disaster of
              each defendant ma y be reported. I hope that - I can see that
              seems to satisfy their concern.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:       On April the....

                   MR. HARRISON: My Lord, I do not have any difficulty about
              the reporting the rank or that the two defendants were in a
              position of responsibility at the match. Since I do not know
              quite what form of words is likely to be adopted to try and
              elaborate or put a gloss on that responsibility, I am concerned
              about how that might be reported.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: H o w do y o u wish to describe them?

    D              MEMB E R OF THE P R E S S : We would (Inaudible) barest minimum
              details, my Lord, simply to refer to the statements of the two
              defendants, at the time. This is not to elaborate upon anything
              other than that fact.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I would have thought that would - the
               rank and role wo u ld meet it. It is what Section that I am
               actually making the order, it is under S e c t i o n . ...
     E
                    M R . C L E G G : 4.2.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: 4.2, yes. Under Section 4.2 of the
               Contempt of Court Act 19 81, I make the following order, which is
               to continue in force until verdict or further order.
               There shall be no reporting of any proceedings in the absence of
               the Jury, with the following exceptions. The contents of Counts
               1, 2 and 3 may be reported, and the fact that the defendants
               have pleaded not guilty. There shall be no publicity about
               proposed Counts 4 and 5. The place and date of trial may be
               reported. The identity of the Judge and Counsel, the fact that
               defendants are on bail, and the rank and role of the defendants,
               of the two defendants, on the - I am sure everyone is so
               familiar with t h e . ...

                    MR. JONES:       15th of April 1989.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. There is only one issue about
               which I am asked to make a ruling. The Press wish to publish the
               fact that there will be on January the 4th, a hearing, during
               which the defendants will be making an application that the
               indictment should be stayed as an abuse of process. The Press
               point out that the fact that such an application was made before
               the Magistrates' Court has already been published. Mr. Harrison,

                                                        - 36-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
p articularly makes the point that if that date is published and
if the defendants were not to succeed in that application, that
might be something which an astute reader of the newspaper or
watcher of television or listen to the radio, would realise. Mr.
Jones, and again, a helpful representative of the Press has made
the point, well, still that will be six months before the trial.
1 take the view that if that application were to fail, there
would be - and if a Jury were to know that - then there is a
substantial risk of prejudice to these two defendants. Mr. Clegg
makes the point, forcibly, that if that were to be published,
then that would add further weight to the submissions that he
wishes to make. On balance, I take the view the test is
satisfied in 4.2 and there is to be no publication of the fact
that there will be an abuse hearing or the date of such hearing
is to take place. I stress, of course, and that ruling applies
until verdict or until further order. Anything else on that?
Anything else on that subject, at all? Yes, thank you very much.
      Now the defendants may go. You are released on bail. You
are to - they should be here on the 2 0th of December?
Admissibility arguments?

       MR. CLEGG: Are they? Yes,            I think they probably should be,
yes.

MR HARRISON: I think the 2 0th of December is Mr. Clegg and Mr.
Duckenfield only.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I think there may be - you do not
think you are going to be involved, at all?

       MR. HARRISON: I can not be involved, on that date.That was
the    problem. That is why we are coming bac k in January.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, we will have to bear that in mind,
Mr. Jones, when we do the agenda for the 20th, that Mr. Harrison
will not be here. Well, Mr. Murray, you need not be here on the
2 0th of December, but you must be here on the 4th of January.

            MR. MURRAY:            Yes, my Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And Mr. Duckenfield,               you must be here
on the 20th of December?

            MR. D U C K E N F I E L D :   Yes,   my Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And you both understand that should you
fail to appear, you commit an offence punishable by
imprisonment. Yes, thank you very much, both of you. You are
released on unconditional bail. Now....

     MR. CLEGG: (Inaudible)               the orders that you have made by
Monday of next week.

       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: To Counsel,              once you have all agreed
i t , t h e n ....

     MR. ISAACS: I trust the Court will have copies towards the
end of next week.
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: If you could send mine to the Royal
              Courts of Justice. Now, where are we?

                   MR. JONES: My Lord, this is a complicated matter. My Lord,
              I understand, I hope I am right in understanding, that your
              Lordship did not receive the note we sent about this, with its
              enclosures, until today?

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, I have read the opening
     B        correspondence. I have not gone into the whole history of the
              matter, but can I first of all look at what we are actually
              doing? By one route or another, this is a witness summons, in
              effect or could be turned into a witness summons.

                    MR. JONES:   It is that type of debate,   my Lord, yes.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: To the Chief Constable?

                    M R . JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,   does the new law apply?

                   MR. JONES: No, it does not, my Lord, it does not. This is
              an old style case because there was a police investigation in
    D         1989 to 1990.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, no, no, under witnesses, there is
              the new law where they have amended - I would have thought that
              applies? I do not think that is a transitional - Section....

                       MR. JONES: No, my Lord, I do not think this is really a
              witness summons case, my Lord, it is a question about disclosure
     E        more generally. My Lord, I wonder if I could outline what the
              pr o b l e m is and where we are because there have been discussions
              about this, and in correspondence now for a period of a year,
              and there is an urgent problem about access to documents.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I understood all of that. So, before we
               start on that, can we just look at the legal basis for any order
               I make? As I understand it, it is the new orders regarding
               witness summons which came into force about two or three months
               ago.

                    MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, if there is, but we are not in
               that area, my Lord, because the context in which we are here is
               the context of the management of a voluntary disclosure process,
               and it has bee n indicated on behalf of the Chief Constable that
               he will comply with any guidance the court may give about this.
               My Lord, the reason why the witness summons procedure does not
               apply is because the width and volume of the documentation we
               seek is unknown to us. There will be large numbers of
               statements, reports admissible under Section 24 and other
               documentary material, in the possession of the South Yorkshire
               Police, which is directly relevant to the matters on the
               indictment, and my Lord, the pro b l e m historically arises in the
    U          following way; my Lord, your Lordship may know that there have
               been four inquiries into this matter before 1997, and if I just

                                                -38-

J. L Harpham Ltd.
              outline them, the first of them was Lord Justice Taylor, my Lord
              the second was the Director of Public Prosecutions, the third
              was the Inquest, and the fourth, the Police Complaints
              Authority.

                   Now, the documents all the evidential documents in the
              case, witness statements and exhibits were collected by the West
              Midlands Police, reportin' to 2 ach of those statutory bodies.
              Now, my Lord, that happened in succession. Last year, when these
              private prosecutions commenced, we sought all available
    B         documentation of all those bodies, and to our considerable
              surprise, my Lord, it was reported that all the documents
              collected by the West Midlands Police, for all those different
              bodies, had found their way back to South Yorkshire Police, of
              course which had been one of the bodies under investigation, and
              therefore, we have not been able get more than a handful of
              documents from the Coroner. We have been able to get from the
              Director of Public Prosecutions only the documentation he has
              retained since 1990. My Lord, nothing from the Police Complaints
              Authority, and there is one pa r t y I have missed out, and Lord
              Justice Taylor's documents, my Lord, some of them were put into
              the Public Record Office, but the West Midlands Police have
              handed over the documents they collected for Lord Taylor to the
              South Yorkshire Police. So, my Lord, the South Yorkshire Police
              have all those documents.
    D
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   Yes.

                   MR. JONES: The problem, my Lord, has been this, unless one
              can identify with precision an individual document under the
              witness summons procedure, whether it is old or new, Magistrates
              Court or Crown Court, unless one can identify particular
              documents, by description, then you cannot get those documents
    E         produced by force of law.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   I am not sure of that proposition.

                    MR. JONES: Well,   my Lord....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Where do I find that?

                   MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, what we have looked at is the
              witness summons procedure under Section 9 7 (a) of the Magistrates
              Courts procedure ... 1

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We are not, we are looking at Section 4
              of the - aren't we? - of the Criminal Procedure Attendance of
              Witnesses Act of 1965?

                    MR. JONES: Yes. My Lord, I wonder if I could trouble your
               Lordship for a page reference?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: As amended by the 1996 Act.

                    MR. JONES: If I could trouble your Lordship for a page
               reference, I would be grateful?
    H
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:   Page 9 91. No,   that is not right,   that

                                                 -39-
J L Harpharn Ltd.
              is further.

                     MR.   JONES: Yes.

                     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:    It is the - what is it?

                     MR.   JONES:    It is 986.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: 986, yes, that is right.            Criminal
              Procedure Attendance of Witness Act 1965.
    B
                   MR. JONES: Yes. A summons directive, requiring a person to
              whom it is directed to attend before the trial and give evidence
              or produce any document or things specified in the summons may
              be issued out of the Crown Court or out of the High Court, and
              then there is the provision for setting it aside, and schedule
              1, the procedure for doing this, and then underneath there are
              authorities, my Lord, which I think are effectively the same,
    C         whether the witness summons applied for in relation to the Crown
              Court or to the Magistrates C o u r t . What is not permitted by the
              authorities, as your Lordship knows well, and my learned friend
              has cited I believe the appropriate authorities, is a trawling
              or fishing expedition, and my Lord, that however does not answer
              the problems p o se d in this case.

    D               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, just before you get there, I
               mean, just look at the authorities on which he relies for that
               proposition because over and over again, one is used to wide
               ranging applications to local authorities to produce all their
               files.

                     MR.   JONES:    Yes.

     E              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And what they are required to do is to
               produce the file and then they are supposed to look it and
               identify any document that is relevant therein.

                    MR. JONES: My Lord, that would normally, in my respectful
               submission, that would normally be an application under schedule
               1 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, which application is
               made b y a Constable.
     F
                     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: No, Mr. Jones,        we do them all the time.

                     MR.   JONES: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Requiring local authorities to attend,
               bring their files with them, and the whole file is brought, the
               whole file is read by the judge or for that matter, can be
    G          delegated to Counsel for the local authority.

                     MR.    JONES:   Yes. Well, my .Lora, if....

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:           I am qui^e used to general,   very
               general orders.

    H                MR.   JONES: Well,     my Lord, we would....


                                                       -40-

J. L Harpha   Ltd.
                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Are similar authorities being relied on
              to suggest the contrary? It is a circular argument.

                   MR. JONES: My Lord, paragraph seven onwards. Does my Lord
              have a red file?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       I do.     It is the red one,   is it?

                    MR.   JONES:   Yes.

     B             MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, it is here. The problem with all
              the authorities in 8(b), as I recollect, is that they completely
              overlook Section 23 and 24.

                   MR. JONES: Yes, well, my Lord, my learned friend does refer
              to that and also Barlow Clowes, but I respectfully agree that
              Section 24 c ertainly does widen the traditional historical
              scope.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: That is why I have never found Derby
              Magistrates pa r t i cularly helpful, since it overlooks that line.
              Yes, well, there is the legal background.

                   MR. JONES: Yes, and my Lord, we would be very content to
              apply for a witness summons, directed to the Chief Constable, to
              produce all witness statements taken - and the matter could be
    D
              described g e ne r a l l y - all witnesses statements taken by the West
              Midlands Police or other police forces, in connection with - and
              one could list those four Inquiries - into the Hillsborough
              disaster, any documents or any reports containing evidence of
              those. In fact, my Lord, we have, in the, correspondence, set out
              the categories of documents.

     E              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Let us do it bit by bit              Witnesses
               statements, first of all.

                     MR. JONES: Yes. Every statement made by a police officer or
               - well, by anyb o d y - about the events occurring inside or
               immediately outside Hillsborough Stadium on the 15th of April
               1989 .

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Let us see what the objection to that.
              What is your o b jection to that? It could well be admissible in
              evidence in their own right.

                    MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, my learned friend has said today,               he
               is not going to call any police officer because they are not
               witnesses of the truth.

                    MR.   JONES:   No,    I have not,    I said senior police officers.

                    MR. GODSMARK:        Then I misheard.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, he has not seen the witnesses.               The
               ones he seen, so far he does not like.

                    MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, the objection in law is that this is
               a trawling and fishing exercise.

                                                        -41-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Why? It is identifying witness
statements, taken in the course of an Inquiry. Let us reverse
this and imagine Mr. Jones had all these documents and you were
prosecuting someone else. You would be looking for all of those
things. As a Constable, you would be going in and seizing it,
you would not even be asking for - you would just take them.

        MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord,    the difference is I am not the
Pr o s e c u t o r .

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, you are a third party.

     MR. GODSMARK: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Upon whom a witnesses could be served.

     MR. GODSMARK: Yes, and different considerations apply, in
my submission. My Lord, can I move from the law to the
practicalities? Because you say, what is the objection? There
are objections in law, but in fact access to this material has
been offered.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     Is?

     MR. GODSMARK:    Has been offered.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, well, now, let us not deal with
the law then. What terms do you offer that?

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, an appropriate undertaking as to
conventions, which shall be implied in any event, that I do not
believe is a controversial matter. Supervision so far as access
to the archive is concerned, and payment of our costs.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Where in the rules is there anything
about payment of your costs?

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, there isn't. If your Lordship were
to order the production, as a matter of law, then we would of
course have to comply, but my Lord, my submission is that, with
the greatest respect, your Lordship should not and cannot order
as a matter of law - what the Chief Constable is offering a
voluntary facility.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, let us look at the law first
then. W hy cannot I (?) as a matter of law?

     MR. GODSMARK: Can I take you to 8(a)? To which we have
referred to previously briefly all ready, or perhaps if I start
slightly earlier than that, the 7th Hallas(?) and my Lord, can I
say that ^I would hope tabbed in the red folder, there are the
authorities to which I refer.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We will just look at Hallas.

     MR. GODSMARK: The relevant part of the judgment, my Lord,
that of Lord Justice Lloyd, is at the bottom of page 342. The
.r




                   penultimate paragraph starts,       "I do not...."

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       This was before the proceedings had
                   started?

                          MR. GODSMARK: Yes.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So they were not considering the
                   question I have to consider.

          B             MR. GODSMARK: Well,       my Lord,   the principle is the same,   in
                   my submission.

                          MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Why?

                        MR. GODSMARK: Because it would not matter whether
                   proceedings had started or not, to govern a general principle,
                   that an individual private prosecutor is not entitled to demand
                   documents as of right, if he has no other entitlement to them.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, wculd that apply to a bank too?
                   Or is it that you are in some special position? What is your
                   special position that puts you outside for example a local
                   authority, bank?

          D             MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, there are particular criteria that
                   apply to banks, in terms of banker's books evidence, etcetera.

                          MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     Local authorities.

                        MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, the position there is that a witness
                   summons is served, and that is the appropriate procedure in this
                   case.
          E
                        MR. JUSTICE       HOOPER: Yes, well, that is what we are
                   assuming, we are       assuming that a witness summons is going to be
                   served on them.

                        MR. JONES: My learned friend seems to suggest that that is
                   not correct procedure, it is my submission it is.

                        MR. JUSTICE  HOOPER: Well, tentatively, I think I agree with
                   you. I am looking at this as a witness summons case. Now, why
                   can you refuse to produce a document on the basis of Hallas, if
                   a witness summons is served upon you? I do not understand that
                   at all.

                        MR. GODSMARK: No, no, Hallas is simply the authority for
                   the proposition that other than through the witness summons
                   procedure.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,       in which case we just ignore
                   Hallas?

                          MR. GODSMARK:   Yes.

         H                MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:   For the moment. Now,   what is your next
                   one?

                                                        -43-
     J. L Harpham Ltd
                    MR. GODSMARK: McMillan,                 b e hind tab two.
     A
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: This is the liquidator one?

                   MR. GODSMARK: Yes, many of them are of that description. If
              I can ask your Lordship to read the head note, I will then take
              you to the relevant part of the judgment.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:              Yes.    Yes,    show me the passage.
     B
                   MR. GODSMARK: Page 841, my Lord. It is part of the judgment
              of Mr. Justice Millet. Can I invite you to the bottom of page
              841, just be l o w the H? A n d ask your Lordship to read that
              paragraph a n d its conclusion over the page.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am obviously looking at Mr. Justice
              Millet's decision in Clowes?
     C
                    MR. GODSMARK: Yes.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: He upheld the witness summons.

                    MR. GODSMARK:         On Section 24,

     D              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: On the grounds that the evidence was
               material and admissible.

                    M R . G O D S M A R K : Ye s .

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well this evidence would be admissible
               and would seem to be material. Otherwise, there is no point in
               taking the statement in the first place.
     E
                    MR. GODSMARK: My Lord,              I query the admissibility.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Why?

                    MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, well, at the moment I do'not
               understand what issue it will go. There may be a large number of
               witness statements. They may deal wit h a variety of matters, but
     F         on my limited knowledge of the case, I have not seen the
               depositions in the case papers and from listening to submissions
               this afternoon, it appears that the case will revolve around
               essentially, the events between a fairly strict time period on
               15th of April, and probably what the defendants said to others,
               in a period thereafter. Now, my Lord, there may be witness
               statements that deal with t h a t .
    G               MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: But I could deal with that by ordering
               you to produce all relevant witness statements, but that
               involves you then looking at everything, and then I would be
               entitled to look at the balance and decide whether or not they
               should be produced all of which is a considerable burden

                    MR. GODSMARK:          I would like to spare your Lordship that.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                                                              -44-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                 1




V




                        MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord,      can I s a y . .. ?

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I mean, all we are talking about is
                  whether or not you should be paid £3 0 an hour to do this, that
                  is what it is all about.

                        MR. GODSMARK: The practicality is very much that because as
                   I say, the reality is that access has been offered to this
                   documentation, and my Lord, I have made the point in the
         B         skeleton argument, there is p o tentially a vast amount of
                   documentation to be considered.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, forgetting documents which may be
                  privileged and or in a different category, we can perhaps deal
                  with those later, if we need to.

                        MR. GODSMARK:   But in my s u b m i s s i o n . ...

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: If I have the power to order you to
                  produce any relevant document, and we have obviously have to
                  define relevant.

                        MR. GODSMARK:   Yes.

         j)             MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You would have to go through them all.
                   Which would cast you £30 an hour.

                        MR. GODSMARK:   Well,   somebody would have to.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Whereas if you do it the other way and
                   just make it available to the Defence, subject to querying any
                   particular document as to having some particular status which
                   means it ought not to be produced.

                        MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, what is objected to,          in essence,   is
                   the unfettered trawl through the entire archive.

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, then, you must do the trawl then.
                   Who would you rather do it? A n d show me the ones you say that
                   are not relevant and then let me look at them? History tells us
                   the easiest way is to allow the Defence, if it is in the case of
                   a defendant, when the defendant is making his application here -
                   it is usually the Prosecution - let them in, and under
                   supervision, look at it all.

                        MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, in my respectful submission, no.
                   That is a fishing and a trawling exercise. In relation to
                   statements, your Lordship has picked upon a particular category
                   of documents. That is not the only category of documents....

                        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No, I am dealing with witness
                   statements any way. All of which seem to me to be both
                   admissible and could be relevant, but without looking at them,
                   no one is going to know.

        H               MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, if we are confining ourselves to
                   witness statements, and as I say, they have b een offered

                                                         -4 5-
    J. L Harpham Ltd.
              voluntarily. If my Lord orders that they be produced, that will
              be done, obviously, and the costs wo u ld have to fall upon us to
    A         comply with the order. I make no bones about that. The concern,
              in terms o f ....

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       I can only order you to produce
              relevant documents.

                    MR. GODSMARK:   Yes,    relevant material a n d . ...

     B              MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We have to define what relevant means.

                    MR. GODSMARK:   Yes.

                   MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So that would be a huge undertaking,       on
              your part, to comply with my order. A huge undertaking.

                    MR. GODSMARK:   Yes.

                       MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: It is being offered to be done for you,
              and you are saying, supervised, that is agreed. So I do not see
              why, given that, you just do not get on and do it because I have
              the power, I would have thought, to order you to produce
              relevant documents, but then you have got to then trawl through
              them, find the relevant ones, which would not really be very
              m u c h . ...

                    MR. GODSMARK:   My Lord,    can I try and cut the Gordian knot?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                    MR. GODSMARK: A n d take you to two documents. Does your
               Lordship have the bundle prepared by my learned friend for the
     E         Prosecution. Mine is more substantial.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: The       blue one?

                    MR. GODSMARK:   The green     one, I think.

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Which one is it, Mr. Jones?

                    MR. JONES: It is a green file. It has got on the back,
               Leeds Crown Court 3rd of September. It is has not come in that
               box, my Lord. It came separately to this court, last week.

                    MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:    This is the correspondence one.

                    MR. GODSMARK:   My Lord,     can I take you to the latest
               position?

                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Which tab?

                    MR.   GODSMARK: B. Behind B in mine, and can I take you
               firstly,   please, to page 16. Note of the 20th of August. If your
               Lordship   passes his eye down the categories on pages 17 and 18,
               of which   there are 13.
    H
                    MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

                                                    -46-
J. L Harpham Ltd.
     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, witness statements is top of the
list, as I say, but that is by no means all of the
documentation.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,    let us just deal with witness
statements.

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, if you order their production as
being material and admissible.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I will order the production of relevant
ones, but it is         then for you, with a huge task, to work out what
is r e l e v a n t . So it seems more sensible that you let them look at
the documents.

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, we have offered that,      in relation to
the witness statements.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     But at 3 0 an hour.

     MR. JONES:   My Lord, (?) 1 and 9 are agreed by the South
Yorkshire Police, but as your Lordship has rightly identified,
the question is, should we pay 3 0 an hour, and should we pay
30  an hour, further, for them to be copied to the Defence.

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, someone has got to p a y for it, and
in my submission, the burd e n should not fall upon the Chief
Constable. The 3 0 an hour, I am instructed, an estimate of the
cost of having an officer supervise and deal with these matters.
It may not be an officer, it may be civilian, but an individual,
and that may be the only matter between my learned friend and
myself.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: If I make an order that you produce all
relevant documents, which involves you in a huge amount of work,
are you entitled to be p aid for that by the person demanding it,
under the rules?

     MR. GODSMARK: No, my Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Unless,     obviously,    there may be a gap
(Inaudible) but that is i t .

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, I cannot seek to say that we will
comply with any order of the court, on condition of payment.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: No.     It does not look like you are
winning this o n e .

     MR. GODSMARK: Well, my Lord, witness statements being in a
particular obvious category in any event.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: So, you have got the choice, either I
order all relevant witness statements or you come more gently
and let them in to look at these things. Copying is a different
matter. I would have thought they would p a y for copies, but I do
not think they will object to anything like that. Which route do
you want me to go?

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, whilst we look at other matters,               can
I take instructions on that?

      MR.      JUSTICE HOOPER:   Yes.

     MR. JONES: My Lord, can I say we have proposed to take our
own photocopier with us. My Lord the Crown Prosecution Service
have offered, without charge, I may say, to supervise this
process, and we, for out part, welcome that because it is a
neutral person. M y Lord, may Ijust say that categories one to
nine are all agreed, by Mr. Danes, subject to those matters of
undertakings.

      MR.      JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

       MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, the preferred route,         as I understand
it,   is that we will give access to all of them.

     MR.       JUSTICE HOOPER:   That is for one to nine,     in this
letter?

       MR. GODSMARK:       No, my Lord,   for one.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         One only.   Right,   let us go to the next
one then. Two?

         MR.   GODSMARK:   Copy books of officers,    my Lord,   admissible?

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes, why not? Section 24, business
records - straight forward. I do not have any difficulty with
that one. If log books in hotels are admissible - if the guest,
what is it called - the book you sign in, the drug dealer signs
in, w hen he goes to Spain to buy his drugs is admissible, one
would have thought that the log book of police officer is
permissible.

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, it is being suggested then that the
pocket book entry of a police officer be put before a Jury
without w a r n i n g s .

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: It is admissible in evidence.              It is
something that is admissible. You could put it in.

         MR. GODSMARK: A n d material?

         MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: There might be objections.

         MR.  GODSMARK: I can see that,       under Section 35, yes. M y
 Lord,    materiality, a g a i n . ...

      MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: That is the same issue, again.              Either
 you do the work yourself or you Ice them look at it and                let them
 decide it

      MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, I am beginning to get the direction
 of the wind. Can we move to three?
    MR.     JUSTICE HOOPER: Three.

     MR. GODSMARK: No problem with that. "4. All notes and tape
recordings of meetings". My Lord, we are now moving on to
different ground, in my submission.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes. Let me just look at them more
carefully.

     MR. GODSMARK:    Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I am not really quite certain what they
are, though. I mean, the test is whether they are admissible
under Section 24.

     MR. GODSMARK: As a start point,    yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Some might be. For example, there might
be there, a Mr. Duckenfield or Mr. M u rr a y saying something, and
that would be clearly admissible. So how are we going to work
out whether it is there or not? The hard route or the easy
route?

        MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, m y learned friend, Mr. Jones,
pr e s umably knows the facts that he seeks to prove in this case.
To that, he is more privy than I. If he wishes to trawl, and it
would be a trawl of that documentation, to seek to decide what
is admissible and what is not, I leave to one side for a minute
whether a trawling exercise is permissible, but if that is an
exercise that he wishes to undertake, then in my submission, he
should not throw the burden of him undertaking that exercise,
financially upon the Chief Constable.

         MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, that is the same point you have
made. In this case, the order is for you to do the trawl, to
find out anything that is admissible under Section 24,
p a r t i cularly in relation to these two defendants.

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, m y only d i f f iculty with at that, as
I say, is that I am not privy to the depositions, I am not privy
to the w a y in which the Crown puts its case.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: And what were these produced to the
Magistrates Court? What was produced?

     MR. GODSMARK: M y Lord, there was a fairly large quantity of
documentation. I have got, actually, copies of the summonses and
the schedules, briefing notes, turning now ground log, audio
tapes, plans, layout. All of that has been produced already.
Photographs.

      MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: So, what are we short of? What is
missing,     as far as the Prosecution is concerned, what do they
want?

      MR. GODSMARK: Well, my Lord, if m y learned friend can
 specify - can I seek to try and turn this round, slightly?
Because it certainly is, in my submission, the law that it is
for the p e rson seeking the production of the documents, properly
to specify what he wants, adequately to particularise the
documentation which is sought.

     Now, m y Lord, if my learned friend had tightened his
definitions of what he is looking for so, for example, if he
seeks to say in relation to No- v any notes or records of
utterances of Mr. Duckenfield or Mr. Murray, then chat is a
matter wit h which we can deal, but in my submission, as
Prosecutor, he needs to know what it is he is seeking to prove
and how he is seeking to prove it.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,     I am not sure that actually
states the law. Mr. Jones?

     MR. JONES: Well, I think I can help on that. My Lord, those
briefing notes that were referred to, where disclosed in a
statement of a witnesses called Detective Sergeant Carr, who was
one of the statements whose  statements was put by request to the
Home Secretary in the House  of Commons Library. He listed,
briefing notes of meetings of the 16th, 17th and 19th of April.
We believe and have grounds to believe from other statements
that there were other    such meetings at     which further assertions
of fact, admissible under Section 24, were made.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     Made by whom?

     MR. JONES: By a group of officers, including Mr.
Duckenfield and Mr. Murray, in a series of meetings, and my
Lord, Mr. Danes, fortunately, at page twelve, does not raise any
problem about this, other than the question of cost and
undertakings. So, Mr. Danes has not raised, my Lord, at page
twelve, any difficulty about this item, under paragraph 4.

     My Lord, it would inevitably include anything at which a
lawyer was present or at which legal advice was tendered.

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: W h y would he include that?

     MR. JONES:   It would exclude it.

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:   Exclude.

     MR. JONES: I am so sorry, yes, under ordinary principles.
My Lord, Mr. Danes has not identified any p roblem or difficulty
about that category, and, my Lord, also we believe that those
notes on which we have had, they appear to be a transcript of a
tape recording.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: W o u l d you be entitled to two officers
discussing what happened that day? Neither of who m were Mr.
Duckenfield or Mr. Murray?

     MR. JONES: We would, in my submission, if they were
recorded and taken down b y a person acting in the course of a
duty, yes.


                                   -50-
     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:     In Section 24?

     MR. JONES: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: H o w many of these are there, Mr.
Godsmark? What is the bulk of these?

     MR    GODSMARK:   Of category four?

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, that I do not know. Would your
Lordship excuse me a moment? My Lord, I have been told there
maybe n o n e .

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: Nine.

     MR. GODSMARK: None. I think that is unlikely, given the
particularity that my learned friend has been able to give me on
four, but my Lord, he is certainly able from the submissions
that he as just made to you, to pa:. Licularise what he wants, in
more detail, and my Lord, can I pass one matter here? The
particularity point is in essence the cost protection of the
third party. The proposition that a prosecutor in this case can
not simply insist on a fishing exercise or a trawl is part of
the cost protection of a third party, and certainly the Chief
Constable volunteered access to all of these matters, but is
conscious of the cost to the public purse of so doing.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Mr. Jones, on four, I am minded to say
that to the extent to which any of those contain admissions or
statements made of either of the two defendants.

     MR. JONES: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: They must be relevant and must
therefore be disclosed, and as to the balance, that there is
some doubt, and I wo u l d be mind e d to make you pay your 30.

     MR. JONES:    For those?

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

     MR. JONES: V ery well, my Lord, but I if I can just haggle a
little bit, I hope not 3 0 for them also to be copied to the
Defence, because we can copy them at a fraction of the cost
levied by the South Yorkshire Police.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A reasonable cost for supervising.

      MR. JONES: Those documents,     certainly, yes.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: A n d we will come back and do the order
 later.

      MR. JONES: Yes. Now, m y Lord, No. 5, then there m ay be no
 others in that category, there may be, I know not. My Lord, the
 ones we have been able to identify in the witness summonses from
last May, were those where they were referred to b y the Crown
Prosecution Service schedules or in some cases, were we had
copies from the Crown Prosecution Service because they, my Lord,
as I have just indicated, opened their doors completely and
utterly, to allow us to see anything of evidential value for
them. We ask for the same, in respect of the South Yorkshire
Police because there may be models or other plans or other
tapes, other than those that we have been able to identify, and
it can not be a difficult task, in our submission, to identify
whether some such exist and to produce them.

     M y Lord, similarly w ith six. All tape recordings and
transcripts of conversations from the police control box, other
than those we have already seen, and there cannot be any
practical difficulty about those.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, you would certainly be entitled
to those, I would have thought, at the times w ith which are
concerned. You say 1pm to 6pm would be about right

     MR.   JONES: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: As far as five - well, going back to
five for a moment. Some of those w o u l d be, one would have
thought would come clearly within Section 24, but I am not
certain about some of the others. Models produced after the
event, for the purposes of an Inquest.

     MR. JONES: Well, they would certainly be capable of being
real evidence, in my submission.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I think - they are not
contemporaneous, they are made subsequently, after the time.

     MR. JONES: My Lord, I do not know whether there are any
models, my Lord, but we would not go to the stake for models,
but documents, photographs, plans and video tape of the day in
question, certainly we would.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I do not think you could object to the
photographs and video tapes of the complaint, made on the day,
could you?

     MR. GODSMARK: No,      not   (Inaudible).

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: As far as photographs and video tapes
then, I would otherwise be making an order that they are
relevant and are to be produced. As far as the balance, I think
it is the 3 0 you are going to have to pay, Mr. Jones.

     MR.   JONES: Yes.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: We will try and put this all together
 later, but six, you cannot object ^o that, can you?

      MR. GODSMARK:      I have to say,   I detect the thrust of your
 Lordship's views.
     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Seven, Mr. Jones, is I think is more
difficult unless it is one of the two defendants.

     MR.    GODSMARK: Yes.

         MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, except that there are instances
we know where the West Midlands police officers interviewed
p e o p l e , un d er caution, in 1991, and they are particularly
controversial witnesses who were around the perimeter. People
like Police Constable Illingworth and Police Constable Smith.

M R JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,      you have told me you are not calling
those witnesses?

      MR. JONES: No, my Lord, with respect to the people we are
not p r o p o s i ng to call are the senior officers of rank of
Inspector or, my Lord, Chief Inspector or above. There are one
or two exceptions who we m a y still, and there are other
officers, my Lord, in respect of whose statements we might wish
to apply for that evidence to be admitted under Section 24. That
is extracts from original statements made.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, seven really is,            I suppose,   you
would say, really the same as one?

       MR. JONES: A statement, yes, and        it is a matter, my Lord,
to which we attach importance because          it was important witnesses
who were interviewed on video, people          concerned with round the
p e rimeter and with the opening of the        gate, and they really do
go the heart of the case.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       I am minded to order seven under the
none £3 0.

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, would you excuse me a moment? Two
things that occur to me about that. Presumably, that is officers
below the rank of Chief Inspector, in the light of what my
learned friend has said?

     MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

     MR. GODSMARK: The second thing is, I simple do not know,
but realise there may be an issue on is public interest
immunity.

      MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,        that you just bring back to me.

      MR. GODSMARK: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: There is no pro b l e m - this all subject
to P.I.I. and legal professional privilege, which you just bring
back as a separate issue.

      MR. GODSMARK: Yes,       I am obliged,    my Lord.

      MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER:    Eight,    Mr. Jones,   I think is a £30 one.

      MR.    JONES: Well, my Lord,       we have been asking for those for
a year,   my Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, you may have been,             but it is
still £30.

     MR. JONES: Well....

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         That really is muc h more difficult for
me to order that o n e .

     MR. JONES:      Indexes. V ery well,       my Lord.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         £30.

     MR. JONES: And,       my Lord,       nine must be....

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Nine must be none £30,              I would have
thought.

     MR. JONES: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Do you wis h to address me on that?
Subject to P.I.I. subject to the (Inaudible) clearly an expert
report must be relevant?

     MR. GODSMARK: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes.

     MR. GODSMARK: I am not going argue with that in the light
of your Lordship's rulings and observations. My Lord, we then
enter in ten and eleven.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         T e n . ...

     M R . G O D S M A R K : Privilege.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: ....and eleven is privilege. I am not
going to do those today, it is now already twenty-past-four,
those can be argued at some separate time. I think you would
have an uphill task, Mr. Jones, but there it is. We will come
back to those. A n d twelve?

      MR. GODSMARK:      They want it copied on disk.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:         Do you object to that?

      MR. GODSMARK:      My Lord, we can do it,        it is just costs.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: You must p a y for the copy.

     MR. JONES: Well, we can do it, my Lord, we have made
enquiries about this and there is relatively simple though
technically obscure procedure, by which homes computers can be
transferred to the people who are advising us upon scanning
documents.

      MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well,            will you p ay for that?
    MR. JONES:    Certainly,     my Lord,   yes.

     HR. JUSTICE HOOPER:      The first part of the copy.

     MR. JONES: But, my Lord, I am sure this is a matter which
we can deal with by c o r r e s p o n d e n c e .

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:       I will leave twelve then.

     MR.   JONES: Yes.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: But I would expect you to be paying for
copies, and if the copying of the homes needs some software to
do it, then you are going to have to pay for it.

     MR. JONES: Oh, yes, my Lord, but we would propose to
undertake that cost ourselves, in our respectful submission,
but, my Lord, one of the problems is that Mr. Dames at page
twelve, and this is one of the reasons w h y we wanted to deal
with this today, Mr. Danes at page twelve, said he wanted to
check with the Home Office first. My Lord, in our respectful
submission, there can be no reason w h y we can not copy any of
the documents within the categories ment i on e d in items one to
nine, on to disk. We are not taking anything else, and we are
converting it i n t o . ...

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: I do not know, it may be a software
programme that would which is not de s igned to do this, for
reasons of security.

     MR. JONES: Well, my Lord, no, we have been told by out
expert, my Lord, that it can be done by simply copying files and
converting them into a more modern format so that we can use
them on our own computer system, and we wo u l d certainly be
prepared to pay, under our own arrangements, which would be a
lot, lot cheaper than would be imposed u p o n us by the South
Yorkshire Police, for an expert to come in, under the
supervision, again, of Mr. Crosston, and to copy documents from
the computers, and then we will be troubling the South Yorkshire
Police and be a nuisance to them for a lot shorter time than
would otherwise be the c a s e .

        MR. JUSTICE HOOPER:    Mr. Godsmark,       what do you say about
that?

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, can I invite you to leave twelve for
two reasons.  Firstly, the problems that we have already
identified, and secondly, the Home Office may have some say
about this, and if they want to instruct somebody or indeed
instruct me, if we can not resolve it, then so be it.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Well, I want it done quickly so I will
do it on the b e ginning of next term, in London. If you cannot
agree.

        MR. GODSMARK:    M y Lord.
    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER:       Content?

    MR. JONES: Yes.

    MR.    JUSTICE HOOPER: A r ra n g i n g it through my Clerk.

    MR.    JONES:   Certainly.

     MR. JUSTICE HOOPER: Because o bviously it is vital to get
this sorted out, otherwise there is going to be a lot of paper
coming into existence which can be saved. So, if it is not
resolved, then you are to get, through m y Clerk, arrange a date
in London where both of you attend and argue the p o i n t .

     MR. JONES: I am v ery grateful. Possibly, my Lord, a little
flexibility wit h hours I hope might be possible, but I....

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: With?

     MR. JONES: A little flexibility over hours might be
possible.

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: Oh, yes. Where are you in October?

     MR.   JONES: My Lord,        I am in London,   the Old Bailey.

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER: Yes,        certainly. We will do it at 9:30.

     M R . J O N E S : Thank y o u .

     MR. GODSMARK: My Lord, that leaves 13. At the moment, it
escapes me how that might be admissible evidence, in this trial

     MR.   JUSTICE HOOPER:        I am leaving 13 for the moment.

     MR. GODSMARK:       Right.




                                        -56-
