                                                                                               M IR .1 5




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised   /k lf lC -   i"   £'*7                     Number



Title

( Include source and a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)

                                                  <          {?      a
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No u )                          r
                                                                                                                                   Receiver


                       T
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                               Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                          O/M         S IO
                                                                                                    gp» § ■1— *p»-
                                                                                                    l,_ E H
                                                                                                    -B     S-S-- &--
                                                                                                                     I

                                                                                                           £! £&*■>? *&38S
                                                                                                                               f
                                                                                                                               I& 3 i
                                                                                                                                     Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                                      GJD/JF




Norwich


                                                      8 May 1989




Dear Sir


I read your letter concerning the Hillsborough tragedy with great
interest and found your comments of help.

I share your feelings of distress at the incident and I am very
grateful to you for writing.


Yours faithfully


                                            'Z \

Chief Constable
 0           TELEPHONE
-    ■v*



                                   (RETIRED)
                                                            NORWI


                                                           29 th    1 1969
           The Chief of Police,
           West Midlands Division,
           Birmingham.

           Dear Sir,
                         Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry.

                       I understand from TV publicity that you are n       ig statements
           from those who were present at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy a fortnight
           ago. I was not there but I had some personal experience of a football crush
           thirty years ago and would like to offer my views on the mechanics of pressure
           waves in crowds. Unless this is widely understood, both by the public and the
           police, similar happenings in the future are almost inevitable.

                Commentators on the media seem genuinely baffled by what happened and
           there is an understandable reluctance to apportion blame, so anger is directed
           against inanimate objects like perimeter fencing, gates and turnstiles.
           What is not understood is that when there is a crowd of standing people,
           each unable to move his feet freely, a push from the outside will start a
           pressure wave which builds up as it runs down the line and is converted to
           the force of a pile-driver at the other end.
                To take it step by step, if the first push amounts to 201b weight and the
           second man, to retain his balance, pushes on his next neighbour with a force
           of 201b weightthe third man will receive a push of 401b weight, because the
           second man is adding his push to the first. As the wave runs down the line,
           which could take only seconds of time, it would only take five men to build
           up a push of near one cwt. or twenty men to build up a push of 4001bs weight.
           This would be enough to knock down a wall, as at Heysel or throw spectators
           into a heap as, I seem to remember, happened at Ibrox Park.

                Within a confined space a crowd may have room when standing quietly
           but ifleach begins to fear crushing and presses outward to give himself more
           room, the pressure will rise and, especially in the middle, the weaker ones may
           be crushed to death.
                In a shooting tragedy there may be predisposing circumstances but one
           wants to know whose finger pressed the trigger. In the Hillsborough tragedy
           those crushed must have been killed by pressure exerted by those around them,
           probably initiated by a pressure wave from those arriving at the back and
           pushing in their impatience to get a good view.
                I suggest that you do some experiments with a squad of men, first standing
           quietly and then with each pushing against his neighbour. Perhaps you could
           build a model with spring-loaded dolls to display to schools. In my view the
           approach to every football ground should have large notices warning "Never,
           never push when in a crowd. Somebody could be killed."

                After the Heysel disaster I wrote to both the Brussels and the English
           police along these lines, and had a letter in The Eastern Evening News, but
           got no response.
                                               Yours very truly,
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                     FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                              Furnival Gate
                                                       Sheffield S1 4QN
 H IL L SB O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M
                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9

WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                SM ITHDOW N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                 Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                               Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 9 0 /7 2 3 1
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5        Your Ref:

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                       Our Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                        Date:             29 June 1989




    Norwich




    Dear

    I am grateful to you for writing and the information that you included in your
    letter will be of great interest to my investigation team.

    There is a specialist team from the Health and Safety Executive who are looking
    at the sort of experiments you have referred to.

    I do not at this stage intend to arrange a personal visit to obtain any further
    information, however if you have any additional information since you last
    contacted my investigation team or you feel that a personal visit is essential
    please do not hesitate to make contact at any of my offices listed above.
    Alternatively you can write to the Secretary of the Inquiry as below: -

    Mr R M Whalley
    Secretary to The Inquiry
    50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT

     Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to convey his personal thanks for your taking
     the trouble to make contact and for the contribution you have made to his
     Inquiry.

     Yours sincerely




    J M JONES
    ^ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
