                                                                                               M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   Date and tim e raised   M / i h i      H I ®                   N jm b e r



Title
(Include source a n d a n y document number i f relevant)


                                         tion —
R e ce iv e r's instructions -- urgent action
                                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                                      Indexer
Document/rfgistered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions                                                           Oa A O M ?
                                    jd fJ lA -    ■ Qcc,            Qr
                                                                                                                                  jJ Z s Q *-

                                                                                                                                      Indexer
Indexed asjpdicated

NofiJ^Sfactions raised

Examined - furth er action to be taken

                                                                                                r
                                                                                               -4—
                                                                                                         v-->v,i ft H®
                                                                                                         r       —   A -
                                                                                                                           T $
                                                                                               1     O T    |«s
                                                                                                \    a" & a
                                                                                                     T       p   luv. •               Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
DCC' -CHESPOL                    TEL   No . 0 2 4 4 + 3 4 1 2 2 6       23   Jan   91   9 =07   No. 001    P . 02




        HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT 15 APRIL 1989 - MEETING BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVES OF
        ELROND ENGINEERING LTD AND THE RESEARCH AND M O R A T O R Y SERVICES 0
        THE HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE ON 18 JANUARY 1991



        The meetInt was held at the Sheffield premises of Research and L a b o r a t o r y
        services Division (RLSD) of the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). The purpose
        was to discuss points of apparent d i s a g r e e m e n t betweeu the r e p o r t s produced b y
        Flrond Engineerln£ Ltd and HSE on technical aspects of the Incident that
        occurred on 15 April 1989 At Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's Hillsborough
        Stadium.


        2     PRESENT

        Deputy Chief Constable J Mervyn Jones - Cheshire Constabulary
        Detective Inspector C Perkins * Cheshire Constabulary

        Mr N J Burne - Elrond Engineering Ltd
                      - Elvond Engineering Ltd
                             Elrond Engineering Ltd

         Dr C E Nicholson - KLSD, HSE
        ---------------- • R L S D , USE
                         R L S D , HSE
                         LSD, HSE
                           - RLSD, HSE


         3     ftTSCUSSIQN

         DCC Jones explained that he was advising Dr S Popper, Sheffield's Coroner
         during the conduct of the Inquest to determine how 95 people died during this
         incident. He *aid that the Intention of the present meeting was to prevent
         detailed technical matters from being debated In the Coroner'* Cuuit, possibly
         to the confusion of non*specialist*•

         DCC Jones said that the Coroner would be requiring HSE to give evidence during
         the Inquest, which was likely to continue until March 1991. Elrond Engineering
         would not be called as witnesses but would be represented by Hammond Suddards
         who had retained them as technical advisors, He likened his own presence
         this meeting to that of a referee,

            Mr Burne said that he had many year* experience of providing coneultuncy In
            matters of dispute and arbitration. Elrond Engineering had been retained by
            Hammond Suddards who were acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police. The
            policy o f Elrond Engineering v « co present the facts truly and not to
             'massage* them to suit a particular case. He said that the findings of the
            Elrond report that dealt with barrier 124A was based on an examination at West
            Bromwich of this barrier, calculations( and site tests, all of which
            c o r r e l a t e d well. Elrond'a find Inge were n o t Juat thv*e of tilt* own s taff,buC
            were supported by Dr                  H ManCheater University, D r | f m p e r i a l
            College, end Halerow and Partners.

            Dr Nicholson said that ehere appeared to be two « w s of contention between
            Elrond and HSE; i.e. the estimate of the nurober of people In Pen 3, and the


                                                             -1 -
DCC- CHESPOL                TEL   N o .0244+341226            23   Jan   91   9:07   No. 001   P . 03




        collapse load o f barrier 124A. He suggested that the occupancy of Pen 3 should
        be discussed first and this was agrood.

        3,1    NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN PEN 3

                  showed Che enlarged, composite, photograph that he had used to
        estimate the number Of people in Pen 3 and Pen 4. He explained the method that
        he had used to estimate the number of people in Pen 3 and Pen 4. He had
        employed computer-aided draughting equipment for the superposition <>f crush
        barriers, for the transfer of areas missing from photographs, and for counting
        visible persons

                  emphasised that only f*oe* that weir* definitely visible Lad buon
        counted on the three rearmost rows, aftd that *n estimated packing density of
        10 persons/m* had been used on the poorly defined front m w , This packing
        density was based on tests conducted at RLSD, and was suppotled by the trend
        of increasing packing density in the row* down the terrace. It was his opinion
        that HSE's estimate of 1,576 pereon* within Pen 3 (HSE report IR/L/ME/89/32)
        would underestimate, rathex than ovenssilmaLe, Lhe Liue otcupancy of Pen 3 at
        15,03 hours, the time marked on the composite photograph.

        Mr Burns said that the only photograph of the crowd available to them had been
        the one shown in Lore Justice Taylor's report. He said that Elrond had not
        counted people standing within the area marked by cross-hatching at the mouth
        Of the tunnel, It was his opinion that It should not be considered to form
        part Of the area of Pen 3 because people were not l u U n J e J to stand there. He
        said that Elrond had attempted to estimate the mutibet of persona in obscured
        areas. He asked for RLSD'a estimate of the time that barrier 124A collapsed.

        Dr Nicholson said that HSE had made repeated attempts to identify the collapse
        of barrier 124A by examining video recordings of the crowd in Pen 3, but had
        been unable to make a positive identification of this «vont.

        Mr Burne said that Elrond had examined video recordings of the crowd in Pen 3
        and had 'worked back' from 15.15, a time identified by an ambulance on the
        recording, They had concluded that barrier 124A had collapsed between 15.05
        and 15.06,

        DCC Jones SAid that the evidence of witnesses suggested that barrier 124A had
        collapsed between 15.00 and 15.06, His own best guess, based on this evidence,
        was that the collapse occurred at 15.04.

        Pr Nicholson asked whether Mr Burne now found RLSD's figure of 1,576 persons In
        Fen 3 to be acceptable, In view of the explanations and discussion.

        Mr Burne said that he preferred a figure more in the region of 1,400 persons,
        but conceded that RLSD had worked from better information,

         3.1.1   The allowable capacities of Pens 3_Artd_4

         Dr Nicholson referred Mr Burne to Page 26 of the Eliond icpuit wlicie it is
         stated that "a density of 67.5 persons/10 m* represents a density
         representing completely full capacity". Dr Nicholson said that even on the
         basis of a person occupying a rectangular rather than an elliptical area of
         terrace, the calculation provided a packing density of 80 persons/10 m*.
         Mr Hurne said that he would rwawtre&v this particular calculation.




                                               *2*
BCe-CHESPOL                         TEL   No . 0 2 4 4 + 3 4 1 2 2 6   23   Jan   91   9:07   N o . 001        P . 04
1 ;’L   '-1n CLr r 1 Cl L L1              , LL   hu.UlHi                                  ± L, . ^    ................




                Mu Burne said that he wished to draw particular attention to the'Green Guide'
                recommendation that people should not be more chan 12 m from an exit. HSE's
                report IR/L/m e / 89/35 made no reduction in the capacity of Pent 3 and 4 to
                compensate for the departure from a recommendation. Its implementation would
                reduce the allowable capacities of the*© pens considerably.

                              said that the authors had not considered themselves qualified to
               mane estimates of allowable crowd capacity, other than where the means for
               making a mathematical calculation was Indicated in the 'Green Guide'. He
               referred to the final conclusion of this report which lit.ted six further
               departures from the recommendations of the 'Green Guide', together with the
               statement that "the maxi d u d combined capacity of Pens 3 and 4 should be
               reduced further because of these six departures,"

              Mr Burne said that the capacities of the emergency exits from Pens 3 and 4
              would also reduce the maximum allowable capacities shown In the HSE report.
              Mr Waterhouse agreed that this might be the case. He and his co-author had
              confined their estimation of maximum allowable capacities to the arrangements
              on the terrace.

              DCC Jones said that he would draw the attention of the Coroner to the matter
              of the capacity of emergency exits that had been raised by Mr Burne.

              3,2      COLLAPSE LOAD OF BARRIER 124A

              Mr Burne commenced by explaining the load-deflection diagram shown on Page             60
              of the lilrond report, and ice significance when considering the failure of            a
              crush barrier. He pointed out that there was a mistake in the illustration             of
              barrier 1*4A in hse report I R / L / M M / 6 V H in that the angle section forming     tl,«
              front leg of support 3 had been drawn the wrong way around, This was
              acknowledged by IISE'a representatives.

              Dr Nicholson and          asked for a definition of failure, as used in the
              context of the Eirono report. Mr &utne Baid that failure involved yield,
              cracking and tearing, all of which had occurred on barrier 124A. He agreed
              that initiation of yield did not necessarily mean collapse, the term used by
              RLSD to describe the laiiure of barrier 124a ,

             Mr Burn* said that a computer analysis made by Elrond, and subsequent teats
             conducted by SGS on Similar crush barriers, had demonstrated that barrier 124A
             should be deemed to have failed the proof test made on it by Eastwood and
             Partners in 1$88. He said that Eastwood and Partners' had mis-interpreted the
             Lest requirements of che 'Green Guide', and that the tensile properties of
             wrought iron reported by HSE tended to overestimate the strength of the upper
             rail of barrier 124A.

                      pointed out that the tensile properties stated in HSE report
             iR/L/nn/9V 11 were not used in HSE'* calculation of the collapse load of
             barrier 124a , but were obtained from a bending test on a wrought iron too rail
             taken from barrier 129. Following further discussion of the properties of the
             barrier materials it was agreed that the tensile test properties obtained by
             SGS and HSE were in reasonable agreement,

                       isked whether the computer analysis made by Elrond was an elastic
            analysis
               : r ; and was coia
                              told cnat
                                   that it wa“
                                           was.-         said that Lhere were dangers in
            predicting the mode of collapse of barrier i24A from an elastic analysis.




                                                             -3-
"d CC- CHESPOL              TEL   N o.0244 +341226             23   Jan   91   9 =0 ?   N o . 001   P




         Mr »urne emphasised that the resultB of Elrond's computer analysis and SGS's
                                                                                     and
         site tests were in agreement, and were supported b      y       _______
                   on behalf of Halcrow and Partners. The analysis had be*n          for
         the conditions of continuous rail and broken rail. Analysis and teat re.ult.
         had shown that yield of the top rail occurred with a loading o £ 2 . i> kN/m, tha
         the fracture occurred at 6 kN/m.

         Mf Burne said that barrier 12BA had failed during teste made by SGS at less
         than 6 kN/«. Dr Nicholaon aaid that the tabulated results on Pages 24 and 2 5
         of Appendix G of Che Eirond report suggested that this barrier had withstood a
         force of 7.24 kN/m. Mr Burne said that the forces shown were marginally in
         error and that a force of 7.24 kN should be taken to mean between 7.24 kN/m
         and 6 kN/m, An inaccuracy in the calibration of the pressure gauges with the
         hydraulic jacks used to apply the test force caused the gauges to indicate
         forces that were too high. The degree of inaccuracy was not known, but was
         probably of the order of a few percent.

          Mr Burne said that a cracking noise was heard during th* testing of barrier
          128A When the indicated lOAfl was e kN/rn. Examination had shown that the top
          rail had cracked under one of the retaining clips and that a fracture w a s
          present in the bottom rivet hole of the rear leg of the centre support.

          There was a lengthy discussion on the details* of the SGS u s L s and their
          correlation with the elastic analysis of the stresses in the barrier. Mr Burne
          said that Elrond's computer analysis showed that the first region lu yi#ld wat
          at the lower ed£& Of the gusset plate was on the rear leg of the supports, and
          that this occurred at 5.25 kN/m.

                                 said that RLSD's elastic finite element analysis had
          also shown this be the place where initial yielding would occur, Their
          analysis indicated that yielding would commence in both the top rail and the
          supports at a load of less then 6 kN/m.

          Mr Burne said that barrier 128A was not so severely ^ u u J e d as barrier 124A
          and that the results of their analysis and the SGS tesLs caused him to
          conclude that barrier 124A would have failed at a load of less than 6 kN/m on
           15 April 1989.

                             aid that it was his opinion that span 3\4 had been the first
           member ot D a r n er 124A to collapse, due to the formation of plastic hinges.
           This was followed by the collapse of span 2\3 ae end 4 of span 3\4 parted from
           Its support and commenced pivoting about support 3. HSE's calculations
           suggested that this collapse commenced when the loading on span 3\4 was
           approximately 8 kN/m.

           Mr Burne disagreed with this sequence of events. lie said that collapse
           commenced at support 3, although it was probable that the collapse of this
           support and that of the top rail of span 3\4 occurred almost instantaneously.

                          isked if Elrond could be more precise in their estimate of the
           collapse loao <Sf barrier 124A rather than stating it to be less than 6 ktf/m.
           Mr Burne said that Elrond had stated a value of 5,25 kN/m on Page 6 of their
           report and referred Mr____________ to the diagram In Appendix L, Mr
           said that Stage 2 of this diagram showed yielding below the gusset plate of
           the rear leg of a support at a load of 5.25 kN/m, this being followed by
           Stages 3 and 4 in which increased deformation occurred up to a load of 7 kN/m,




                                                -4-
JJ L- L   ■L-n c o r u L            LL   NO .Uz!44 + 5 4 1 2 2 b    23   Jan   91   9:07   No. 001   P. 06




                 Mr Burne said that this was a mis-Interpretation of the diagram, which was
                 Intended to show the loads required to produce yield at different regions of
                 the barrier. Ha said that calculated results could be supplied tp substantiate
                 the diagram in Appendix L. In response to a request by Dr Nicholson he said
                 that he would try to provide him with a copy of the report written for Halcrow
                 and Partners by            and to pursue the matter of the calibration of the
                                       uges used by SGS in chelr tests.




                 22/01/91




                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                             I




                                                          -5-
DCO CH E S P O L                 TEL    No . 0 2 4 4 + 3 4 1 2 2 6                    23   Jan   91   9 :07   Mo . 0 0 1   P .02




          HT1TSB0R0UGH INCIDENT 15 APRIL 1989 - MEETING BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVES OF
                   encineeS ng   Lt p   and   the   r e s e a r c h a » i>   ^   oratory   SERVICES P1V1SIOX OF
          THE HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE ON 18 JANUARY 1991

          1     PURPOSE OF THE MEETXtte

          'ihe meeting was held at the Sheffield premises of Research and Laboratory
          services Division (RLSD) of the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). Tim purpose
          was to discuss points of apparent disagreement between tl.e reports produced by
          Eltfond Engineering Ltd and HSE on technical aspects of the incident that
          occurred on 15 April 1989 At Sheffield Wednesday Football Club 6 Hillsborougn
          Stadium.



          2     PRESENT

          Deputy Chief Constable J Mervyn Jones - Cheshire Constabulary
          detective Inspector C Perkins * Cheshire Constabulary

          Mr N J Burne * Elrond Engineering Ltd
                        - Elvtsnd Engineering Ltd
                        Elrond Engineering Ltd

           Dr C E Nicholson » KLSD, HSE
                          * RLSD, HSE
                          RLSD, HSE
                          LSD, HSE
                           - RLSD, HSE


           3 DISCUSSION

           DCC Jones explained that he was advising Dr S Popper, Sheffield's Coroner
           during the conduct of the Inquest to determine how 95 people died during :
           incident. He said that the intention of the present meeting was to prevent
           detailed technical matters from being debated in the Coroner ‘ v Cuuit, possibly
           to the confusion of non*specialist#.

              DCC Jones said that the Coroner would be requiring HSE to give evidence during
              the Inquest, which was likely to continue until March 1991. Elrond Engineering
              would not be called as witnesses but would be represented by Hammond Suddards
              who had retained then! as technical advisors. He likened his own presence at
              this meeting to that of a referee,

              Mr Burne said that he had many year* experience of providing v on m ltuncy lu
              matters of dispute and arbitration. Elrond Engineering had been retained by
              Hammond Suddards who were acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police. The
              policy of Elrond Engineering was to present      the facts truly and not to
              'massage' them to suit a particular case. He said that the findings of the
              Elrond report that dealt with barrier 124A was based on an examination at West
              Bromwich of this barrier, calculations, and site tests, all of which
              correlated well. Elrond' u finding* were nut Juat thvse of hit, own staff, but
              were supported by Dr            Manchester University, D r I m p e r i a l
              College, and Halcrow and Partners,

              Dr Nicholson said that chare app»*red to be two        of contention between
              fclrond and HSE; i.e. the estimat* of the number of people in Pen 3, and the


                                                                -1-
HE S P U L                T E L N o . 0 Z 4 4 + -y 4 1 Z z b   Z   j a n 91   y •u   c   No . 0 u 1 P




    collapse load of barrier 124A. He suggested that the occupancy of Pen 3 should
    be Ult.cus.ied first and this was agreed.

    3,1      NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN PEN 3

              showed the enlarged, composite, photograph that he had used to
    estimate the number of people In Pen 3 and Fen 4. He explained, the method that
    he had used to estimate the number of people in Pen 3 and Pen 4. He had
    employed computer-aided draughting equipment for the superposition cf crush
    barriers, for the transfer of areas missing from photographs, and for counting
    visible persong.

               emphasised that only fAO** that weir® definitely visible hud b^cm
    counted on the three rearmost rows, and that an estimated packing density of
    1(3 persons/m2 had been used on the poorly defined front i m , This packing
    density was based on tests conducted at RLSD, and was s u p p o s e d by the trend
    of increasing packing density in the rows down the terrace, It was his opinion
    that HSE's estimate of 1,576 person# within Pen 3 (HSE report IR/L/ME/89/32)
    would underestimate, rathei titan oveiest ImiiLe, this Ltue utcupancy of Pen 3 at
    15.03 h our6, the time narked on the composite photograph

    Mr Burne said that the only photograph of the crowd available to them had been
    the one shown in Lord Justice Taylor's report.:. He said th»t EliouJ had uul
    counted people standing within the area marked by cross-hatching at the mouth
    Of the tunnel. It was his opinion that It should not be considered to form
    part Of the area of Pen 3 because people were not intended to ttoiid there. He
    caid that Elrond had attempted to estimate the itwiibci of persona In obscured
    areas. He asked for RLSD's estimate c-f the time that barrier 12.4A collapsed.

    Dr Nicholson said that HSE had made repeated attempts to Identify the collapse
    of barrier 124A by examining video recordings of the crowd in Pen 3, but h**<.'
    been unable to make a positive Identification of this evont,

     Mr Burne said that Elrond had examined video recordings of the ciowd in Pen 3
     and had 'worked back' from 15.15, a time identified by an ambulance on the
     recording, They had concluded that barrier 124A had collapsed between 15.05
     and 15.06,

     DCC Jones Sftid that the evidence of witnesses suggested that barrier 124A had
     collapsed between 15.00 and 15.0$, HI* own best guess, based on this evidence,
     was that the collapse occurred at 15,04.

     Dv Nicholson asked whether Mr Burne now found RLSD's figure of 1,576 persons                 In
     Pen 3 to be acceptable, In view of the explanations* and di*cvfr*ion.

     Mr Burne said that he preferred a figure more in the region of 1,400 persons,
     but conceded that RL5D had worked from better information,

     3.1.1     The allowable capacities frf fang 3.Anftj£t

     Dr Nicholson referred Mr Burne to Page 26 of the Bliuud icpuiL wUeic it is
     stated that “a density of 67.5 persona/10 m* represents a density
     representing completely full capacity". Dr Nicholson said that even on the
     basis of a person occupying a rectangular rather than an elliptical area of
     terrace, the calculation provided a packing density of 80 persons/10 m2 ,
     Mr Jiurne said that he would rw*» » es » this particular calculation.




                                                        *2*
     - CHESPOL                      TEL   No . 0 2 4 4 + 3 4 1 2 2 6                 23   Jan     91              9:07       No. 001              P . 04
<3
-J     ^   ^   r 1   i- i-'               1 l— C   I^   U   . I'    ( w 1w 1 I   2              f V   i.   J   -.1 X   J. i .i , hi   >_.   i   , . ■ V4




               Mr Burne said that he wished to draw particular attention to the'Green Guide'
               recommendation that people should not be more chan 12 m from sn exit, HSE's
               report IR/L/HE/89/35 made no reduction in the capacity of Pen*. 3 and 4 to
               compensate for the departure from a recommendation. Its implementation would
               reduce the allowable capacities of theec pens considerably,

                             said that the authors had not considered themselves qualified to
               make estimates of allowable crowd capacity, other than where the means for
               making a mathematical calculation was Indicated in the ‘Green Guid e ’, He
               referred Lu the final conclusion of this report which H a t e d six further
               departures from the recommendatlona of the 'Green Guide', together with the
               statement that "the maximum combined capacity of Fens 3 and 4 should be
               reduced further because of these six departures,"

               Mr Burne said that the capacities of the emergency exits from Pens 2 and 4
               would also reduce the maximum allowable capacities shown In the HSE report.
               Mr Waterhouse agreed that this might be the case, He and his co-author had
               confined their estimation of maximum allowable capacities to the Arrangements
               on the terrace.

               DCC Jones said that he would draw the attention of the Coroner to the matter
               of the capacity of emergency exits that had been raised by Mr Burne,

               3.2      COLLAPSE LOAD OF BARRIER 124A

               Mr Burne commenced by explaining the load-deflection diagram shown on Page                                                   60
               of the Klrond report, and it* significance when considering the fail ure of                                                  a
               crush barrier. He pointed out that there was a mistake in the Illustration                                                   c*f
               barrier 1J4A in H5E report IR/L/MM/6 V l l in that the angle section forming                                                 thv
               front leg of support 3 had been drawn the wrong way around, This was
               acknowledged by USE'a representatives.

               Dr Nicholson and Mr|       [sked for a definition of failure, as used in the
               context of the Elrond report. Mr fcutne Baid that failure involved yield,
               cracking and tearing, all of which had occurred on barrier 124A. He agreed
               that initiation of yield did not necessarily mean collapse, the term used by
               RLSD to describe the taliure of barrier 124a .

               Mr Burn# said that a computer analysis made by Elrond, and subsequent teats
               conducted by SGS on Similar crush barriers, had demonstrated that barrier 124A
               should be deemed to have failed the proof test made on it by Eastwood and
               Partners in 1988. He said that Eastwood and Partners' had irsts -interpreted the
               test requirements of the 'Green Guide', and that the tensile properties of
               wrought iron reported by HSE tended to overestimate the strength of die uppev
               rail of barrier 124A.

               Mi       pointed out that the tensil* properties stated in HSE report
               IR/L/KM/89/11 w ere not used in HSE's calculation of the collapse load of
               barrier 124a , but Were obtained from a bending test on a wrought iron top rail
               taken from barrier 129. Following further discussion of the properties of the
               barrier materials it waa agreed that the tensile test properties obtained by
               SGS and HSE were in reasonable agreement,

                         asked whether the computer analysis made by Elrond was an elastic
                         n H lillb
               analysis and  was ftold
                                   nM f V b f it
                                       that   ^ i- i.ina Mk>
                                                   was. Mr   _ J .1 a
                                                             aid      V. _ I i
                                                                    that      l_.
                                                                             there      ■
                                                                                   were dangers in
               predicting the mode of collapse of barrier 124A from an elastic analysis




                                                                   -3-
, . DCG- CHESPOL                TEL   N o .0244+341226                  J a n 91     07   No . 0 0 1   P .0:




           Mr   m e emphasised that the results of Elrond's computer analysis and SGS's
           site tests were In agreement, and were supported by Dr         _______     [and
           Dr         kn behalf of Halcrow and Partners. The analysis had be«m mud* Tot
           the conditions of continuous rail and broken rati, Analynia and tost results
           had shown that yield of the top rail occurred with a loading o f 2 . b kN/m, chat
           the fracture occurred at 6 kN/w,

           Mf Burne eatd that barrier 12BA had failed during tests made* by SGS at less
           than 6 kH/m. Dr Nicholson said that the tabulated results on Pages 24 and 25
           of Appendix G of the Elrond report suggested that this barrier had wlthblood a
           force of 7.24 kN/m. Mr Burne said that the forces shown were, marginally in
           error and that a force of 7.24 kN should be taken to mean between 7.24 kN/m
           and t UN/m, An Inaccuracy In the calibration of the pressure gauges with the
           hydraulic jacks used to apply the test force caused the gauges to indicate
           forces that were too high. The degree of inaccuracy was not known, but was
           probably of the order of a few percent.

           Mr Burne said that a cracking nois* was heard during the testing of barrier
           128A when the indicated load was & kN/ro. Examination tmd shown that the top
           rail had cracked under one of the retaining clips      that a fracture was.
           present in the bottom rivet hole of the rear leg of the centre support.

            There was a lengthy discussion on the details of the SGS u s L s and their
            correlation with the elastic analysis of the stresses in the hairier, Mr Butne
            said that Elrond'* computer analysis showed that the first region to yield was
            at the lower edge of the gusset plate was on the rear leg of the supports , and
            that this occurred at 5.25 kN/m,

                                           said that RLSD's elastic finite element analysis had
            a.i_so snowu— cirrus d e — une place where initial yielding would occur, iheli
            analysis indicated that yielding would commence in both the top rail and the
            supports at a load of less than 6 kN/m.

            Mr Burne   said that barrier 12©A waa not «o severely u o u u J e d h s barrier 124A
            and that   the results of their analysis and the SGS teiLs caused h i m to
            conclude   that barrier 124A would have failed at a load of less than 6 kN/m o n
            15 April   1989.

                          said that it was his opinion that span 3\4 had been the first
            member of barrier 124A to collapse, due to the formation of plastic hinges,
            This was followed by the collapse of span 2\3 a* end 4 of span 3\4 parted from
            its support and commenced pivoting about support 3. HSE's calculations
            suggested that this collapse commenced when the loading on span 3\4 was
            approximately 8 kN/m.

            Mr Burne disagreed with this sequence o£ event*. Ue said that collapse
            commenced at support 3, although It was probable that the collapse of this
            support and that Of the top rail of span 3\4 occurred almost instantaneously.

                           isked if Elrond could be more precise in their estimate of the
            coiiapse ioau of barrier 124A rather than stating it to be less than 6 kN/m,
            Mr Burne said that Elrond had stated a value of 5,25 kN/»! on Page 6 of their
            report and referred Mr              to the diagram in Appendix L, Kr
            said that Stage 2 of this diagram showed yielding below the gusset plate of
            the rear leg of a support at a load of 5.25 kN/m( this being followed by
            Stages 3 and 4 m which Increased deformation occurred up to a load of 7 kN/m.




                                                    -4-
•DeO- CHESPOL              TEL   No . 0 2 4 4 + 3 4 1 2 2 6          23   Jan   91   9 :07   No. 001   P .06
                                             - - •-'•u    II A   ,




         Hr Burne said that this was a mis-Interpretation of the diagram, which was
         intended to show thft loads required to produce yield at different regions of
         the barrier. He said that calculated result* could be supplied tv substantiate
         the diagram in Appendix L. In response to « request by pr Nicholson he said
         that he would cry to provide him with a copy of the report written for Halcrow
         and Partners by           \ and to pursue the isatter of the calibration of the
         hydraulic Jacfc# and gauges used by SGS in th#ir test®,




         22/01/91
