Qthar Document Form                     Date and time raised .                                  Number



Title                   ffrf     t '\     bA \w & (L      Mfrt-duet &rJ           firfoi
/M u tff souns end any document number if relevant)


Receivers instructions urgent ection Yes/No
                                                                                                               Receiver




Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                       Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                              Statement
Statement readers instructions
                                                                                                              Reader


                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                        0/M             SIO


                                                                                                         i         Indexer
 Further action no(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

 MIR 15
        Report for the
        information o f>


                                                              METROPOLITAN                   POLICE
           The Chief Constable,
                                                                    'Q' Division. Wembley,        s ta tio n
           South Yorkshire Police,
           Police Headquarters,                                     603 Harrow Road.,. Wembley, Middlesex.
           Snig Hill,                                               HAO 2liH
           Sheffield S3 8LY,
           South Yorkshire.                                         5 June,
                                                              Ref      No.

           Through Deputy Assistant                           Your     Rot.
           R B wells QPM MA (QXCN)                            D ated




                           Subject   7,A. CUP FINAL   - 20 MAY, 1989.         ........



1.      I am a Chief Inspector in the Metropolitan Police, attached to Wembley Division.
         My duties include the policing of events at Wembley Stadiun and T have been doing
        this in my present rank since January, 1987.

2.      The Hillsborough tragedy, after the initial shock, gave me hope for the future.
        This hope was that the behaviour of fans in Leppings Lane, which I recognise as
        a not unknown tactic at Wembley, would now cease - the danger being acknowledged
        by those who indulge in such acts.

3.      On the 20 May I was in charge of the concourse at Wembley Stadium frcnt the Royal
        Tunnel round Westwards to Turnstile ’K’. This area has two groups of turnstiles,
        *F* and 'G1, which are approached by flights of steps and are relatively safe frcnt
        crushing.   It also has three groups of turnstiles, 'H*, 'J* and 'K\, approached
        by level ground and which are liable to crushing problems.    The stadium offices
        are close to *H', 'J' and ’K' and likewise on level ground,

        I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my way into Wembley at Stat-more Broadway,
        sane six miles frart the stadium, where a nunber were sitting on the pavement drinking
        cans of beer or lager, at about 9.30 a.m.

5.      The closer to Wsnbley, the more fans I saw who were drinking in the street, often
        carrying more cans with them.

6   .   I arrived at Wembley Stadium at about 10.30 a.m. and saw that a large number of
        fans were already on the complex, perhaps as many as 10,000. Again, many of them
        had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with them. I was dismayed to find that many
        of those present did not have tickets for the game. My advice to them to .leave
        the area went for the most part, unheeded.




                                                                                                 No. 144
        M.P -75
On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile ’H" a small section of
fencing, secured by scaffold clips, had been slackened so that a signifi­
cant breach of the fence could be made, giving access to the circulating
corridor.   From the enquiries I made it appeared that this hod been done
by fans during the night, no doubt intending to apply pressure at the
right moment to gain ^entry to the Stadium.

information was passed to officers under my cortniand by an unidentified
Liverpool police officer, that he had heard fans planning to rush the
'H1, 'J1 and rK r turnstiles. This confirmed my own view that these were
the most vulnerable areas and therefore the most likely to be attacked.

As time progressed, I noticed that there were more people in that area
suffering the ill effects of alcohol and tension was beginning to increase.
This culminated in a number of fights at the 'pinch point’, the narrowest
point of the concourse, outside the Stadium Offices.       The fights were
caused apparently by tlie tsale of tickets by 'touts'. Although well known
touts were not evident, there seemed to be a number of people selling
one or two tickets.    The fans were keen to attack such people and yet
also to buy the tickets at inflated prices.

By 12.30pm, the crowd was building up generally, but especially so outside
turnstiles 'H', ,J* and 1K 1. Because this area is confined, 1 had to
put in a cordon of police horses and foot police between the T.V. compound
and turnstile 'H' to prevent the danger of crushing.

Outside of the cordon, there were more outbreaks of disorder among fans
who had been drinking and I personally received a blow to the head whilst
assisting one of my officers in making an arrest.

The turnstiles were late in opening because a lorry was still carrying
out seme work in the circulating corridor.    This lorry could only make
an exit through a gate at the side of turnstile 'K'. it d.id this just
before 1.15pm but caused quite severe problems with crowds waiting for
the turnstiles to open.   The gate stuck when it was only half open and
a lot of effort was required to prevent a large nuitber of illegal entries
to the Stadium.

Once the turnstiles opened, 1 expected the crowd to ease considerably
and to reduce the complaints of crushing I was getting from people in
the crowd*   That people were obviously pressing forward and causing a
crush in these circumstances, in the wake of Hillsborough, amazed me.
I was more amazed, however, to find that the crush was not diminishing
as I expected •it to at turnstile *H '. This was because of ticketless
fans forcing their way through the turnstiles with ticket-holders on
having to be removed through exit gates, slowing down the whole of the
operation.
Whilst a lot of illegal entrants were removed, I believe an appreciable
number were not. The most intense crush was at turnstile 'H', which had
had a fence weakened during the night, and in my mind must have been pre­
planned by a large number of fans hoping to breach the security of the
fence, if they were unable to get in through the turnstiles.

By 2.30pm, the number o f people going in through turnstiles 'H‘, 'J and
'K' had reduced greatly.    This had been achieved by having tickets for
turnstile 'H' accepted at 1J ' and 'K* turnstiles and filtering people
at tbe cordon and allowing only those with tickets through. Many people
were reluctant to produce tickets, fearing that they might be snatched
fran them.    Thsy took the trouble to secrete them in shoes, socks and
other places,        made it difficult when production was demanded. The
nuntoer of street robberies for this event are much higher than for similar
events.

Tfiere were new seme 300 people on the outside of the cordon who did not
have tickets but were still -anxious to find a way into the. Stadiun. Ratter
■than leaving the cordon as a fixed target, I decided to comnence a sweep
of .the concourse,.pushing these fans towards the Royal Tunnel and away
fran the vulnerable area.

When the sweep fran the other side, turnstiles 'A* to 'E*, reached the
Bayal Tunnel, the crowd which nurrbered about* 500 began throwing bottles
ani cans at police. A nurrber of arrests were made during the completion
of the sweep.

Despite the sweep, snail pockets of ticketless fans returned to the concourse
during the progress of the game. At about half time, there was a determined
attempt by about 200 to gain entry through gates and winders at the stadiun
Offices and turnstile 'H*. Uiis was successfully repelled.

Just before the end of the game, all gates to the Stadiun were qpenea
in preparation for the exodus. At this stage, Liverpool were in the lead
ani fans were starting to leave. However, the equalising goal was then
scored by Everton. This resulted in an influx of fans who had been leaves
arti      those still around the ground without tickets. All managed to
get into bays around the Stadium to watch extra time.

The nuntoer of arrests, 76 on the outside of the stadiun, does not fully
reflect the magnitude of misbehaviour by drunken fans.



 Cn this occasion, there was a rapport between the Liverpool and Ev^ton
 supporters.   Had this not been the case, I believe much greater disorder
 would have emanated fran the section of fans determined to gain entrance
 to the Stadiun, regardless of the cost in any tern®, to others.

 Having described a lot of bad behaviour on tte part ^
 say that the majority were well betevaS and ccncemed for the safety of
 themselves and others*




                               \ J   J. MILLER
                             Chief Inspector (Operations)




                                                            TOTAL P . 0 4
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
.....     1
          .'i........           """".......                        —

                                                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                  8NIG BILL
                                                                  SHEFFIELD S 3 8 L I
                                                                  TELEPHONE    0?k2 768522
                                                                  TELEX        5*7996
                                                                  FACSIMILE    Qf?k2 5232*5
             I




   ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO                           01         2 .0   (if G O
            • THE CHIEF CONSTABLE '
                                                                   TOUR REFERENCE

                                                                   OUR REFERENCE

                                                                   DATE




                                    FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION



   DATE

   to                               .{ fc 'z llT & iT .. .                    .                      ^   ^

                                                                                             • • •




   FOR THE ATTENTION OF                                           ........ ............


 ©COMMENTS              ........... -...*............. ................. .




   raoM                                                                                      -

   « * « . « «          . m     &       .... . ? . a r z ? r . . ..................


   NUMBER OF PAGES ( INCLUDING THIS PAGE
                                                      % ...................
                                                      )
                                                             (W/^.
                                                                            .
                                                                                         .   ...


   IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPT PLEASE CONTACT:


                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OPERATIONS R O W

                        TELEPHONE     07*2 768522            EXTENSION 32*9
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                          POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                          SNIG H ILL
                                                                                          SHE FFIELD S3 8LY
                                                                                          TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                                          TE LE X 547996



       A L L CO M MUNICATIO NS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
_     "T H E CHIEF CONSTABLE"
r                                                                  1
      Mr. R. B. Wells, Esq., QPM                                                          YO UR REFERENCE

      Deputy Assistant Commissioner                                                       OUR REFERENCE     BLM/PC
      Metropolitan Police (7 Area HQ)
       3 The Mall                                                                         d a te            5 June 1989
       Kenton
      HARROW
L     Middlesex, HA3 9TF                                          J




       Dear Mr. Wells

       With reference to our telephone conversation of today concerning the
       FA Cup Final held at Wembley on Saturday 20 May 1 9 8 9 , it would be
       helpful in our enquiries concerning the Hillsborough disaster to
       obtain information of the experiences of the Metropolitan Police at
       that event in dealing with Liverpool supporters.

       As I indicated, we are currently examining the attitudes of Liverpool
       supporters and experiences at matches preceding the semi-final
       scheduled at Hillsborough.  There is some indication of large numbers
       of supporters attending at games without tickets, as was the indi­
       cation at Hillsborough, and I understand that similar experiences
       were found at Wembley.

       As suggested by yourself, I have spoken to Chief Inspector Jim
       Miller at Wembley, and have asked him to prepare a report, setting
       out his experiences. From our discussions it is clear that his
       information would be of considerable assistance, and if you agree, I
       would appreciate it if his report could be forwarded to the South
       Yorkshire Police Headquarters, for consideration of introduction as
       evidence in the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry.

        Because of the time scale of the Inquiry, there is some urgency in
        this matter and it would be appreciated that if approval is given
        for the report to be forwarded, then this might be faxed to our
        Headquarters.

        May I take this opportunity of thanking you for your assistance in
        this matter.

        Yours sincerely




        B . L. Mole
        Chief Superintendent

               T HE OFFICER D EA LIN G W ITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE I S ..................             EXTENSION

    A D M /1
                       METROPOLITAN POLICE

       FACSIM ILE M ESSA G E
TO: . jC k ifc.£                           ...............................................................................

ADDRESS:                                                     . ^^1^....?“^              IdL.iQ..........................



FROM: ..MV..L y              ..........................................

ADDRESS: 7....                         rO^... !^.&..^..-L.)...

FAX NUMBER;.Q.L„.2:J..y..n...fel.fei?.                      ENQUIRIES:

NUMBER OF PAGES TO FOLLOW: '




                                         M ESSAGE

 J3.4    1M..A21:^ A 9 A .z .^ ,.^ u ±                                z     c£.        &ii§£                ^ . X .

  J V |Q U £       r    ^ P o U"              £ £ Q \a £ * T E J>                   B>v         H jfisK        .................




                                                                                                                                   M.P.9
Form
                                                                      ■ Ax.




        Report for the
        information of:-


                                                                   METROPOLITAN                                   POLICE
           The Chief Constable,
                                                                         'Q\ Division Wembley,                    .    Station
           South Yorkshire Police,
           Police Headquarters,                                          603 Harrow Ro^.,.Wembley, Middlesex.
           Snig Hill,                                                    HAO 21IH
           Sheffield S3 8LY,
           South Yorkshire.                                              5 June,                                      .19.89.
                                                                   Ret      Nn

           Through Deputy Assistant CcfimfsaijQneij-               Yo u r     Rot.
           R B wells QFM MA (OXCN)
                                                                   Dated




                           Subject   F.A. CUP FINAL   -   2 0 MAY, 1 9 8 9 .         ..........................

        &QBcxkaex£kK£&C)att>l3G0i^^

1.      I an a Chief Inspector in the Metropolitan Police, attached to Wembley Division.
         My duties include the policing of events at Wembley Stadiun and T have been doing
        this in my present rank since January, 1987.

2.      The Hillsborough tragedy, after the initial shock, gave me hope for the future.
        This hope was that the behaviour of fans in Leppings Lane, which I recognise as
        a not unknewn tactic at Wembley, would now cease - the danger being acknowledges
        by those who indulge in such acts.

3.      On the 20 May I was in charge of the concourse at Wembley Stadium from the Royal
        Tunnel round Westwards to Turnstile *K'. This area has two groups of turnstiles,
        ' f * and ' G ' , which are approached by flights of steps and are relatively safe fran
        crushing.       It also has three groups of turnstiles, 'H1, 'J' and ’K', approached
        by level ground and which are liable to crushing problems.         The stadium offices
        are close to 'H', 'J’ and 'K' and likewise on level ground.

        I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my way into Wembley at Stanmore Broadway,
        seme six miles from the stadium, where a nunber_were sitting on the pavement drinking
        cans of beer or lager, at about 9 . 3 0 a.m.

5.      The closer to Wembley, the more fans I saw who were drinking in the street, often
        carrying more cans with then.

6   .   I arrived at Wembley Stadium at about 10.30 a.m.and saw that a large number of
        fans were already on the complex, perhaps as many as 10,000.Again,  many of them
        had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with them. I was dismayed to find that many
        of those present did not have tickets for the game. My advice to thOT to .leave
        the area went for the most part, unheeded.




                                                                                                                      No. i44
        M.P -75
On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile ’H' a small section of
fencing, secured by scaffold clips, had been slackened so that a signifi­
cant breach of the fence could be made, giving access to the circulating
corridor.   Fran the enquiries I made it appeared that this hod been done
by fans during the night, no doubt intending to apply pressure at the
right moment to gain‘entry to the Stadium.

information was passed to officers under my comnand by an unidentified
Liverpool police officer, that he had heard fans planning to rush the
'H', 'J' and 'K' turnstiles. This confirmed my own view that these were
the most vulnerable areas and therefore the most likely to be attacked.

As time progressed, I noticed that there were more people in ttiat area
suffering the ill effects of alcohol and tension was beginning to increase.
This culminated in a number of fights at the 'pinch point', the narrowest
point of the concourse, outside the Stadium Offices.       The fights were
caused apparently by tlse sale of tickets by 'touts'. Although well known
touts were not evident, there seemed to be a number of people selling
one or two tickets.    The fans were keen to attack such people and yet
also to buy the tickets at inflated prices.

By 12.30pn, the crowd was building up generally, but especially so outside
turnstiles 'H', 'J' and 1K 1. Because this area is confined, I had to
put in a cordon of police horses and foot police between the T.V* compound
and turnstile ’H' to prevent the danger of crushing.

Outside of the cordon, there were more outbreaks of disorder among fans
who had been drinking and I personally received a blow to the head whilst
assisting one of my officers in making an arrest.

The turnstiles were late in opening because a lorry was stil.l carrying
out sane work in the circulating corridor.    This lorry could only make
an exit through a gate at the side of turnstile 'K'. it did this just
before 1.15pm but caused quite severe problems with crowds waiting for
the turnstiles to open.   The gate stuck when it was only half open and
a lot of effort was required to prevent a large nuntier of illegal entries
to the Stadium.

Once the turnstiles opened, I expected the crowd to ease considerably
and to reduce the complaints of crushing I was getting from people in
the crowd.   That people were obviously pressing forward and causing a
crush in these circumstances, in the wake of Hillsborough, amazed me.
I was mors amazed, howsver, to find that the crush was not diminishing
as I expected -it to at turnstile 1H’r. This was because of ticketless
fans forcing their way through the turnstiles with ticket-holders and
having to be rerroved through exit gates, slowing down the whole of the
operation.
Whilst a lot of illegal entrants were removed, I believe an appreciable
number were not. The most intense crush was at turnstile H , which had
had a fence weakened during the night, and in my mind must have been pre­
planned by a large number of fans hoping to breach the security of the
fence, if they were unable to get in through the turnstiles.

By 2.30pm, the number of people going .in through turnstiles 'H’, 'J' and
'K' had reduced greatly.   This had been achieved by having tickets for
turnstile ’H' accepted at 'J' and ’K ’ turnstiles and filtering people
at the coition and allowing only those with tickets through. Many people
were reluctant to produce tickets, fearing that they might be snatched
from them-    Uhey took the trouble to secrete than in shoes, socks and
other places, which made it difficult when production was demanded. The
nuntoer of street robberies for this event a re much higher than for similar
events.

Ttere were now seme 300 people on the outside of the cordon who did not
fvtvst tickets but were still .anxious to find a way into the Stadium. Rather
than leaving the cordon as a fixed target, I decided to commence a sweep
of tN* concourse, pushing these fans towards the Royal Tunnel and away
from the -vulnerable area.
When the sweep from the other side, turnstiles JA* to 'Ef, reached the
Royal Tunnel, the crowd which numbered about* 500 began throwing bottles
and cans at police* A number of arrests were made during the ocmpletion
of the sweep.

Despite the sweep, small pockets of ticketless fans returned to the concourse
during the progress of the gane. At about half time, there was a determined
atteirpt by about 200 to gain entry throucgi gates and windows at the Stadiun
Office and turnstile ’H ’. This was successfully repelled.

Just before the end of the game, all gates to the Stadiun were opened
in preparation for the exodus. At this stage, Liverpool were an the leao
and fans were starting to leave. However, the equalising goal was then
scored by Everton. This resulted in an influx of fans who had been leaving
aitf also those still arouxxi the ground without tickets. All managed to
get into bays around the Stadium to watch extra time.

The mmfaer of arrests, 76 on the outside of the Stadiun, does not fully
reflect the magnitude of misbehaviour by drunken fans.



 On this occasion, there was a rapport between the Liverpool a ^ Everton
 supporters. Had this not been the case, I believe much greater disorder
 would- have emanated fran the section of fans determined to gain entrance
 to the Stadiun, regardless of the cost in any terms, to others.

 Having described a lot of bad behaviour on the part of s a f a r i s . *
 say that the majority were well behaved and concerned for the safety of
 themselves and others.




                               \ J   J. miller
                             Chief Inspector (Operations)




                                                          TOTAL P.04
                                       1QQQ_       06    15 : 1 4
                                 M E T R O P O J . H



                 FA C SIM ILE
        -TO:                 ... .......................

        VADDRESS:                               J P A tK > U !.^:k




         FROM:.. i M i ;                              ........................

         ADDRESS:                            ......

        |fe A X .N tJ M B E R :^ .,i.^ ,^ ;.P .^ ,^ k i..k i) ...

        . NUMBER OF PAGES TO FOLLOW: . T h A ^ r i:

t
    '
v-t,,

                    :                    .                        MES



         .. M p u - e      . r                             ........     17       4;:,
ftepoft fof
information of:-


r                                                  METROS
    H iediief Ccrjsteble,
    South Yorkshire Police,
    Police Headquarters,
    Sniq Hill,'
    Steffield S3 SLY,
    South Yorkshire,

    Through Deputy Assistant ujroipgxonei
    R B WellS QFM MA (Omi)




                        F.A- CUP FIHaL



I am a Chief Inspector in the Metrypyy,:;
 My duties include the policing oi yvyy - ■■
this in my present rank since Jariiyyry. ...y

The Hillsborough tragedy, after :;ue y ^ ...
This hope was that the behaviour at. ray..
5 not unknown tactic at Wembley» would
oy those who indulge in such acts,

On the 20 May I was in charge of, Che cov
Tunnel round Westwards to Turnstile ’K' .          '•
 •F» and 'G', which are approached by ll:,..-o ■
■crushing.   It also has three coroups or yyr.. .
 by level ground and vtfiich are liable ty 'y
 are close to ’H ’» *J 1 and ’K" and ijkewiBe -/;*

I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my v,v.;;- --
some six miles from the stadium, where y niratx-.’^ wvyy:
cans of beer or lager, at about 9 3-> e.n>.

The Closer to Wembley, the more fans I saw v.:n.r> vs.y
carrying more cans with than.

I arrived at Wembley Stadium at about 1 0 , 1 0 n.ao        .
fans were already on the ocnplex, perhaps as ;«ny
had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with ttem,     ®
of those present did not have tickets tor the ga~ne
the area went for the most part, unheeded.;'.
     7.      On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile ‘H ‘ 3 3rrk3ii. synss. ■.3'                     :
             fencing, secured by scaffold clips, s^fi-Gecs. s.issssscs.                    -ssss s s..1 1 :..
             cant breach of the fence could s:x; ?bi?.                      -yx.-i.,::. ;:          .
                                                                                                    1 .,is,
             corridor.   Fran the enquiries 1 sssss         1 :1 1 1 :1 1 1 sis:             s: ■ s - s
             by -fans during the nicrftt, no siss:.     .1 1 1 1 : ■ s ■■■; .ss •      -               .
             right moment to gain entry to     "is^.;s s;

      8.     information was passed to ci:iiii'3 ixi;-
             Liverpool police officer,, tRit ss. 1 1 1 y.::■:
             'H 1 *J! and *!<* turrsstij.s£,   s's: ' . i '
             the most 'vulnerable areas arii s r i m -

             As time progressed, 1 fisiiiss un.
             suffering the ill ellecls 0 1 1 :1 ..,1 1 . .-1
             This culminated in a number f-t fus.
             point of the concourse, outiiifc;
             caused apparently by ttsi ;;nie -is v ,-i. -
             touts were not      evident,cneii.i;s..;i-'
             one: oj: two tickets,   The far.;--
             also to buy the tickets at i m m - .        - -
o
    10,      By 12.30pn, the    crowd ¥as ou: u:
             turnstiles ’ H ’ ,   M ' and ’K ’.
             put in a cordon of police torses ■■!!? ,
             and turnstile ’H ’ to prevent rss. ssi -s

             Outside of the cordon, ther&
             who. had been drinking and 1 p
                                           1.
             assisting one of iny officers .

    .1 2 ,   The; turnstiles were late in­
             cut: some work in the :circuls-
             an .exit through a gate at t.b
             before .1.15pm but caused quv
             the: turnstiles to open,   The
             a lot of effort was required 1
             to the Stadium,

             Ones the turnstiles - opened, 1              ------


             arri: to reduce the complaints     L
             the crowd*     That .people' were )bv U/i;:: ■                                             jis; y;i'
             crush in these circumstances, s\ mi;,                                                  : -is sss-<
             I was more amazed, 'however, t t:;xi
                                                                                                     . -I'C     '
             as ;I expected it to at 111x11. 911.
                                                1*
             fans forcing their way through fss                                                      "-.v s-:m ;s
             having to be removed through        it: O;;;*US:                                         ..1   yiri
             operation.

             Whilst a lot of illegal entrants ssi's n m                  si                       Sir S>S;.i
     14                                                                                           ylIll'S S3I
             number .were not.     The most intense ciss1:
             had a fence weakened during the nicht , «sa                                           Silt). S'
             planned by a, large number 0 1 tans rs.>si.so                                         ■S ys
             fence, if they w e r e -unable to get in. 1 .(1 1 0 1 1 1        0 ,1


              By 2.30pm, the number of people going s siiisis;                                       ■r-
              'K' had reduced greatly.    This !>-• •
                                                                                                ?SiliSSS Ssis
              -turnstile ’H 1 accepted at M ! and ’K ‘ tur-s;::: i.c-<                          .IS'' ffc-jp'iS.
at the carton and ailowUng only those with tickets through.  K*my
v m m reluctant to produce             • ,-v-          x •*”    33
from there.  Ihey took the      •.*  '         ^ ’      " -
other places, which rods r; t      1 ‘       • " '
nurtoar of stree t ixstafaeriee tor t*a,e          w ^-cr; m : ;"                               ■
events.

Tbere were now ear© 300       -> *-•                            ‘" :
have tickets but were tAill           u:                                    l—
•than -leaving the cordon as a fixer)                                                           l
of the CanQQMCSe, pushino t « * p uv::’ U               '       V:H
frati the -vuljnaratoile s n » ,

When the sweep froeo the otosr                                                                  ■
Royal Tunnel? the crowd -■• --                           v     v       ;
aril cans at police. A-nvsmber         or -hr^         /'r^                      ■ ■' " '   ■
of tie swsep.

Despit© the sweep., small mckets c: ■..            ;          v--v
dwrijng tte progress of tJ*             -u ,uc.i..:.. r-rv
■attest bv about 200 to
Offices w & turnstile "H’- i!u-s •«;

Just:before    the end of the c&m,                       >
.in preparation for the exodus.         M   ^
w & fans vere starting to leave,                                     •■-
■.scored by Everton* This resulted in w                                 v   ■
 and also those still arciuwi tlis                                     ~-
 ■get into beys around the Stadium to «bk.i;.

The :nwter of arrests, 76       "
reflect.'the magnitude of w!l.sbelavi^.g ty fe v' -



 On this occasion, there was a . <-
 snorters. Had this not teen the eat
 would have emanated from -the 'sectif;r. >'
 to the Stadium, regardless.of the cost; ;

 Having -described a lot of bad behav-iou
 say \ thiat the majority;.were well behav
 themselves and others*




                                                                                                    ■?.i■
SOUTH
»
.
      YORKSHIRE POLICE
                1— ''
                    ■'"■■■                 "           "

                                                                          POLICE HEADQUARTERS
         w   B Sb                                                        sniq hill
                                                                          SHEFFIELD S 3 8 L I
        ^ ^ v l t                                                        TELEPHONE     Cf?k2 ?68^22
                                                                          TELEX        5^7996
    xiu K>}                                                              FACSIMILE     0?*»2 5232*»3
    k               ijh^




    ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO                   f-A~f            Ot - 20 £ 6 / 6 0
             * THE CHIEF CONSTABLE «
                                                                            YOUR REFERENCE

                                                                            OUR REFERENCE

                                                                            DATE



•                          fo ( L
                           /    ■* .              f ,C - ^
                                           FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION



    date




                                .                     .. .^ .c.'.c.£   .{ •" •••        •r f - J -   •••
                                 3   7?-7z


                                               M /l     ( s v '& C t - S
    for th e attention of                                                  ....................


^COMMENTS                       .................................................




    ROM                         .&//»£... .SjtfT. ...                                 - ....... - -

    TELEPHONE NUMBED            ..Q.V.HZ..... .................................
                                                                           0 ^ ( i£
    NUMBER OF PAGES            ( INCLUDING THIS PAGE       )     .........................




    IN THE EVENT OF A POOR COPT PLEASE CONTACT:


                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OPERATIONS ROOM

                               TELEPHONE     07^2 768522         EXTENSION 32^9
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                              POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                              SNIG H IL L
                                                                                              SH E FF IEL D S 3 8 LY
                                                                                              TELEPHONE (0742) 768522
                                                                                              TE LE X 547996



      A L L C O M MUNICATIO NS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO
      "T H E CHIEF CONSTABLE"
r                                                                                             YO UR REFERENCE
      Mr. R. B. Wells, Esq., QPM
      Deputy Assistant Commissioner                                                           OUR REFERENCE             BLM/PC
      Metropolitan Police (7 Area HQ)
      3 The Mall                                                                              DATE                      5 June 1989
      Kenton
      HARROW
L     Middlesex, HA3 9TF                                             J




      Dear Mr. Wells

      With reference to our telephone conversation of today concerning the
      FA Cup Final held at Wembley on Saturday 20 May 1989, it would be
      helpful in our enquiries concerning the Hillsborough disaster to
      obtain information of the experiences of the Metropolitan Police at
      that event in dealing with Liverpool supporters.

      As I indicated, we are currently examining the attitudes of Liverpool
      supporters and experiences at matches preceding the semi-final
      scheduled at Hillsborough.  There is some indication of large numbers
      of supporters attending at games without tickets, as was the indi­
      cation at Hillsborough, and I understand that similar experiences
      were found at Wembley.

      As suggested by yourself, I have spoken to Chief Inspector Jim
      Miller at Wembley, and have asked him to prepare a report, setting
      out his experiences.  From our discussions it is clear that his
      information would be of considerable assistance, and if you agree, I
      would appreciate it if his report could be forwarded to the South
      Yorkshire Police Headquarters, for consideration of introduction as
      evidence in the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry.

      Because of the' time scale of the Inquiry, there is some urgency in
      this matter and it would be appreciated that if approval is given
      for the report to be forwarded, then this might be faxed to our
      Headquarters.

      May I take this opportunity of thanking you for your assistance in
      this matter.

      Yours sincerely                       .___




      B. L. Mole      ^
      Chief Superintendent

            THE OFFICER D E A L IN G WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE IS .................................................EXTENSION

    ADM/1
