                                                              ( ^ O p v 'bb'Z-



STATEMENT OF:             DAVID JEREMY LATHAM

AGE:                      Over 21

OCCUPATION:               Detective Constable 1805

ADDRESS:                  Maltby C.I.D.



At 7.30 a.m. on Saturday, 15th April 1989, I reported cm duty at Dinnington

Police Station in full police uniform to work at Hillsborough Football Ground

for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

Together with D.C. 2338 Wassell I took a police vehicle to Main Street Police

Station, Rotherham, for service by the garage staff.   I waited at Main Street

and at 8.30 a.m. I was taken by force coach to Hillsborough.

At 9.30 a.m. I attended a briefing in the North Stand together with other members

of my serial under the supervision of P.S. 1771 Johnson.

At 11.00 a.m. I went with other members of my serial to commence patrol at

Herries Road frcm the Five Arches Bridge to the Five Arches Public House.

I worked with D.C. 1539 West throughout that duty which entailed patrolling

the main road and checking on the conduct of Nottingham Forest supporters

who were using the public house and a nearby off licence for the purchase of

intoxicants.    Supporters were generally well behaved although mainly of them

consumed drink and were apparently suffering frcm its effects although none

of them were incapable.

During this time I was aware of radio transmissions and in particular at

about 2.20 p.m. I heard someone on the radio request that Leppings Lane be

closed to traffic because of the volume    of supporters.   Fran then until I

started to make my way to the ground at 2.45 p.m. I was aware that the fans

at the Leppings Lane end were becoming a problem, and I heard an officer

say that unless the crowd were controlled there would be serious injury.

I was not aware of who transmitted the message or the actual details of that

message.

                                                            continued ........
                                                                                  'S C L




Statement of:   DAVID JEREMY LATHAM                             Page 2



I made my way down Herries Road South with the intention of going to

Claywheels Lane for a meal.   As I got to GATE 0 on Penistone Road North

a uniformed Sergeant came out of the ground and said that our assistance

was required because there was 'sane trouble'.    Together with D.C. West

I ran into the ground through GATE 0 down the ramp and onto the pitch,

and ran along the touchline towards the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

I remember looking at the clock and saw that it was 3.02 p.m.    When I got

to the Leppings Lane end of the ground I saw the mass of supporters pressed

against the fence.   Together with other officers I attempted to pull supporters

through the access gate.   It was apparent that people were piled cm top of

one another and appeared to be tangled up and we had extreme difficulty in

extricating supporters frcm the terrace.    I pilled two males through the

gate having had to first untangle their legs, but I realised that there were

people behind who were obviously suffering and I believed dying.     I ran

along the running track and went into the West Stand through another gate

in the fence where there were obviously not as many supporters.     I ran along

the terraces and climbed a barrier to get into the part of the terraces

where the supporters were being crushed.    My recollection of events frcm then

is not very clear.   I remember pulling out and carrying at least six bodies,

one of them a young woman and passing them to police officers through another

gate, and then were taken onto the pitch. I also remember bending down to

check on the condition of a large man who appeared to be dead and I attempted

to give mouth to mouth resuscitation as I did so I remember being kicked

in the back by an unknown person.     When the terraces were cleared I went

cxito the pitch and I was joined by P.C. 3056 Southall.    I have no recollect ion

of what happened then only that I remember




                                                           continued
                                                                         Qpfc

statement of:   DAVID JEREMY LATHAM                             Page 3



I eventually made my way to the Police Roan underneath the North Stand

and fran there to Claywheels Lane.

I went off duty at Dinnington Police Station at 8.15 p.m. that night.




Dated:    4-fe. ^                          Signed
