                                                                                       M IR .1 5



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and time raised                               Num


Title   J
(Include                     iment number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                Receiver




                                                                                                                Indexer
Document registered/iadeaeaias indicated

No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                         S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    O /M            S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                              lexi



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                                    Liverpool[
                                                                    Tel Fo.

                                                                    17th April 1989
 P.B. Robinson,
 Chief Executive,
 Liverpool Football Club,
 Anfield Road,
 Liverpool L4 OTH.



 Dear Sir,

         I am writing to Liverpool Football Club hoping that what I witnessed at
  Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday 1 5th April 19B9 can be of help in avoiding?
  a repeat of the disaster.
         W e 'arrivej£.b?*coach in Sheffield at 2 . 1 5 pm. We walked the 10 minutes
  from the coach c a r p a r k to the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The lane itself
  was very crowded with supporters the only police were sitting in police vans in
  the side roads, which were blocked off.
         When we reached the first gate leading to the turnstiles no police were at
  the gate to check if supporters had tickets (last year police were at the first
. £ja"te      stop supporters with no    tickets from entering     turnstile area).So
  between first gateand turnstiles no check.
         At turnstiles     there was no  body searchbypolice and onlvone mounted
  policeman.                                                           "—             . ■-
       When we went through turnstile there were no police or stewards to direct
supporters to the different sections of the ground. Only due to my previous
visits to the ground did I know to avoid the middle section, we moved to the                 *
right hand side of Leppings Lane. This section at 2.50 pm was not unduly full
but as we looked across at middle section people were already trying to climb
out to escape the crush.
       At 3.00 pm at the right hand side of the Leppings lane end where we were
stood we felt a sudden surge from the back as if a lot of supporters were pushing
in at the last minute.                                                      >
      When leaving the ground no large door open in Leppings Lane only one small
gate also there was a large force of police outside, whv weren't they there at
2.45 pm?                                                      ‘
 ^ H o p i n g this can be of help.
